CROSBY, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-4, passed - -
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
10.001   Designation and citation of code
   
10.002   Authority and purpose
   
10.003   Rules of construction; definitions
   
10.004   Interpretation of code
   
10.005   Prior offense and rights not affected
   
10.006   Effect of repeals
   
10.007   Certain ordinances not affected by code
   
10.008   Amendments to code
   
10.009   Supplementation of code
   
10.010   Severability
Administrative Offenses
   
10.025   Purpose
   
10.026   General provisions
   
10.027   Administrative citation procedures
   
10.028   Administrative hearing
   
10.029   File transmittal
   
10.030   Presentation of case
   
10.031   Written decision
   
10.032   No appeal available
   
10.033   Failure to appear
Judicial Review
   
10.045   Decision review
   
10.046   Option to withdraw
Administrative Review
   
10.060   Appeal
   
10.061   Notice
   
10.062   Decisions
   
10.063   Suspension or revocation
Recovery of Civil Penalties
   
10.075   Nonpayment
   
10.076   Lien
   
10.077   Personal obligation
   
10.078   Late fees/charges
   
10.079   License revocation or suspension
Criminal Penalties
   
10.090   Misdemeanors punishable by state law
   
10.091   Duplicate prosecution
Misdemeanors
   
10.105   Provisions of state law adopted
 
   
10.999   General penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.001 DESIGNATION AND CITATION OF CODE.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Crosby,
Minnesota”.
(Prior Code, § 1.1)
§ 10.002 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   This code is authorized by M.S. § 415.021, as it may be amended from time to
time. This code represents a codification of all current ordinances of the
city, now in effect, except as set out in §§
10.005 to
10.010. The purpose of the code is to organize in one location the current
ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1.2)
§ 10.003 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT or EMPLOYEE. Whenever the code requires an act to be done, which act
may legally be done by an agent or employee as well as by the principal, such
requirement shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
AGENT or EMPLOYEE.
   CITY. The City of Crosby, Minnesota, and shall extend to and include its
several officers, agents, and employees.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The Crosby City Administrator.
   CITY COUNCIL and COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Crosby, Minnesota.
   CLERK-TREASURER. The Crosby Clerk-Treasurer.
   CODE. The code of ordinances and amendments thereto.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time, where the performance or doing of any act,
duty, matter, payment, or thing is ordered or directed and the period of time
or duration for the performance or doing is prescribed and fixed by law or
ordinance, shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last
day of the prescribed period or duration of time. When the last day of the
period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be omitted
from the COMPUTATION.
   COUNTY. The County of Crow Wing, Minnesota.
   DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Solid waste resulting from the demolition of buildings,
roads, and other human-made structures, including concrete, brick, bituminous
concrete, untreated wood, masonry, glass, trees, rock, and plastic building
parts. DEMOLITION DEBRIS does not include asbestos wastes.
   GARBAGE. Discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving, and consumption of food.
   GENDER. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender shall
extend and be applied to both the masculine and feminine genders, and to legal
entities.
   KEEPER and PROPRIETOR. Include persons or legal entities, whether acting by
themselves or through a servant, agent, or employee.
   LEGAL ENTITY OR ENTITIES. Firms, partnerships, limited liability companies,
limited partnerships, corporations, and all other legal entities recognized
under state statutes.
   M.S. Refer to the latest edition or supplement of Minnesota Statutes.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. A word importing the singular may extend and be applied to the
plural, and vice versa.
   OATH. Include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an OATH, and in such cases the terms “swear” and “sworn”
shall be equivalent to the terms “affirm” and “affirmed”.
   OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OR OTHER AGENCY. Whenever
any officer, employee, department, board, commission, or other agency is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the phrase “of the City of Crosby, Minnesota”. Whenever by the provisions of
this code any OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OR OTHER AGENCY
of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty,
reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission, or other
agency shall mean and include such officer or any designee or authorized
subordinate and shall also include the successor in function to such officer,
employee, department, board, commission, or agency.
   OWNER. When applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Extend and is applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms,
partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate, and legal entities as well as
to individuals. For the purpose of imposing penalties or fines for violation of
any section of this code and whenever the term PERSON is used in such section
for which a penalty is imposed, the term PERSON shall include partners or
members of an association and, as to corporations, shall include the officers,
agents, or members of the corporations who are responsible for any such
violation.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Include every kind or type of property except real
property.
   PROPERTY. Include real, personal, and mixed property.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place subject to the primary control of any public agency,
including, but not limited to, any park, street, public way, cemetery,
schoolyard, or adjacent open space and any lake or stream.
   REAL PROPERTY. Include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REFUSE. Include putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street
cleanings, and market and industrial solid wastes, and include municipal
treatment wastes which do not contain free moisture.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes, including ashes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
   SECTION. Is referred to by use of the symbol “§”.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb-line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or
air contaminant treatment facility, and other discarded waste materials and
sludges, in solid, semi-solid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting
from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, and from
community activities, but does not include hazardous waste; animal waste used
as fertilizer; earthen fill, boulders, rock; sewage sludge; solid or dissolved
material in domestic sewage or other common pollutants in water resources, such
as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents or
discharges which are point sources subject to permits under § 402 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342, as amended,
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows; or source, special nuclear, or
byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 2011 et seq., as amended.
   STATE. The State of Minnesota.
   STREET. Embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, alleys,
lanes, viaducts, and all other public ways in the city.
   TENANT, OCCUPANT, and LESSEE. When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole
or part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
   TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting bicycles and also devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include any representation of words, letters, or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
   YARD WASTE. The garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, and pruning’s
generated at residential or commercial properties.
(Prior Code, § 1.3)
§ 10.004 INTERPRETATION OF CODE.
   The words and phrases used in this code shall be construed in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense, except that technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (A)   Catch-lines of sections. The catch-lines of the several sections of
this code printed in boldface type or italics are intended as mere catchwords
to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of such sections nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly
so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catch-lines, are amended or reenacted.
   (B)   References to chapters or sections. All references to chapters or
sections are to the chapters and sections of this code unless otherwise
specified.
(Prior Code, § 1.4)
§ 10.005 PRIOR OFFENSE AND RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any
offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any
contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this
code.
(Prior Code, § 1.5.1)
§ 10.006 EFFECT OF REPEALS.
   The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this code shall not revive any
ordinance or portion of this code in force before or at the time the provision
repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this code
shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took
effect or any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the
repeal for an offense committed under the provision repealed.
(Prior Code, § 1.5.2)
§ 10.007 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following
when not inconsistent with this code:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred before the effective date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any
evidence of the city’s indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease,
deed, or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city;
      (3)   Any administrative ordinances of the city not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (4)   Any right, permit, or franchise granted by any ordinance;
      (5)   Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, and the
like, any street or public way in the city;
      (6)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (7)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes;
      (8)   Any ordinance prescribing fees, fines, charges, rates, or other
specific monetary values;
      (9)   Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any
ordinance extending the boundaries of the city;
      (10)   Any ordinance establishing traffic or parking regulations on any
street or public way, including traffic schedules;
      (11)   Any ordinance regarding salaries or compensation of city officers
or employees; and
      (12)   Any temporary or special ordinances.
   (B)   All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. All ordinances
are on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 1.5.3)
§ 10.008 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   Any and all additions and amendments to this code, when passed in such
form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make such additions or
amendments a part of this code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code
so that reference to the code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions and amendments.
   (B)   All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code which
amend, repeal, or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance
with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion in this code.
When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or division or any
portion, such repealed portions may be excluded from the code by their omission
from reprinted pages.
   (C)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in substantially the following language: “That section          of the
Code of Ordinances, City of Crosby, Minnesota, is hereby amended to read as
follows:” The new provisions shall then be set out in full.
   (D)   If a new section not then existing in the code is to be added, the
following language may be used: “That the Code of Ordinances, City of Crosby,
Minnesota, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered           ,
which section reads as follows:” The new section may then be set out in full.
   (E)   All chapters, sections, divisions, or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by chapter, section, or division as the
case may be.
(Prior Code, § 1.5.4)
§ 10.009 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council. A
supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances passed by the City Council or adopted by initiative and
referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by
the supplement in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that
they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages
which have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so
prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through
the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by their omission from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier, meaning the
person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, non-substantive
changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement,
insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For
example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catch-lines, headings, and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and make changes
in catch-lines, headings, and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the term “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter”, “this subchapter”, “this section”, or “       through        ,”
indicating the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of
the ordinance incorporated into the code; and
      (5)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code, but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Prior Code, § 1.5.5)
§ 10.010 SEVERABILITY.
   It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that the chapters,
sections, divisions, and sentences of this code are severable; and if any
chapters, sections, divisions, and sentences of this code shall be declared
unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable, such unconstitutionality,
invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining chapters,
sections, divisions, and sentences of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1.5.6)
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES
§ 10.025 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcing this code. While criminal fines and penalties have been the most
frequent enforcement mechanism, there are certain negative consequences for
both the city and the accused. The delay inherent in that system does not
ensure prompt resolution. Citizens resent being labeled as criminals for
violations of administrative regulations. The higher burden of proof and the
potential of incarceration do not appear appropriate for most administrative
violations. The criminal process does not always regard city code violations as
being important. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the use of
administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is a legitimate
and necessary alternative method of enforcement. This method of enforcement is
in addition to any other legal remedy that may be pursued for this code’s
violations.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.1)
§ 10.026 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Administrative offense. A violation of any provision of this code is
an administrative offense that may be subject to an administrative citation and
civil penalties. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Exemption. Alcohol and tobacco license violations are not subject to
administrative citation under this section.
   (C)   Civil penalty. An administrative offense may be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor violation under
state law.
   (D)   Schedule of fines and fees. The City Council must adopt by resolution
a schedule of fines for offenses initiated by administrative citation. The City
Council is not bound by that schedule when a matter is appealed to it for
administrative review under §§
10.060 to
10.063. The City Council may adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to
administrative hearing officers.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.2)
§ 10.027 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Administrative notice.
      (1)   Upon the first violation, the city may issue an administrative
notice to the violator. The city will deliver the administrative notice to the
violator in person or by regular mail. The violator will have ten calendar days
to correct the violation after issuance of the administrative notice.
      (2)   If the violator is making a good faith attempt to remedy the
violation, the city may grant an extension, the length of which must be agreed
upon in writing between the city and the violator. The city is not required to
give such notice and the city, in its sole discretion, may determine that the
violation needs no notice since it is presumed that the public is clearly on
notice that the conduct is in violation of this code. In such cases, the city
shall immediately issue the administrative citation as set forth in division
(B) below.
   (B)   Administrative citation. If the violator fails to correct the
violation within the time period provided in the administrative notice, the
city may issue an administrative citation. The city must issue the citation to
the violator in person or by certified and regular mail. In the case of a
vehicular offense, the citation may be attached to the motor vehicle. The
citation must state the date, time, and nature of the offense, the name of the
issuing officer, the amount of the scheduled fine, and the manner for paying
the fine or appealing the citation.
   (C)   Payment. The violator must either pay the scheduled fine or request a
hearing within seven days after issuance of the citation. Penalties for failure
to correct the violation or late payment of the fine may be imposed as set
forth in §§
10.075 to
10.079. The city may issue a second citation or take other legal action to
achieve compliance with the ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.3)
§ 10.028 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   Hearing officers. The City Council will periodically approve a list of
qualified individuals, from which the City Clerk-Treasurer will randomly select
a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is
requested. The hearing officer will be a public officer, as defined by M.S. §
609.415, as it may be amended from time to time. The hearing officer must not
be a city employee. The City Clerk-Treasurer must establish a procedure for
evaluating the competency of the hearing officer, including comments from
accused violators and city staff. These reports must be provided to the City
Council.
   (B)   Removal of hearing officer. No later than five days before the date of
the hearing, the violator may make a written request that the assigned hearing
officer be removed from the case. The City Clerk- Treasurer will automatically
grant one request for removal. A subsequent request must be directed to the
assigned hearing officer who will decide whether he or she can fairly and
objectively review the case. If the hearing officer determines he or she cannot
fairly and objectively review the case, the hearing officer shall notify the
City Clerk-Treasurer in writing at least one day before the scheduled hearing
date. The City Clerk-Treasurer will then assign another hearing officer.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. Within 30 days of the request for a hearing, the
City Clerk-Treasurer will schedule the hearing and will notify the violator and
involved city staff of the date, time, and place for the hearing. Parties are
expected to be available for two hours. Notice of the hearing must be mailed to
the violator and the hearing officer at least ten days in advance of the
scheduled hearing, unless a shorter time is accepted by all parties. The notice
must contain the names of the parties, the identity of the hearing officer, the
location of the alleged violation and the type of violation alleged.
   (D)   Continuance. A request for a continuance must be made to the City
Clerk-Treasurer at least five days prior to the scheduled hearing date. The
City Clerk-Treasurer may grant a continuance at the request of the violator or
the city staff member only for good cause shown and for no more than ten days
from the originally assigned date.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.4)
§ 10.029 FILE TRANSMITTAL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of any request for a hearing, the City Clerk-Treasurer’s
office will compile a summary report detailing the facts in support of any
determination that the offense constitutes a violation.
   (B)   The summary report will include:
      (1)   Copy of the citation issued;
      (2)   Copy of the administrative notice, which preceded the citation;
      (3)   Copy of any case history in the issuing employee’s department;
      (4)   Photographs and/or videotape of property where available; and
      (5)   Proof of mailing and/or posting of notice on the property if the
citation was not personally served on the violator.
   (C)   The file must be ready for the hearing officer to pick up on the
business day preceding the scheduled hearing.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.5)
§ 10.030 PRESENTATION OF CASE.
   At the hearing, the parties will have the opportunity to present testimony
and question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidence will not apply. The
hearing officer must tape record the hearing and receive testimony and
exhibits. The hearing officer must receive and give weight to evidence,
including hearsay evidence, that possesses probative value commonly accepted by
reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.6)
§ 10.031 WRITTEN DECISION.
   (A)   The hearing officer must issue a written decision containing findings
of fact, conclusions of law, and an order. The decision will be mailed to the
parties within ten days after the hearing. The hearing officer has the
authority to determine that a violation occurred, to dismiss a citation, to
impose the scheduled fine, and to reduce, stay, or waive a scheduled fine
either unconditionally or upon compliance with appropriate conditions.
   (B)   When imposing a penalty for a violation, the hearing officer may
consider any or all of the following factors:
      (1)   Duration of the violation;
      (2)   Frequency of reoccurrence of the violation;
      (3)   Seriousness of the violation;
      (4)   History of the violation;
      (5)   Violator’s conduct after issuance of the administrative notice and
citation;
      (6)   Violator’s conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
      (7)   Good faith effort by the violator to comply;
      (8)   Impact of the violation upon the community;
      (9)   Prior record of city code violations; and
      (10)   Any other factors appropriate to a just result.
   (C)   The hearing officer may not impose a fine greater than the established
fine, except that the hearing officer may impose a fine for each week that the
violation continues if:
      (1)   The violation caused or is causing a serious threat of harm to the
public health, safety, or welfare; or
      (2)   The violator intentionally and unreasonably refused or refuses to
comply with the code requirement.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.7)
§ 10.032 NO APPEAL AVAILABLE.
   Except as provided in §§
10.060 to
10.063,
10.045, and
10.046, the decision of the hearing officer is final without any further right
of appeal.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.8)
§ 10.033 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   The failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the violator’s
rights to an administrative hearing and an admission of the violation. A
hearing officer may waive this result upon good cause shown. Examples of good
cause are death in the immediate family or documented incapacitating illness of
the violator; a court order requiring the violator to appear for another
hearing at the same time; and lack of proper service of the citation or notice
of the hearing. Good cause does not include forgetfulness, lack of
transportation or childcare, and intentional delay.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.1.9)
JUDICIAL REVIEW
§ 10.045 DECISION REVIEW.
   An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the hearing
officer as provided in state law.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.2.1)
§ 10.046 OPTION TO WITHDRAW.
   These procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have
been charged with administrative offenses. The individual may withdraw from
participation in this administrative process by submitting a written request
for withdrawal to the City Clerk-Treasurer within seven days of the issuance of
the administrative citation. Upon receiving this written request, the city may
bring criminal or other civil charges according to this code and state law.
Likewise, nothing in this section shall prohibit the city, in its discretion,
to initiate criminal charges or any other remedy in lieu of the administrative
procedures herein set forth.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.2.2)
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
§ 10.060 APPEAL.
   A violator may appeal the hearing officer’s decision in any of the following
matters to the City Council for administrative review:
   (A)   An alleged failure to obtain a permit, license, or other approval from
the City Council as required by an ordinance;
   (B)   An alleged violation of a permit, license, other approval, or the
conditions attached to the permit, license, or approval, that was granted by
the City Council; or
   (C)   An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity who
has received a license granted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.3.1)
§ 10.061 NOTICE.
   The appeal under this subchapter will be heard by the City Council. Notice
of the hearing must be delivered to the alleged violator or property owner and
involved city staff, in person or by mail, at least ten days in advance of the
hearing. The parties to the hearing will have an opportunity to present oral or
written arguments regarding the hearing officer’s decision.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.3.2)
§ 10.062 DECISIONS.
   The City Council must consider the record, the hearing officer’s decision,
and any additional arguments before making a determination. The Council is not
bound by the hearing officer’s decision, but may adopt all or part of the
officer’s decision. The Council’s decision must be in writing.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.3.3)
§ 10.063 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   In addition to imposing a civil penalty, the Council may suspend or revoke a
city-issued license, permit, or other approvals associated with the violation.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.3.4)
RECOVERY OF CIVIL PENALTIES
§ 10.075 NONPAYMENT.
   If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it will
constitute:
   (A)   A lien on the real property upon which the violation occurred, if the
property or improvements on the property was the subject of the violation and
the property owner was found responsible for that violation; or
   (B)   A personal obligation of the violator in all other situations.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.4.1)
§ 10.076 LIEN.
   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the same manner
as taxes.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.4.2)
§ 10.077 PERSONAL OBLIGATION.
   A personal obligation may be collected by appropriate legal means.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.4.3)
§ 10.078 LATE FEES/CHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   If after seven days the fine has not been paid or a hearing
requested, the fine will increase by 10% for each seven days thereafter for one
month.
      (2)   After four weeks and four late fee charges have been added to the
original fine, the total bill will be assessed to the property taxes and all
city licenses will be revoked.
      (3)   For continued violations, the city will correct the violation and
assess the charges for doing so on to the property taxes or criminal charges
may be filed.
   (B)   If the same property and property owner are charged with a subsequent
violation within a 12- month period for the same, or substantially similar
offense, the fine will be increased by 25%. After a third infraction in a 12-
month period, the fine will increase by 50%, and after a fourth infraction, by
100%.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.4.4)
§ 10.079 LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   Failure to pay a fine is grounds for suspending or revoking a license
related to the violation.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.4.5)
CRIMINAL PENALTIES
§ 10.090 MISDEMEANORS PUNISHABLE BY STATE LAW.
   The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance with state law:
   (A)   Failure, without good cause, to pay a fine or request a hearing within
30 days after issuance of an administrative citation;
   (B)   Failure, without good cause, to appear at a hearing that was scheduled
under §
10.028; and
   (C)   Failure to pay a fine imposed by a hearing officer within 30 days
after it was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the hearing
officer.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.5.1)
§ 10.091 DUPLICATE PROSECUTION.
   If the final adjudication in the administrative penalty procedure is a
finding of no violation, then the city may not prosecute a criminal violation
in District Court based on the same set of facts. This does not preclude the
city from pursuing a criminal conviction for a violation of the same provisions
based on a different set of facts. A different date of violation will
constitute a different set of facts.
(Prior Code, § 5.6.5.2)
MISDEMEANORS
§ 10.105 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 609, as it may be amended from time to time,
relating to definition of terms and maximum penalties for misdemeanors and
petty misdemeanors, are incorporated by reference as if set out in full. The
provisions herein below are enacted consistent with the provisions of M.S. §§
609.03, 609.0332, and 609.034, as they may be amended from time to time. In the
event these statutes are amended or repealed, the provisions thereof are hereby
declared to be incorporated in this code by reference as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 5.7.1)
§ 10.999 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever in this code, or in any ordinance of the city, any act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in this code or in any ordinance the doing of any act
is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this code
or city ordinance shall be punished as a misdemeanor, that is, with a fine of
up to $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment plus the cost of prosecution in any case, unless otherwise
provided in this code. The term MISDEMEANOR shall be as defined in M.S. §
609.02, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. The term PETTY
MISDEMEANOR shall mean an offense which does not constitute a crime and for
which a sentence of a fine of not more than $300 may be imposed. Each day any
violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   In case of the amendment by the City Council of any section of this
code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in
division (A)(1) above shall apply to the section, as amended; or if such
amendment contains provisions for which a specified penalty other than the
aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same
chapter, the penalty so specified shall be held to relate to the amended
section, unless such penalty is specifically repealed.
(Prior Code, § 1.5.7)
   (B)   Unless an act, omission, or violation is declared to be a petty
misdemeanor or unless another type of penalty is expressly provided, any person
violating any provision of this code, or any rule or regulation adopted in
pursuance thereof, or any other provision of any code adopted by this city by
reference, including any provision declaring an act or omission to be a
misdemeanor, shall be subject to conviction of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both, plus the cost of
prosecution in any case. This provision is effective regardless of any other
provision for punishment now contained in any provision of the ordinances of
the city, shall apply to any said act, omission, or violation, and inconsistent
provisions are hereby amended or repealed.
(Prior Code, § 5.7.2)
   (C)   Whenever an act, omission, or violation is declared by the code to be
a petty offense or a petty misdemeanor, any person violating the provision
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of nor more than $300. This
provision is effective regardless of any other provision for penalties for
petty offenses now contained in any ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.7.3)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ORGANIZATION AND EMPLOYMENT
      
31.   CITY COUNCIL
      
32.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 30: ORGANIZATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Form of government
   
30.02   Clerk-Treasurer
   
30.03   Motor Vehicle Deputy Registrar
   
30.04   Fee schedule
Background Checks for City Employment
   
30.15   Purpose
   
30.16   Police to conduct investigations
   
30.17   Manner of investigation, sharing results
   
30.18   Consent to investigation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The city is a statutory city organized and operated under state law as an
“Optional Plan A” type city. The Clerk-Treasurer is appointed and Council
members and the Mayor are elected.
(Prior Code, § 2.1)
§ 30.02 CLERK-TREASURER.
   The office of the City Clerk and City Treasurer are combined in the office
of Clerk-Treasurer, and thereafter the duties of each office as the same
existed prior to January 1, 1970, shall be performed by the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2.3.1)
§ 30.03 MOTOR VEHICLE DEPUTY REGISTRAR.
   The city provides Motor Vehicle Deputy Registrar sendees through the City
Clerk-Treasurer’s office located at City Hall. The Commissioner of Public
Safety has appointed the Deputy Registrar pursuant to M.S. § 168.33, as it may
be amended from time to time, and the Assistant Deputy Registrar.
(Prior Code, § 3.29)
§ 30.04 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The fee schedule is hereby adopted by reference. A full copy of the fee
schedule can be found at city hall.
(Prior Code, § 2.5) (Ord. 2019-06, passed 11-25-2019)
BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT
§ 30.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized criminal history
information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks
for the positions described in §
30.16.
(Prior Code, § 5.5.1) (Ord. 2012-4, passed - -)
§ 30.16 POLICE TO CONDUCT INVESTIGATIONS.
   The Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the
city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for
all employees of the city and all volunteer positions that work with children
or vulnerable adults.
(Prior Code, § 5.5.1) (Ord. 2012-4, passed - -)
§ 30.17 MANNER OF INVESTIGATION, SHARING RESULTS.
   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to
screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access
data maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions computerized
criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department
under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her
designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data
may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including the
City Council, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or other city staff involved in the
hiring process.
(Prior Code, § 5.5.1) (Ord. 2012-4, passed - -)
§ 30.18 CONSENT TO INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Police Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The
written consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 13, as it may
be amended from time to time, regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may
be amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for
employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is
directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for
a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.
   (B)   If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city
shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. §
364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
      (4)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 5.5.1) (Ord. 2012-4, passed - -)
CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
31.01   Regular meetings
   
31.02   Special meetings
   
31.03   Emergency meetings
   
31.04   Public meetings
   
31.05   Initial meeting
   
31.06   Open to the public
   
31.07   Presiding officer
   
31.08   Minutes
   
31.09   Order of business
   
31.10   Quorum and voting
   
31.11   Actions and documents
   
31.12   Suspension of rules
   
31.13   Committees
   
31.14   Salaries
§ 31.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held twice each month, date
and time to be determined by the City Council by resolution at its first
regular Council meeting in January of each year. Any regular meeting falling
upon a holiday shall be held on the next following business day at the same
time and place. All meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, shall
be held in the City Hall unless proper notice of a different location for a
special meeting is provided.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.1)
§ 31.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The Mayor or any two members of the Council may call a special meeting of
the Council upon at least one day’s notice. Unless an emergency, written notice
shall be provided to each member of the Council. This notice shall be delivered
personally to each member or shall be left at his or her usual place of
residence with some responsible person. Similar notice shall be given to the
City Attorney and members of the press, and posted at the City Hall and two
other public places in the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.2)
§ 31.03 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   An emergency meeting is a special meeting called by the Council due to
circumstances that, in its judgment, require immediate Council consideration.
The procedure for notifying Council members of emergency meetings is the same
as that for special meetings. Notice must be by telephone or by any other
method used to notify Council members. The notice must include the subject of
the meeting. A published or posted notice is not necessary.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.3)
§ 31.04 PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   All Council meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, and meetings
of Council committees, shall be open to the public unless as authorized by
state law.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.4)
§ 31.05 INITIAL MEETING.
   At the first regular Council meeting in January of each year, the City
Council shall:
   (A)   Designate the dates of regular meetings for that year;
   (B)   Designate the depositories of city funds;
   (C)   Designate the official legal newspaper;
   (D)   Choose one of the Council members as acting Mayor, who shall perform
the duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor from the
city, or, in case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, until a successor has
been appointed and qualifies; and
   (E)   Appoint such officers and employees and such members of boards,
commissions, and committees as may be necessary.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.5)
§ 31.06 OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
   All Council meetings, including special and adjourned meetings and meetings
of Council committees, shall be open to the public except as authorized by
state law.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.6)
§ 31.07 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   Who presides. The Mayor or, in the Mayor’s absence, the acting Mayor
shall preside.
   (B)   Procedure. The Council shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
The presiding officer shall preserve order; enforce the rules of procedure; and
determine without debate, subject to the final decision of the Council on
appeal, all questions of procedure and order. Except as otherwise provided by
statute or by this chapter, the proceedings of the Council shall be conducted
in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised.
   (C)   Rights of presiding officer. The presiding officer may make motions,
second motions, or speak on any question, except that on demand of any Council
member, he or she shall vacate the chair and designate a Council member to
preside temporarily.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.7)
§ 31.08 MINUTES.
   (A)   Who keeps. Minutes of each Council meeting shall be kept by the Clerk-
Treasurer, or in the Clerk-Treasurer’s absence, by the Deputy Clerk-Treasurer.
In the absence of both, the presiding officer shall appoint a secretary pro
tem. Ordinances, resolutions, and claims need not be recorded in full in the
minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the Clerk-Treasurer and
can be accurately identified from the description given in the minutes.
   (B)   Approval. The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten
form, shall be signed by the Clerk-Treasurer, and copies shall be delivered to
each Council member and the City Attorney as soon as possible after the
meeting. At the next regular Council meeting following such delivery, approval
of the minutes shall be considered by the Council. The minutes need not be read
aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any additions or corrections.
If there is no objection to a proposed addition or correction, it may be made
without a vote of the Council. If there is an objection, the Council shall vote
upon the addition or correction. If there are no additions or corrections, the
minutes shall stand approved.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.8)
§ 31.09 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Order established.
      (1)   Each Council meeting shall convene at the time and place appointed.
Council business shall be conducted in the following order:
         (a)   Call to order;
         (b)   Pledge of allegiance;
         (c)   Approval of the agenda;
         (d)   Consent agenda;
         (e)   Public comments;
         (f)   Unfinished business;
         (g)   New business;
         (h)   Reports of staff and consultants; and
         (i)   Adjournment.
      (2)   Public hearings and openings of bids shall be conducted at the
times announced, and the order of business shall be suspended for so doing.
   (B)   Varying order. The order of business may be varied by the presiding
officer.
   (C)   Agenda. An agenda of business for each regular Council meeting shall
be prepared and filed in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer not later than two
days before the meeting. The agenda shall be prepared in accordance with the
order of business, and copies of the agenda shall be delivered to each Council
member and the City Attorney as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit. No item of business shall be considered unless it
appears on the agenda for the meeting or is approved for addition to the agenda
by two-thirds vote of the Council members present.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.9) (Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-25-2019)
§ 31.10 QUORUM AND VOTING.
   (A)   Quorum. At all Council meetings, a majority of all the Council members
elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may adjourn from time to time.
   (B)   Voting. The votes of the members on any question may be taken in any
manner which signifies the intention of the individual members, and the votes
of the members on any action taken shall be recorded in the minutes. The vote
of each member shall be recorded on each appropriation of money, except for
payments of judgments, claims, and amounts fixed by statute. If any member is
present but does not vote, the minutes, as to his or her name, shall be marked
“Present - Not Voting”.
   (C)   Votes required. A majority vote of all members of the Council shall be
necessary for approval of any ordinance unless a larger number is required by
statute. Except as otherwise provided by statute, a majority vote of a quorum
shall prevail in all other cases.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.10)
§ 31.11 ACTIONS AND DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   Writings required. Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented
in writing. An ordinance or resolution need not be read in full unless a member
of the Council requests such a reading.
   (B)   Signing. Every ordinance and resolution passed by the Council shall be
signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk-Treasurer, and filed by the Clerk-
Treasurer in the ordinance or resolution book. Proof of publication of every
ordinance shall be attached and filed with the ordinance.
   (C)   Repeals. Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous ordinance
or resolution or a section or subdivision of an ordinance or resolution shall
give the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or code number of the
ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. Each ordinance or
resolution amending an existing ordinance or resolution or part of an ordinance
or resolution shall set forth in full each amended section or subdivision as it
will read with the amendment.
   (D)   Motions and communications. Every motion shall be stated in full
before it is submitted to a vote by the presiding officer and shall be recorded
in the minutes. Every petition or other communication addressed to the Council
shall be in writing and shall be read in full upon presentation to the Council
unless the Council dispenses with the reading. Each petition or other
communication shall be recorded in the minutes by title and filed with the
minutes in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.11)
§ 31.12 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   The rules of the Council may be suspended only by a two-thirds vote of the
members present and voting.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.12)
§ 31.13 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Designated. There shall be the following standing committees,
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council at the first regular
Council meeting in January of each year:
      (1)   Library Committee;
      (2)   Cemetery, Parks and Recreation Committee;
      (3)   Police Advisory Committee;
      (4)   CREDI Committee;
      (5)   Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (6)   Sewer Board Committee;
      (7)   Personnel Committee;
      (8)   HRA Committee; and
      (9)   Public Works Committee.
   (B)   Authority. The Council may create departments and advisory boards and
appoint officers, employees, and agents for the city as deemed necessary for
the proper management and operation of city affairs.
   (C)   Membership. Each committee shall consist of two members of the
Council. The City Council shall sit as the members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Each committee member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a
majority of the members of the Council. If the committee does not provide
otherwise, the committee shall meet at the call of the chairperson, who shall
be designated by the Mayor. The same notice shall be given of committee
meetings as for special meetings of the Council, except that personal notice
need not be given each member if the committee so decides.
   (D)   Referrals. Any matter brought before the Council for consideration may
be referred by the presiding officer to the appropriate committee appointed by
him or her for consideration and recommendation before it is considered by the
Council as a whole. Each committee shall act promptly and faithfully on any
matter referred to it. The City Council may create such committees, standing or
special, as it deems necessary, with as many members as necessary.
(Prior Code, § 2.2.13) (Ord. 2013-3, passed 10-28-2013; Ord. 2021-05, passed -
-2021)
§ 31.14 SALARIES.
   The salary of the Mayor and the salary of each Council member shall be set
from time to time by the Council in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 2.4)
CHAPTER 32: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
32.01   Authority and purpose
   
32.02   Volunteer Fire Department
   
32.03   Officers and membership
   
32.04   Fire Chief
   
32.05   Assistant Chief
   
32.06   Captain
   
32.07   Lieutenant
   
32.08   Secretary/Treasurer
   
32.09   Drills
   
32.10   Members
   
32.11   Loss of membership
   
32.12   Compensation
   
32.13   Relief association
   
32.14   Interference
   
32.15   City Council preparation
§ 32.01 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   The Council has the power to establish a Fire Department, appoint its
officers and members and prescribe their duties, and provide fire apparatus and
to adopt such ordinances as are reasonable and expedient to prevent, control,
or extinguish fires.
(Prior Code, § 5.1)
§ 32.02 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   There is continued the Volunteer Fire Department, consisting of a Chief, an
Assistant Chief, and not fewer than 30 or more than 35 firefighters.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.1)
§ 32.03 OFFICERS AND MEMBERSHIP.
   The Chief of the Fire Department, the Assistant Chief, and the Secretary/
Treasurer shall be elected annually by the members of the Department, subject
to confirmation by the City Council. Each shall hold office for one year and
until his or her successor has been duly elected, except that he or she may be
removed by the Council for cause after a public hearing. Firefighters shall be
appointed by the officers of the Department, subject to the Council’s right to
disallow any such appointment. Each officer and every other member of the
Department except a probationary firefighter shall serve during good behavior
and may be removed by the Council only for cause after a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.2)
§ 32.04 FIRE CHIEF.
   In order to be eligible or nominated as Fire Chief, a person must be a
member of the Fire Department, in good standing, and have been a member of the
Fire Department for a minimum of ten years, must have state certification as a
Firefighter I and Firefighter II, Officer I, and also must have served as
Assistant Chief on the city’s Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire Department
shall have control of all the firefighting apparatus and shall be solely
responsible for its care and condition. He or she shall make an annual report
to the Council at one of its regular meetings on the condition of the equipment
and needs of the Fire Department. He or she may submit additional reports and
recommendations at any meeting of the Council, and he or she shall report each
suspension by him or her of a member of the Fire Department at the first
meeting of the Council following such suspension. He or she shall be
responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Fire
Department and may suspend any member for refusal or neglect to obey orders
pending final action by the Council on his or her discharge or retention. He or
she shall also make such inspections as the Council may require him or her to
do and report on the inspections.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.3)
§ 32.05 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In order to be eligible or nominated as Assistant Fire Chief, a person must
be a member of the Fire Department, in good standing, and have been a member of
the Fire Department for a minimum of ten years, must have state certification
as a Firefighter I and Firefighter II, Officer I, and also must have served as
a Captain on the city’s Fire Department. In the absence or disability of the
Fire Chief, the Assistant Chief shall perform all the functions and exercise
all of the authority of the Chief.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.4)
§ 32.06 CAPTAIN.
   A Captain is appointed by the Fire Chief. In order to be appointed as a
Captain, a person must be a member of the Fire Department, in good standing,
and have been a member of the Fire Department for a minimum of five years, and
must have state certification as Firefighter I and Firefighter II.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.5)
§ 32.07 LIEUTENANT.
   A Lieutenant is appointed by the Fire Chief. In order to be appointed as
Lieutenant, a person must be a member of the Fire Department, in good standing,
and have been a member of the Fire Department for a minimum of five years, and
must have state certification as Firefighter I.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.6)
§ 32.08 SECRETARY/TREASURER.
   The Secretary/Treasurer shall be appointed by the membership and shall keep
in convenient form a complete record of all fires. Such a record shall include
the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire (if known), type of
building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for which occupied, value of
building and contents, members of the Department responding to the alarm, and
such other information as he or she may deem advisable or as may be required
from time to time by the Council or the state’s Insurance Department.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.7)
§ 32.09 DRILLS.
   The Assistant Fire Chief shall hold a monthly training session practice
drill of at least two hours duration for the Fire Department and shall give or
arrange for instruction to the firefighters in approved methods of firefighting
and fire prevention. Continued absence is determined by the Chief from
Department drills, meetings, or fires.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.8)
§ 32.10 MEMBERS.
   The Assistant Chief and firefighters shall be able-bodied and not less than
21 years of age. They shall become members of the Fire Department only after a
one-year probationary period. The Department may require that each candidate,
before he or she may become a probationary firefighter, must satisfy certain
minimum requirements of height, weight, education, and any other qualifications
which may be specified by the Department, and that he or she must pass
satisfactorily a mental and physical examination, if requested.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.9)
§ 32.11 LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP.
   Absence of any firefighter from drills, meetings, or fires for six
consecutive months unless excused by the Chief shall be cause for removal from
the Department.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.10)
§ 32.12 COMPENSATION.
   The members and officers of the Fire Department shall receive such
compensation as the Council shall determine from time to time by resolution. In
computing compensation for fires and practice drills, two hours shall be
considered as the minimum to be paid to any firefighter or officer.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.11)
§ 32.13 RELIEF ASSOCIATION.
   The members and officers of the Fire Department may organize themselves into
a firefighters’ relief association in accordance with law.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.12)
§ 32.14 INTERFERENCE.
   No person shall give or make, or cause to be given or made, a fire alarm
without probable cause, or neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of
the Chief at a fire, or interfere with the Fire Department in the discharge of
its duties. At the scene of any fire where the Fire Department has been called,
the Fire Chief or his or her designate shall be in full charge and control and
shall have authority over the property owners and all other city employees.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.13) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.15 CITY COUNCIL PREPARATION.
   The City Council shall have authority to enter the Fire Department into
mutual aid firefighting pacts and into firefighting contracts, as provided by
state law.
(Prior Code, § 5.2.14)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
33.01   Authority and purpose
   
33.02   Membership
   
33.03   Chief of Police
   
33.04   Duties of police
   
33.05   Uniform and badge
§ 33.01 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   The Council has the power to establish a Police Department, appoint its
officers and members and prescribe their duties, and provide the equipment
necessary for police enforcement and to adopt such ordinances as are reasonable
and expedient to execute its police enforcement duties.
(Prior Code, § 5.3)
§ 33.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Chief of Police is the head of the Police Department, and the number of
additional members of the Department, together with their ranks and titles,
shall be determined by the City Council or the Police Chief. The compensation
to be paid members of the Police Department shall be fixed by the Council.
Members of the Department shall be appointed by approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.4.1)
§ 33.03 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall have supervision and control of the Police
Department and its members. The Police Chief shall be responsible to the City
Council for law enforcement and for property of the city used by the
Department. The Chief shall be responsible for the proper training and
discipline of the members of the Department. The Chief shall be responsible for
the keeping of adequate records, and the Chief shall report to the Council on
the needs of the Department and its work. Every member of the Department
subordinate to the Chief shall obey the instructions of the Chief and any
superior officer. The City Council shall designate one of the police officers
as Acting Chief, who shall have all the powers and duties of the Chief during
his or her absence or disability.
(Prior Code, § 5.4.2)
§ 33.04 DUTIES OF POLICE.
   Members of the Police Department shall enforce the ordinances and laws
applicable to the city, bring violators before the district court, and make
complaints for offenses coming to their knowledge. Members of the Police
Department shall serve processes on behalf of the city and shall serve such
notices as may be required by the City Council or other authority.
(Prior Code, § 5.4.3)
§ 33.05 UNIFORM AND BADGE.
   Each member of the Police Department shall, while on duty, wear a suitable
badge and uniform, except that the Chief may authorize the performance of
specific duties while not in uniform. The city may provide all necessary
badges, guns, and leather equipment, and each officer shall receive a uniform
allowance, which amount shall be determined by the City Council. When a member
terminates his or her membership in the Department, he or she shall immediately
deliver to the city his or her badge, gun, and all other property of the city
in his or her possession.
(Prior Code, § 5.4.4)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
34.01   State law adopted
   
34.02   Local organization
 
   
34.99   Penalty
§ 34.01 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The state’s Emergency Management Act, M.S. §§ 12.01 et seq., as they may be
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference to the same effect
and purpose as if the pertinent sections thereof were herein set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 7.7.1)
§ 34.02 LOCAL ORGANIZATION.
   There is established a local organization for emergency management with a
director, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, who shall have the
responsibility for organization, subject to the direction and control of the
City Council. The City Council has hereby adopted the Crow Wing County
Emergency Response Plan.
(Prior Code, § 7.7.2)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter or orders or directions
lawfully issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance
with §
10.999.
(Prior Code, § 7.7.3)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWER
      
53.   STORM WATER
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
   
50.01   Purpose
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Open burning
   
50.04   Municipal collection
   
50.05   Removal and transportation
   
50.06   Refuse on premises declared unlawful; regulations
   
50.07   Disposal required
   
50.08   Containers
   
50.09   Contract for refuse collection
   
50.10   Refuse collection schedule and vacancies
   
50.11   Rates and charges
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
30.04
§ 50.01 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 412.221, Subd. 22, as it may be amended from time to
time, the city has the authority to regulate the bringing, depositing, or
leaving within the city of any unwholesome substance or deposit of solid waste
or chemical within the city not otherwise authorized by law and to enact the
necessary laws to protect its citizens and the public welfare.
(Prior Code, § 11.1)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. A house or building occupied by a person engaged in the operation
of a business at or on the premises.
   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT or COMMERCIAL. Any premises where a commercial or
industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on, and shall include clubs,
churches, and establishments of nonprofit organizations and governmental
agencies where food is prepared or served or where goods are sold. It shall
mean any commercial or industrial enterprise, providing products or service,
which is carried on by the owner or occupant which involves the general public
on the premises. Multiple-dwelling units of three or more dwelling units
located in commercial districts in the zoning map (B-1, B-2, I-1, or I-2) shall
be classified as BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT or COMMERCIAL under this chapter.
Construction waste or demolition debris is a BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT or
COMMERCIAL.
   DWELLING UNIT. A separate dwelling place with a kitchen.
   GARBAGE. Organic waste resulting from the preparation of food and decayed
and spoiled food from any source.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE OR SUBSTANCE. A chemical or substance, or mixture of
chemicals and substances, which are either toxic or highly toxic; an irritant;
corrosive; a strong oxidizer; a strong sensitizer; combustible; either
flammable or extremely flammable; dangerously reactive; pyrophoric or pressure-
generating; compressed gas; carcinogen; teratogen; mutagen; reproductive toxic
agent; or that otherwise, according to generally accepted documented medical or
scientific evidence, may cause substantial acute or chronic personal injury or
illness during or as a direct result of any customary or reasonably foreseeable
accidental or intentional exposure to the chemical or substance.
   INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS. A building housing a business engaged in the
manufacturing or remanufacturing of any item for resale.
   JUNK CARS. Any motor vehicle stored within the city which does not bear
current vehicle registration.
   LOW-INCOME HOUSING. Refers specifically to the Edgewood and Dellwood
Apartment Complexes.
   MERCANTILE BUSINESS. A business engaged in merchandising consumer goods,
including, but not limited to, hardware stores, liquor stores and bars,
furniture stores, drugstores, dry goods stores, clothing stores, and filling
stations.
   MULTIPLE RESIDENCE. A dwelling or structure providing dwelling for three or
more families.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A house or building occupied by three or more
families and divided into separate apartments or units.
   RECYCLABLES. Include paper, plastic, tin cans, aluminum, motor oil, glass,
and other metal goods, each separated or otherwise prepared so as to be
acceptable to the recycling center where they are to be deposited.
   RECYCLING CENTER. Premises within the city approved by the Council for
receipt, storage, and processing of recyclables, and premises outside the city
approved as a RECYCLING CENTER by the local unit of government having
jurisdiction.
   REFUSE. Includes garbage and rubbish, but shall not include sewage.
   RESIDENCE or RESIDENTIAL. Dwellings or structures providing dwelling for two
or fewer families or separate individuals (i.e., multiple residences of one or
two dwellings or any dwelling or structure providing dwelling for any number of
families or individuals) in residential zones, R-1 and R-2, according to the
zoning map.
   RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL. Any residence where a commercial or industrial
enterprise, providing products or service, is carried on by the owner or
occupant which involves the general public on the premises.
   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE. Refuse originating from residential property.
   RESTAURANT, CATERING SERVICE. A business engaged in selling prepared meals.
   RETAIL FOOD BUSINESS. A business engaged in selling meats and/or groceries
on a retail level.
   RUBBISH. Non-garbage solid waste such as tin cans, glass, paper, sweepings,
clippings, ashes, rags, and the like.
   SERVICE BUSINESSES. A business engaged in providing consumer services,
including, but not limited to, doctors, dentists, lawyers, insurance agents,
real estate agents, rental outlets, banks, accountants, barbershops, and beauty
shops.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A house or building occupied by one family.
   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A house or building occupied by two families and
divided into two separate apartments or units.
(Prior Code, § 11.2)
§ 50.03 OPEN BURNING.
   Recreational burning and controlled burning by the Fire Department is
permitted. All other open burning is prohibited except as authorized by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 11.3) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 MUNICIPAL COLLECTION.
   (A)   (1)   All refuse accumulated within the city, except such as is
lawfully composted upon the premises where produced or lawfully transported to
a recycling center, shall be disposed of by a private vendor contracted by the
city.
      (2)   No person except who has been authorized by the city shall collect
refuse or garbage, nor shall any person unlawfully dispose of any refuse
accumulated in the city, except it shall not be unlawful for any person to
transport recyclables to a recycling center. Commercial or industrial users
shall be responsible for their own refuse.
   (B)   The city shall supervise and control the collection and disposal of
refuse. In accordance with regular personnel and purchasing procedures, it may
employ necessary personnel and acquire necessary equipment to provide for the
collection and disposal of refuse accumulated within the city. It may, with
Council approval, adopt rules and regulations necessary to supplement the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   In cases where a commercial user stores and disposes of refuse
and the commercial user wishes to employ a private hauler, the commercial user
may have the refuse collection charges waived by supplying the City Clerk-
Treasurer with a signed and notarized affidavit from a garbage hauler licensed
by the city, indicating that the licensed hauler is removing refuse from the
commercial user’s premises on a schedule equal to or exceeding the schedule
indicated herein.
      (2)   This affidavit shall also indicate that it is the responsibility of
the commercial user to notify the City Clerk-Treasurer immediately if the
licensed hauler terminates refuse collection for the commercial user for any
reason whatsoever.
   (D)   In cases where a dwelling or business is unoccupied for any given
month, the refuse collection charge for that month will be waived. It is the
responsibility of the owner of the dwelling or business to notify the City
Clerk-Treasurer, during normal business hours, of any vacancies, prior to the
twentieth of each month the vacancy continues to exist. If the City Clerk-
Treasurer is not notified each and every month of any such vacancies, the
refuse collection charge for the dwelling or business will be charged as if
fully occupied.
   (E)   All containers shall be placed on a rack or stand which shall be a
minimum of 24 inches and a maximum of 36 inches above the ground.
   (F)   Refuse shall be drained of liquid, and household garbage shall be
wrapped before being deposited in a container. Highly inflammable explosive
material or other hazardous wastes shall not be placed in containers.
   (G)   The City Council shall from time to time set a schedule for collection
of refuse. Said schedule shall be passed by resolution and said resolution
shall be published one time in the legal newspaper at least ten days previous
to the effective date of any change in the schedule.
(Prior Code, § 11.4) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 REMOVAL AND TRANSPORTATION.
   (A)   Removal business. Any person wishing to engage in the business of
removal of rubbish or garbage on a regular basis from any location within the
city shall first obtain a license for the privilege. The currently required
annual fee shall be included with the application for the license and shall be
given to the City Clerk-Treasurer at least 30 days in advance of the
establishment of the business.
   (B)   Vehicles. All vehicles used for hauling refuse by the city or a
licensed hauler shall be covered, leak-proof, durable, and of easily cleanable
construction. Every vehicle used for hauling shall be sufficiently airtight and
so used as to prevent unreasonable quantities of dust, paper, or other
collected materials to escape. Every vehicle shall be kept clean to prevent
nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good
repair.
   (C)   Transporting refuse. It shall be unlawful to transport any refuse from
outside of the city limits for pickup by the refuse collection system.
(Prior Code, § 11.5) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 REFUSE ON PREMISES DECLARED UNLAWFUL; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises
is unlawful and therefore prohibited.
   (B)   Refuse in streets, and the like. No person shall place any refuse in
any street, alley, or public place or upon private property, except in proper
containers for collection or other lawful disposal. No person shall throw or
deposit refuse in any stream or other body of water.
   (C)   Scattering refuse. No person shall deposit anywhere within the city
any refuse in such manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements
upon any public place or any other premises within the city.
   (D)   Burying of refuse. No person shall bury any refuse in the city, except
in an approved sanitary landfill. This division (D) does not prevent anyone
from composting.
   (E)   Composting of refuse. Anyone may compost leaves, grass clippings, and
other easily biodegradable, nonpoisonous garbage on his or her own premises.
   (F)   Burning of refuse. No person shall burn any refuse in the city, except
as allowed from time to time by duly adopted amendments to the provisions of
this chapter.
   (G)   Ashes. All ashes must be in burnable containers such as plastic bags,
paper boxes, and the like.
   (H)   Yard waste. Small trees, brush, branches, and the like, must be cut in
lengths of three feet or less and tied in bundles of 50 pounds or less.
(Prior Code, § 11.6) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   Every owner or occupant of residential property shall, in a sanitary manner,
store and dispose of refuse that may accumulate upon property owned or occupied
by him or her in accordance with the terms of this chapter or other ordinance
relating to nuisances. Refuse shall be collected or otherwise lawfully disposed
of at least once each week for residential dwellings, and at least two times
each week for business establishments and buildings with three or more
dwellings located in commercial zones.
(Prior Code, § 11.7)
§ 50.08 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Every householder, occupant, or owner of any residence shall
provide on the premises one 20-gallon can, or receive a 32-, 68-, or 95-gallon
cart-container provided by the private hauler contracted by the city. Such
containers must receive and contain all refuse which may accumulate between
collections or other disposal.
      (2)   All normal accumulation of refuse shall be deposited in such
containers; except that leaves, trimmings from shrubs, grass clippings,
shavings, and other rubbish of similar volume and weight may be stored in
closed containers not meeting the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Business establishments. All business establishments shall have
adequate facilities for the storage and collection of garbage and rubbish.
Business establishments must make use of a licensed garbage and rubbish
collector, not necessarily the private hauler contracting with the city.
   (C)   Container requirements. Containers shall be maintained in good and
sanitary condition. Any container not conforming to the specifics in the
contract with the contract hauler, or having ragged or sharp edges or any
defect likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents, shall be
promptly replaced after notice by the city.
   (D)   Placement. Where an alley open to traffic is available, each container
for premises abutting the alley shall be placed at the rear of the property,
next to the alley. Where no alley exists, the container shall be placed at the
front property line for collection, but it shall not be so placed before 4:00
p.m. the night before collection and shall be removed by 8:00 p.m. the day of
collection.
(Prior Code, § 11.8)
§ 50.09 CONTRACT FOR REFUSE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Authorized. Subject to the provisions of this section, the Council
shall grant the authority to collect and dispose of all refuse originating from
residential property within the city. Commercial business establishment and
demolition hauling shall not be affected by this section.
   (B)   Terms. The contract shall be made for a term of three years subject to
extension by mutual consent and to termination during the period of the
contract as provided in the contract.
   (C)   Contract collector. No person shall collect refuse from residential
property within the city except the person who has obtained a collection
contract for the city. No person shall permit refuse to be collected from his
or her premises by any other person than a contract collector, except business
establishments, which may contract as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 11.9) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.10 REFUSE COLLECTION SCHEDULE AND VACANCIES.
   The contractor shall collect refuse in the city at least once a week from
residences. When the City Clerk-Treasurer is notified in writing that a
residence is to be continuously vacant or unoccupied for a period of not less
than one calendar month, and if the notice is given prior to the first day of
the initial month of vacancy, there shall be no refuse billing or liability for
such residence during the period of vacancy; however, any resident who receives
collection services for any week shall be liable for the entire monthly charge
stated herein.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 50.11 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Application for service. Application for refuse disposal service shall
be made to the City Clerk-Treasurer on forms prescribed by the city and
furnished by the city. Every applicant and every person applying for refuse
disposal, and every owner of property for which such application is made or
service provided, shall be deemed by such application or service to consent to
all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city relating to refuse disposal.
   (B)   Accounts in name of owner. All accounts shall be carried in the name
of the owner who personally or by his or her authorized agent shall apply for
such service. The owner shall be liable for refuse disposal supplied to the
property, whether he or she is occupying the property or not, and any charges
unpaid shall be a lien upon the property. The term CUSTOMER shall include the
owner, occupant, or both.
   (C)   Rates. The rates for refuse disposal shall be a charge against the
premises from which refuse or rubbish is collected and the owner, lessee, or
occupant of the premises, or against any or all of them, and any claim for
unpaid rates charged, rentals, or services which have been properly billed to
the occupant of the premises may be collected in a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction, or in the discretion of the City Council, may be
certified to the County Auditor with the taxes against such property served,
and shall be collected as other taxes are collected.
   (D)   Payment and late charge.  Bills for refuse service charges shall be
rendered on a monthly basis succeeding the period for which the service was
rendered and shall be due 30 days from the date of rendering. Any payment not
received by the due date shall result in a penalty of a late payment charge.
The penalty shall be computed as 10% of the original bill and shall be
increased the same 10% for every month the bill is outstanding.
   (E)   Lien for nonpayment. As authorized by state law, the city may certify
to the County Auditor between October 1 and 15 of each year any charges that
are delinquent, which includes all such charges that are more than 30 days past
due on or before September 30 of that year, which certification shall include
the amount of such charges, the description of the premises serviced, and the
name and address of the owner. The amount so certified shall be extended by the
Auditor on the tax rolls against the premises in the same matter as other
taxes, and collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the city along with
other taxes. If the property is occupied by any person who is not the owner,
the owner is nonetheless obligated for all service collection charges incurred.
   (F)   Billing. The monthly service charge for each premises shall be made to
the owner or occupant, as designated in the application or as requested by the
owner. In all cases, however, the owner of the premises shall be liable for
refuse disposal supplied to the property. If the premises are served by city
water or sewer, the charge will be billed as a separate entry on the city
utility bill.
   (G)   Fund. All service charges shall be deposited in a separate fund
designated as a Refuse Collection Fund. All expenses of providing refuse
collection service shall be paid from the Fund. Any contract with the contract
collector shall provide that even if the Fund, minus administrative fees, is
insufficient to pay the expenses of the contract collector, the city shall not
transfer funds from the General Fund, but must make diligent effort to collect
the unpaid service charges, including certification to the County Auditor for
collection with real estate taxes, or any other legal and appropriate civil
action, or remedy available to the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.11) (Ord. 2019-06, passed 11-25-2019; Ord. 2024-02, passed 5-
13-2024)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with §
10.999.
(Prior Code, § 11.12)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
   
51.01   Public services provided
   
51.02   Applications and owner-customer responsibility
   
51.03   Payment and late charges
   
51.04   Shutoff for nonpayment
   
51.05   Collection of taxes
   
51.06   Tapping
   
51.07   Rates
   
51.08   Sprinkling lawns and gardens
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 PUBLIC SERVICES PROVIDED.
   The city has authority under state statutes to establish city services for
the benefit of its citizens. At the time of the adoption of this code, the city
provides the following services.
(Prior Code, § 3.1)
§ 51.02 APPLICATIONS AND OWNER-CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Application for service. Application for a water service installation
and for water service shall be made to the City Clerk-Treasurer on forms
prescribed by the city and furnished by the city. Every applicant and every
person applying for water service from the city water system and every owner of
property for which such application is made shall be deemed by such application
to consent to all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city relating to
the city water system. If water is used as a source of heat, the applicant must
clearly state on the applicant’s application with the city or the city will
presume that water is not used as a source of heat.
   (B)   Accounts in name of owner. All accounts shall be carried in the name
of the owner, who personally, or by his or her authorized agent, shall apply
for such service. The owner shall be liable for water supplied to the property,
whether he or she is occupying the property or not, and any charges unpaid
shall be a lien upon the property. The term CUSTOMER includes the owner or the
occupant.
   (C)   Responsibility for service pipe. Except when maintenance or repair of
the service pipe from the water main is required due to freeze up, the property
owner whose property is serviced shall be responsible for the maintenance and
repair of the service pipe from the service pipe shutoff valve to the serviced
property. When maintenance or repair is necessitated due to freeze-up, the
property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the
service pipe from the water main to the serviced property.
(Prior Code, § 3.2) (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-24-2014)
§ 51.03 PAYMENT AND LATE CHARGES.
   (A)   Bills for water service charges shall be rendered on a monthly basis
succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and shall be due 30
days from the date of rendering. Any payment not received by the due date shall
result in a penalty of a late payment charge. The penalty shall be computed as
10% of the original bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every month
the bill is outstanding.
   (B)   The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to
such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable to the city.
   (C)   Lien for nonpayment. As authorized by state law, the city may certify
to the County Auditor between October 1 and 15 of each year any charges that
are delinquent, which includes all such charges that are more than 30 days past
due on or before September 30 of that year, which certification shall include
the amount of such charges, the description of the premises serviced, and the
name and address of the owner. The amount so certified shall be extended by the
Auditor on the tax rolls against the premises in the same matter as other
taxes, and collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the city along with
other taxes. If the property is occupied by any person who is not the owner,
the owner is nonetheless obligated for all service collection charges incurred.
(Prior Code, § 3.3) (Ord. 2024-04, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 51.04 SHUTOFF FOR NONPAYMENT.
   (A)   Commercial customers. The Water Department is authorized to disconnect
commercial customers after compliance herewith.
   (B)   Residential customers. The Water Department is authorized to
disconnect city water service of a residential customer from April 16 through
October 14 after compliance with the disconnect procedure set out herein.
   (C)   Residential winter shutoffs. The Water Department shall not disconnect
the city water service of a residential customer if the disconnection affects
the primary heat source of a residential customer when the following conditions
are met:
      (1)   The disconnection would occur during the period between October 15
and April 15;
      (2)   The customer has declared inability to pay using forms provided by
the city;
      (3)   The household income of the customer is less than 185% of the
federal poverty level, as documented by the customer to the employee; and
      (4)   The customer’s account is current for the billing period
immediately prior to October 15, or the customer has entered into a payment
schedule agreement and is reasonably current with the payment under the
schedule.
   (D)   Notification. The Water Department, by and through the City Clerk-
Treasurer, shall notify all residential customers of the winter shutoff or
disconnect requirements set out herein.
   (E)   Notice to residential customers facing disconnection. Before
disconnecting service to a residential customer during the period between
October 15 and April 15, the Water Department, through the City Clerk-
Treasurer, shall provide the following information to a customer:
      (1)   A notice of proposed disconnection;
      (2)   A statement explaining the customer’s rights and responsibilities;
      (3)   A list of local energy assistance providers;
      (4)   A form on which to declare inability to pay; and
      (5)   A statement explaining available time payment plans, and other
opportunities to secure continued city water service.
   (F)   Restrictions if disconnection is necessary.
      (1)   If the service of a residential customer must be involuntarily
disconnected between October 15 and April 15 for failure to comply with the
provisions hereof, the disconnection must not occur on a Friday or on the day
before a holiday. Further, the disconnection must not occur until at least 20
days after the notice required above has been mailed to the customer, or in the
alternative, 15 days after the notice has been personally delivered to the
customer.
      (2)   If the customer does not respond to a disconnection notice, the
customer must not be disconnected until the Water Department or the city
investigates whether the residential unit is actually occupied. If the unit is
found to be occupied, the city must immediately inform the occupant of the
provisions of this section. If the unit is unoccupied, the city must give seven
days’ written notice of the proposed disconnection to the local energy
assistance provider before disconnecting the service.
      (3)   If prior to disconnection a customer appeals a notice of intent to
involuntary disconnection, the city must not disconnect until the appeal is
dismissed or determined.
   (G)   Delinquency between April 15 and October 15. If a customer’s account
becomes delinquent during the period between April 15 and October 15 and
satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been made, the Water Department
may, after the procedural requirements set out herein have been complied with,
discontinue service to a delinquent customer by shutting off the water. When
water service to any premises has been discontinued, service shall not be
restored except upon the payment of all delinquent amounts due, plus a fee set
from time to time by the Council for disconnection and reconnection.
   (H)   Procedure. Water service shall not be shut off or disconnected under
this section until notice and an opportunity for hearing have first been given
to the occupant and owner of the premises involved. The city may rely on its
records to determine the owner and shall mail notice to the owner, or to the
last known address of the owner. Notice shall be personally served on the
occupant by mail or other sufficient method to provide adequate notice to the
occupant and shall state that if payment is not made before a date stated in
the notice, no less than 20 days after the date of which the notice is given,
the water supply to the premises will be shut off. The notice shall clearly
inform the occupant and the owner of the opportunity to present to the City
Council objections to the bill, or proposed disconnection, and shall identify
the telephone number, address, and officer or employee who will handle the
customer’s complaint, and who has the authority to review the facts and files,
to correct any errors in the billing and to arrange for credit terms. The
notice shall also state that the occupant may, before such date, demand a
hearing on the matter, in which case the water supply will not be shut off
until the hearing has been concluded or dismissed. If the customer requests a
hearing before the date specified, a hearing shall be held on the matter by the
City Council at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting after the request
is made. If as a result of the hearing the city finds that the amount claimed
to be owing is actually due and unpaid, and that there is no legal reason why
the water supply of the delinquent customer may not be shut off in accordance
with this section, the city may shut off the supply.
   (I)   Reconnection. The city shall reinstate and reconnect service which in
any way affects the primary heat source of a residential unit if such service
remains disconnected as of October 15, if the residential customer makes
application for reinstatement and enters into either a reconnection plan or
payment schedule. The residential customer may enter into a connection plan
only if the customer’s monthly household income is less than 185% of the
federal poverty level.
(Prior Code, § 3.4)
§ 51.05 COLLECTION OF TAXES.
   Delinquent accounts shall be certified with the City Clerk-Treasurer, who
shall prepare an assessment roll each year providing for assessment of the
delinquent amounts against the respective properties served. The assessment
roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption on or before October 1 of
each year. Upon such adoption, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the assessment
roll to the County Auditor for collection along with taxes.
(Prior Code, § 3.5)
§ 51.06 TAPPING.
   Before any tapping to any water main shall be performed, a permit must first
be obtained from the city and upon the payment to the city of a tapping fee
plus a further sum set from time to time by the Council to cover the cost of
street repair, a three-fourths-inch meter will be installed for residential
units. Should a larger meter of up to one inch be required, an additional
tapping charge set from time to time by the Council shall be paid by the
consumer in addition to the actual expense incurred by the city in completing
the tapping. If a customer desires a larger meter, the customer must purchase
the meter, and the meter must measure in gallons. All such tappings shall be
performed by the City Foreman of the waterworks or his or her agents; and no
taps shall be made between the water main and the inside of the water meter;
and no ties, branches, or other taps shall be made between the water main and
the inside of the water meter. It shall be unlawful for any person except the
City Foreman of the waterworks, or his or her agents, or the Fire Department in
case of fire, to turn on or off the water at the curb or at any other place on
city property.
(Prior Code, § 3.6) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 RATES.
   All taps used by any person for the supply of water from the city shall be
provided with a three-fourths-inch water meter by the city, and each consumer
requiring a larger meter of up to one inch shall purchase the meter, and it
shall remain his or her property. In addition, each water user furnished with a
water meter shall pay to the city a minimum monthly rate, and for all
additional gallons, set from time to time by the Council. In addition to these
fees, and for the purpose of providing funds for the operation and maintenance
of the sewer system of the city, there shall be charged, added, and collected
monthly with each water consumer bill a fee per gallon for monthly sewer
charges and a fee for service charges set from time to time by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 3.7)
§ 51.08 SPRINKLING LAWNS AND GARDENS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to install a separate water meter for the purpose
of sprinkling lawns and gardens may purchase a water meter approved by the city
to measure water for sprinkling. This meter shall measure by gallons. This
meter shall be so connected that no water flowing through it shall be wasted
into the city sewer. Water charges shall be made for the water used by the
meter, but no sewer charge shall be made for the use of the water for
sprinkling.
   (B)   All meters and hookups shall be approved by the city.
   (C)   All meters and water usage for sprinkling shall not be used before May
1 of each year. Meter use and water use for sprinkling shall not occur after
October 20 of each year, and the meter shall be read by the Water Department.
   (D)   Any water used by the meter between October 20 and May 1 will be
considered to be part of the sewer bill.
   (E)   Billing shall be on a monthly basis and billed accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 3.8)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance
with §
10.999.
(Prior Code, § 3.8)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Control by the Superintendent
   
52.03   Prohibitions
   
52.04   Private wastewater disposal
   
52.05   Building sewers and connections
   
52.06   Use of public services
   
52.07   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
52.08   Vandalism
   
52.09   Establishment of a sewer service charge system
   
52.10   Determination of sewer service charges
   
52.11   Establishment of a Sewer Service Fund
   
52.12   Administration
   
52.13   Regulations of sewer service charge system superior to others
Storm Sewer Drainage Utility
   
52.25   Storm Sewer District
   
52.26   Establishment
   
52.27   Determination of rates and charges
   
52.28   Storm water drainage fees
   
52.29   Payment of fees
Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems
   
52.35   Purpose and authority
   
52.36   Intent
   
52.37   Jurisdiction
   
52.38   Scope
   
52.39   Administration
   
52.40   Liability
   
52.41   All SSTS
   
52.42   Existing permits
   
52.43   SSTS on lots created after January 23, 1996
   
52.44   Upgrade, repair, replacement and abandonment
   
52.45   SSTS in floodplains
   
52.46   Class V injection wells
   
52.47   SSTS practitioner licensing
   
52.48   Prohibitions
   
52.49   Alternative local standards adopted by reference
   
52.50   Minimum standards
   
52.51   Compliance criteria for existing SSTS
   
52.52   Holding tanks
   
52.53   Variance
   
52.54   Permit requirements
   
52.55   Operating permit
   
52.56   Compliance inspection program
   
52.57   Enforcement
   
52.58   State notification of violation
   
52.59   Record keeping
   
52.60   Annual report
   
52.61   Fees
   
52.62   Dispute resolution
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   ADMINISTRATION COSTS. Those expenditures attributable to administration of
the wastewater treatment works.
   ASTM. The American Society for Testing Materials.
   AUTHORITY. The city or its representative.
   BOD5 or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in
five days at 20°C, expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning two
feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also referred to as a house connection or service
connection.
   CAPITAL RECOVERY CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater
treatment works for the cost of capital-related expenditures.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city. The term may
also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representative.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any place of business which discharges domestic-strength
waste.
   COMPATIBLE WASTE. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and fecal
coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the district’s
NPDES/SDS permit if the treatment works are designed to treat such pollutants
to a degree which complies with effluent concentration limits imposed by the
permit.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specially constructed for the purpose of
measuring flow and sampling of wastes.
   DISTRICT. The service area of the Serpent Lake Sanitary Sewer District. The
term may be used to refer to the Board of Commissioners (Commission) and its
authorized representative.
   DOMESTIC-STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater which does not exceed any pollutant
concentration shown below.
 
BOD5       300 mg/l
Phosphorus 20 mg/l
TSS        350 mg/l
 
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EXTRA-STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater which has a pollutant concentration greater
than that defined for domestic-strength waste and not otherwise classified as
an incompatible waste.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Includes oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that
it will separate by gravity from wastewater.
   GARBAGE. Includes animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of food.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any unit, agency, or instrument of federal, state, or
local government which discharges domestic-strength waste.
   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE. Includes waste which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of the treatment
works, or to interfere with any treatment works process, or which constitutes a
hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard
in or has an adverse effect on the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
works, or is not defined as a compatible waste, including non-biodegradable
dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any person who discharges any of the following wastes into
the wastewater treatment works:
      (1)   Industrial wastes;
      (2)   Incompatible wastes; or
      (3)   Extra-strength wastes.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Includes gaseous, liquid, or solid wastes resulting from
an industrial or manufacturing process, trade, or business, or from the
development of any natural resources, including, but not limited to, all
Standard Industrial Classification Manual divisions, as follows.
 
Division Industry
A        Agriculture, forestry, and fishing
B        Mining
D        Manufacturing
E        Transportation, communications, electric, gas, and sanitary sewers
I        Services
 
   INFILTRATION. Includes water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer
system, including building drains and sewers, from the ground through such
means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, and manhole walls.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). The total quality of water from both infiltration
and inflow.
   INFLOW. Includes water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system,
including building drains and sewers, from sources such as, but not limited to,
roof leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm
sewers, catch basins, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any user, other than commercial, governmental,
industrial, or residential users, which discharges domestic-strength waste
(e.g., nonprofit organizations).
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the wastewater treatment
works, processes, or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a
violation of any requirement of the district’s NPDES and/or SDS permit. The
term includes the inhibition or disruption of sewage sludge use or disposal in
accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under § 405 of the
Act or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act being
42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.,
the Toxic Substances Control Act being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or more
stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed.
   MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-
owned wastewater treatment works which are determined to be not susceptible to
treatment by such treatment works or would interfere with the operation of such
treatment works, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally
discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to §§ 402 and 405
of the Act.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface
water or ground water.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant
added is heat.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required to provide for the dependable
and economical functioning of the treatment works throughout the design or
useful life, whichever is longer, of the treatment works, and at the level of
performance for which the treatment works were constructed. OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE includes replacement.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Expenditures for operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
terms of grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to
the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
   REPLACEMENT. The procurement and installation of equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the design life or useful life,
whichever is longer, of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works whose premises or building
is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including dwelling
units such as detached and semi-detached housing, apartments, and mobile homes,
and which discharges primarily domestic-strength wastes.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewater from individual point-source discharges and connections.
      (2)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.
      (3)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a
public authority.
      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned, maintained, and controlled by
a public authority.
      (7)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants,
governmental facilities, and institutions, together with minor quantities of
ground water, storm water, and surface waters which are not admitted
intentionally.
      (8)   STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry
storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street wash
water, drainage, and unpolluted water from any source.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The aggregate of all charges, including charges for
operation, maintenance, replacement, capital recovery, and other sewer-related
charges that are billed periodically to users of the wastewater treatment
works.
   SEWER SERVICE FUND. A fund into which income from sewer service charges is
deposited along with other income for wastewater treatment. Expenditures of the
SEWER SERVICE FUND will be for operation, maintenance, and replacement costs
and capital-related costs for the wastewater treatment works.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment
works which has a discharge in excess of 25,000 gallons per average workday;
has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the treatment works; which
contains a pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act; or which
has a significant effect, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment works, the quality of
sludge, the system’s effluent quality, or emissions generated by the treatment
system.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flow during normal operation, and shall adversely affect the operation and/
or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL. The manual of the Office of
Management and Budget, 1972, as amended and supplemented.
   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. Any permit, including any terms,
conditions and requirements, issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. § 115.07, as
it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system as defined by M.S. §
115.01, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
   SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM (SSTS). As defined in Minn. Rules Part
7080.1100.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Utilities Superintendent of the city or his or her
deputy, agent, or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which, upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism, will
cause adverse effects as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of
the Act.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the wastewater
treatment works. See NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.
   USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the wastewater treatment works.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the treatment works for the user’s
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including
replacement.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community, also referred to as sewage. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, government facilities,
industrial plants, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface
water, and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment, or processes owned or used by the
city or the district for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of municipal, domestic, or industrial wastewater, or
structures necessary to recycle or reuse water, including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power, and other equipment and
their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and
alterations; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply
such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works,
including land, which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used
for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
   WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Prior Code, § 3.9) (Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.02 CONTROL BY THE SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent shall have control and general supervision of all public
sewers owned and operated by the city and service connections in the city and
shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter to the
end that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained.
(Prior Code, § 3.11)
§ 52.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement,
garbage, or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the district’s NPDES/
SDS permit.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   (D)   The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes from which wastewater is
discharged, and which is situated within the city and adjacent to any street,
alley, or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the
city shall be required, at the owners’ expense, to install a suitable service
connection to the public sewer in accordance with provisions of this chapter,
within 30 days of the date the public sewer is operational. All future
buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public sewer shall be
required to immediately connect to the public sewer. If sewer connections are
not made pursuant to this division (D), an official 30-day notice shall be
served instructing the affected property owner to make the connection.
   (E)   If an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in compliance with
a notice given under this section, the city must undertake to have the
connection made and shall assess the cost against the benefitted property. Such
assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the rate determined by the City
Council and shall be certified to the County Auditor and shall be collected and
remitted to the city in the same manner as assessments for local improvements.
The rights of the city shall be in addition to any remedial or enforcement
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.12) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions hereof, the
building shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying
with the provisions of §§
52.35 through
52.62, subchapter "Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems" of this chapter.
   (B)   At such time as a public sewer of the city becomes available to a
property serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days in compliance with this
chapter, and within 60 days any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private
wastewater disposal systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be
broken to permit drainage, and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
(Prior Code, § 3.13) (Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.05 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any new connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited
unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities,
including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD5, and suspended solids,
as determined by the Superintendent and the district.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without
first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (C)   Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or his or her
authorized agent and the party employed to do the work and shall state the
location, name of owner, street number of the building to be connected, and how
occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits
of the building or property for which the service connection permit has been
given.
   (D)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or any other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type
of activity.
   (E)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered one building sewer. The city does not and will not assume
any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any
such connection.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and tested by the Superintendent or his or
her representative, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (H)   The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling of the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the State Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in the amplification of such
provisions, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (J)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or indirectly to the wastewater treatment works.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by
proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior
to installation.
   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection and inspection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her authorized representative.
   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work, shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (N)   No person shall make a service connection with any public sewer unless
regularly licensed under this section to perform such work, and no permit shall
be granted to any person except such regularly licensed person.
   (O)   Any person desiring a license to make a service connection with public
sewers shall apply in writing to the City Council with satisfactory evidence
that the applicant or employer is trained or skilled in the business and
qualified to receive a license. Every application shall be referred to the
Superintendent for recommendation to the Council. If approved by the Council,
such license shall be issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer upon the filing of a
bond as provided in this section.
   (P)   No license shall be issued to any person until the required bond to
the city, approved by the Council, is filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer
conditioned that the licensee will indemnify and save harmless the city from
all suits, accidents, and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in any
street, alley, or public ground made by the licensee or by those in the
licensee’s employment for any purpose whatever, and that the licensee will
replace and restore the street and alley over such opening to the condition
existing prior to installation, adequately guard with barricades and lights,
and will keep and maintain the location to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent, and shall conform in all respects to related rules and
regulations, and pay all fines that may be imposed on the licensee by law.
   (Q)   The license fee for making service connections shall be set from time
to time by the Council. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the license
year unless the license is suspended or revoked by the Council for cause. Upon
failure to apply for a license renewal prior to the expiration date, the
license fee for the ensuing year shall be set from time to time by the Council.
   (R)   The Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this
section for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Giving false information in connection with the application for a
license;
      (2)   Incompetence of the licensee; and/or
      (3)   Willful violation of any provisions of this section or any rule or
regulation pertaining to the making of service connections.
(Prior Code, § 3.14) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
water such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage, or
noncontact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet
on approval of the city and upon approval and the issuance of a discharge
permit by the MPCA.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater treatment works or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment works, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles
greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater treatment works; or
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
works. A toxic pollutant shall include, but is not limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act.
   (D)   The following described substances, materials, water, or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm sewers, the wastewater treatment works treatment processes,
or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream and/or
soil, vegetation, and ground water; or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb,
or public property or constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent or the district
may set limitations lower than limitations established in this division (D) if,
in his or her opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet these
objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of wastes,
the Superintendent or the district will give consideration to such factors as
the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater
treatment processes, the district’s NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of the
treatment works, degree of treatability of wastes, and other pertinent factors.
The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or
wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated
without approval of the Superintendent and district are as follows:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C), or
causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or
having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater
treatment works resulting in interference;
      (2)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65.6°C), and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral
origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;
      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
slug;
      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be
connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates
from the preparation of food on the premises or when served by caterers;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (7)   Noncontact cooling water or unpolluted storm water, drainage, or
ground water;
      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids such as, but not
limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or dissolved
solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate in such
quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater treatment works;
      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent or the
district in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing the following substances to such
degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the
wastewater treatment works are in excess of the limits set by the
Superintendent or the district for such materials:
         (a)   Arsenic;
         (b)   Cadmium;
         (c)   Copper;
         (d)   Cyanide;
         (e)   Lead;
         (f)   Mercury;
         (g)   Nickel;
         (h)   Silver;
         (i)   Total chromium;
         (j)   Zinc; and
         (k)   Phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the wastewater
treatment works.
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater
treatment works which violate any statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance of
any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body; and
      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific written agreement subject to the provisions of this section.
   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated herein, and/or which, in the judgment of the
Superintendent or the district, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater treatment works processes or equipment, receiving waters and/or
soil, vegetation and ground water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life
or constitute a public nuisance, the city or the district may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating,
and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
      (2)   If the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is permitted,
the design, installation, and maintenance of the facilities and equipment shall
be made at the owners’ expense, and shall be subject to the review and approval
of the city and the district pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
   (F)   No user shall increase the use of process water or in any manner
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this section,
or contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or any state
requirements.
   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner.
   (H)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent or the district, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive
amounts, as specified herein, any flammable wastes as specified herein, sand or
other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the
type to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the
maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means and
shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal, which are subject to
review by the Superintendent or the district. Any removal and hauling of the
collected materials not performed by the owner’s personnel must be performed by
a currently licensed waste disposal firm.
   (I)   Where required by the city or the district, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable structure, or control manhole, with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of wastes. Such structure shall be accessible and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The
structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (J)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests, or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge. The number, type, and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses
to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry
must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge
to assure that compliance with federal, state, and local standards are being
met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses
to the city at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The
owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting
required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the
right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an independent
laboratory.
   (K)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, 20th edition, published by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment
Federation. Sampling methods, locations, times, duration, and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the
Superintendent.
   (L)   Where required by the city or the district, the owner of any property
serviced by a sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
chapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review and approval
prior to construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to
modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter. Users shall notify the Superintendent immediately upon having a slug
or accidental discharge of substances or wastewater in violation of this
chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken by the Superintendent to minimize
damage to the wastewater treatment works. Such notification will not relieve
any user of any liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the wastewater
treatment works or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city or
the district on account thereof under any state and federal law. Employers
shall ensure that all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
   (M)   No person having charge of any building or other premises which drains
into the public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which may form a
deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within ten days
after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall install a
suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists,
shall clean out, repair, or alter the catch basin or trap, and perform such
other work as the Superintendent may deem necessary. Upon the owner’s refusal
or neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair, or
alter the catch basin or trap after the period of ten days, the Superintendent
may cause such work to be completed at the expense of the owner or his or her
representative.
   (N)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the
purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause such work to be done as
the Superintendent may direct. Each day after ten days that a person neglects
or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of this division (N),
and the Superintendent may then cause the work to be done and recover from such
owner or agent the expense by an action in the name of the city.
   (O)   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing
facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times, a
catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil,
dirt, or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
   (P)   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city or the district may assess against any
person the cost of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities
damaged as a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes by such person and
may collect such assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public
sewer system or in any other manner deemed appropriate by the city or the
district.
   (Q)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and/or the
district and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the city and/or the district for
treatment, subject to payment by the industrial concern.
(Prior Code, § 3.15) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city’s sewer system in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater treatment
works. An industry may withhold information considered confidential; however,
the industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the
information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater treatment
works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 3.16)
§ 52.08 VANDALISM.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of the wastewater treatment works.
(Prior Code, § 3.17) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.09 ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city establishes a sewer service charge system whereby all revenue
collected from users of the wastewater treatment works will be used to affect
all expenditures incurred for operation and maintenance and for capital-related
expenditures incurred for the wastewater treatment works.
   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation and
maintenance costs of the treatment works, based on the user’s proportionate
contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users.
   (C)   Each user shall pay capital recovery charges as determined by the City
Council.
   (D)   Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment
works shall be determined and fixed in a sewer service charge system, developed
with the assistance of Donohue and Associates, Inc., according to the
provisions of this chapter. The sewer service charge system shall be adopted by
resolution, shall be published in the local newspaper, and shall be effective
upon publication. Subsequent changes in sewer service rates and charges shall
be adopted by Council resolution and shall be published in the local newspaper.
   (E)   Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a separate
fund known as the Sewer Service Fund. Income from revenues collected will be
expended to offset the cost of operation and maintenance for the facility and
the cost of capital-related expenditures.
   (F)   Sewer service charges and the Sewer Service Fund will be administered
in accordance with the provisions set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 3.18)
§ 52.10 DETERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Classes.
      (1)   All users of the wastewater treatment works shall be identified as
belonging to one of the following user classes:
         (a)   Residential;
         (b)   Commercial;
         (c)   Industrial;
         (d)   Institutional; or
         (e)   Governmental.
      (2)   The allocation of users to these classes for the purpose of
assessing sewer service charges shall be the responsibility of the City Clerk-
Treasurer. Allocation of all users to user classes shall be based on the
substantive intent of the definitions contained in this chapter. Industrial
users discharging segregated domestic-strength waste only can be classified as
commercial users for the purpose of rate determination.
   (B)   User charges.
      (1)   Each user shall be assessed and pay user charges in proportion to
the user’s proportionate contribution of wastewater flows and loadings to the
treatment works, with a minimum rate for pollutant loadings being the rate
established for domestic-strength waste.
      (2)   The charges assessed users discharging domestic-strength waste
shall be established proportionately on the basis of billable wastewater
volume. Billable wastewater volume shall generally be calculated as metered
water usage.
   (C)   Capital recovery charges.
      (1)   Each user shall be assessed and pay capital recovery charges in
proportion to the user’s proportionate contribution of wastewater flows and
loadings to the treatment works, with a minimum rate for pollutant loadings
being the rate established for domestic-strength waste.
      (2)   The charges assessed users discharging domestic-strength waste
shall be established proportionately on the basis of billable wastewater
volume. Billable wastewater volume shall generally be calculated as metered
water usage.
   (D)   Billable wastewater volume and loadings.
      (1)   The billable wastewater volume shall be calculated from the volume
of metered water usage. For all users discharging domestic-strength waste,
billable wastewater volume shall be equal to the metered water usage, as
measured throughout the year. The billable amounts of wastewater loadings shall
be calculated from the volume of metered usage, where the billable quantities
will be those attributable to domestic-strength waste.
      (2)   For users with unmetered water services or not connected to the
city’s water system, the billable wastewater volume shall be calculated from
the volume of metered water usage or, at the discretion of the city, from the
measurement or estimate of effluent flow at the user’s point of discharge.
Measurements shall be according to a regular program prescribed by the city.
      (3)   For all users discharging extra-strength waste, billable wastewater
volume shall be calculated from the volume of metered water usage or, at the
discretion of the city, from the measurement of effluent flow at the user’s
point of discharge. Measurements shall be according to a regular program
prescribed by the city. For all users discharging extra-strength waste,
billable amounts of wastewater loadings shall be calculated by the measurement
of these wastes according to a program prescribed by the city, in keeping with
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater and in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   The city may, at its discretion, require any user to install a
water meter, wastewater meter, or such additional water meters as may be
necessary to determine wastewater volume. When so required, such meter shall be
of a type approved by the city, equipped with a remote registering recorder,
and located at an accessible site on the owner’s property.
   (E)   Determination of user charges.
      (1)   User charges shall consist of a volume charge for domestic-strength
waste and, if necessary, a surcharge for extra-strength waste. Such charges
shall be developed in accordance with the approved sewer service charge system
and computed in accordance with the formula presented below.
      (2)   User charge is as follows: UC = MUC + (VUC x F) + SUC
      Where:
         UC   =   User charge
         MUC   =   Minimum charge ($/billing period) for administration costs
and one unit of domestic-strength wastewater (100 cubic feet).
         VUC   =   Volume charge per 100 cubic feet for OM&R costs.
         F   =   Billable wastewater volume in 100 cubic feet.
         SUC   =   Surcharge for extra-strength waste.
      (3)   Surcharges for extra-strength waste, if applicable, shall be
computed in accordance with the formula presented below.
      SUC = 0.00624 x F x [(B x BOMR) + (T x TOMR) + (P x POMR)].
      Where:
         0.00624   =   Conversion factor.
         B      =   Concentration of BOD5 in excess of domestic-strength waste.
         F      =   Billable wastewater volume in 100 cubic feet.
         T      =   Concentration of TSS in excess of domestic-strength waste.
         P      =   Concentration of phosphorus in excess of domestic-strength
waste.
         BOMR   =   Unit surcharge per pound of BOD5.
         TOMR      =   Unit surcharge per pound of TSS.
         POMR   =   Unit surcharge per pound of phosphorus.
         SUC      =   Surcharge for extra-strength waste.
   (F)   Determination of capital recovery charges.
      (1)   Capital recovery charges shall consist of a volume charge for
domestic-strength waste and, if necessary, a surcharge for extra-strength
waste. Such charges shall be developed in accordance with the approved sewer
service charge system and computed in accordance with the formula presented
below.
      CRC = MCR + (Vcr x F) + Scr
      Where:
         CRC   =   Capital recovery charge.
         MCR   =   Minimum charge ($/billing period) for capital-related costs
assigned to customer service and one unit of domestic-strength wastewater
volume.
         Vcr   =   Volume charge per 1,000 gallons for capital-related costs.
         F   =   Billable wastewater volume in 1,000 gallons.
         Scr   =   Surcharge for extra-strength waste.
      (2)   Surcharges for extra-strength waste, if applicable, shall be
computed in accordance with the formula presented below.
         Scr = 0.00624 x F x [(B x BCR) + (T x TCR) + (P x PCR)].
         Where:
            0.00624   =   Conversion factor.
            B      =   Concentration of BOD5 in excess of domestic-strength
waste.
            T      =   Concentration of TSS in excess of domestic-strength    .
            P      =   Concentration of phosphorus in excess of domestic-
strength waste.
            F      =   Billable wastewater volume in 1,000 gallons.
            BCR      =   Unit surcharge per pound of BOD5.
            TCR      =   Unit surcharge per pound of TSS.
            PCR      =   Unit surcharge per pound of phosphorus.
            Scr      =   Surcharge for extra-strength waste.
   (G)   Determination of sewer service charges. Sewer service charges shall be
computed for each user in accordance with the formula presented below.
      SSC = Uc + CRc
      Where:
         SSC   =   Sewer service charge.
         Uc   =   User charge.
         CRc   =   Capital recovery charge.
   (H)   Additional charges. The sewer service charges established in this
chapter shall not prevent the assessment of additional charges to users who
discharge extra-strength waste or wastes of unusual character, or contractual
agreements with such users, as long as the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The user pays OM&R costs in proportion to the user’s proportionate
contribution of wastewater flows and loadings to the treatment works and no
user is charged at a rate less than that of domestic-strength waste; and
      (2)   The measurement of such wastes are conducted according to the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
in a manner acceptable to the city, as provided for in this chapter.
      (3)   A study of unit costs of collection and treatment processes
attributable to fixed service, flow, BOD5, TSS, and other significant loadings
shall be developed for determining the proportionate allocation of costs to
fixed service, flows, and loadings for users discharging extra-strength wastes
or wastes of unusual character.
(Prior Code, § 3.19)
§ 52.11 ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEWER SERVICE FUND.
   (A)   The city establishes a Sewer Service Fund as an income fund to receive
all revenues generated by the sewer service charge system, and all other income
dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement, and capital recovery
costs of the wastewater treatment works, including taxes, special charges,
fees, and assessments. The city also establishes the following accounts as
income and expenditure accounts within the Sewer Service Fund:
      (1)   Operation and Maintenance Account; and
      (2)   Capital Recovery Account.
   (B)   All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system and all other
income pertinent to the treatment works shall be held by the Clerk-Treasurer
separate and apart from all other funds of the city. Funds received by the
Sewer Service Fund shall be transferred to the operation and maintenance
account and the Capital Recovery Account in accordance with state and federal
regulations and the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient for
operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in the Operation and
Maintenance Account. Interest income generated by the Operation and Maintenance
Account shall remain in the Operation and Maintenance Account.
   (D)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system for capital
expenditures shall be held separate and apart in the Capital Recovery Account.
Interest income generated by the Capital Recovery Account shall remain in the
Capital Recovery Account.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 52.12 ADMINISTRATION.
   The sewer service charge system and Sewer Service Fund shall be administered
according to the following provisions.
   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a proper system of accounts
suitable for determining the operation and maintenance and capital-related
costs of the treatment works and shall furnish the City Council with a report
of such costs annually in October.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council shall annually determine whether or not
sufficient revenue is being generated for the effective operation, maintenance,
and management of the treatment works, and whether sufficient revenue is being
generated for capital-related purposes.
      (2)   The Council will also determine whether the user charges are
distributed proportionately to each user in accordance herewith and in
accordance with § 204(b)(2)(A) of the Clean Water Act.
      (3)   The city shall thereafter, but not later than the end of the year,
reassess and, as necessary, revise the sewer service charge system then in use
to ensure the proportionality of the user charges and to ensure the sufficiency
of funds to maintain the capacity and performance to which the facilities were
constructed, and to accommodate the capital needs of the system.
   (C)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, each user will be
notified annually, in conjunction with a regular billing, of that portion of
the sewer service charge attributable to operation, maintenance, and
replacement.
   (D)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, the City Clerk-
Treasurer shall be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to
document compliance with the sewer service charge system adopted.
   (E)    Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a monthly basis
succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and shall be due 30
days from the date of rendering. Any payment not received by the due date shall
result in a penalty of a late payment charge. The penalty shall be computed as
10% of the original bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every month
the bill is outstanding.
   (F)   The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to
such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable to the city.
   (G)   Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment works of
toxics or other incompatible wastes, including the cost of restoring wastewater
treatment services, cleanup and restoration of the receiving waters and
environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the dischargers of the wastes,
at no expense to the city.
   (H)   Lien for nonpayment. As authorized by state law, the city may certify
to the County Auditor between October 1 and 15 of each year any charges that
are delinquent, which includes all such charges that are more than 30 days past
due on or before September 30 of that year, which certification shall include
the amount of such charges, the description of the premises serviced, and the
name and address of the owner. The amount so certified shall be extended by the
Auditor on the tax rolls against the premises in the same matter as other
taxes, and collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the city along with
other taxes. If the property is occupied by any person who is not the owner,
the owner is nonetheless obligated for all service collection charges incurred.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) (Ord. 2019-06, passed 11-25-2019; Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-
13-2024)
§ 52.13 REGULATIONS OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM SUPERIOR TO OTHERS.
   The sewer service charge system shall take precedence over any terms or
conditions of agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with the
requirements of § 204(b)(1)(A) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 35.2140 of the
Environmental Protection Agency’s grant regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3.22)
STORM SEWER DRAINAGE UTILITY
§ 52.25 STORM SEWER DISTRICT.
   (A)   A Storm Sewer District is established within the city pursuant to M.S.
§ 444.17, as it may be amended from time to time, which shall be entitled the
Crosby Storm Sewer District.
   (B)   The purpose of the District is to enable the city to plan, prepare
for, and establish storm sewers throughout the city and to provide a method of
financing construction of the storm sewers installed pursuant to M.S. § 444.20,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   The entire incorporated boundaries of the city shall be the boundaries
of the District.
   (D)   The governing body of the District shall consist of the Mayor and
Council members of the city.
   (E)   The District shall be empowered to levy taxes pursuant to M.S. §
444.20, as it may be amended from time to time, and/or to make assessments
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (F)   The City Council shall be required to approve all expenditures and
construction by at least a four-fifths vote of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 3.23)
§ 52.26 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A storm sewer drainage utility for the city is established. The municipal
storm sewer system shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to M.S. §
444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, from which revenues will be
derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and state law. The storm
water drainage utility shall be part of the Public Works Department and subject
to the administration of the City Council, under the management and direction
of the working foreman. Just and reasonable charges for use and availability of
storm sewer drainage facilities shall be calculated and determined pursuant to
the terms contained in this chapter based on expected and typical storm water
runoff as may be calculated within reasonable and practical limits with due
regard to just and equitable charges as provided for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.24)
§ 52.27 DETERMINATION OF RATES AND CHARGES.
   Rates and charges for the use and availability of the utility system shall
be determined through the use of a residential equivalent factor (REF), defined
as the ratio of the average volume of runoff generated by one acre of a given
land use to the average volume of runoff generated by one acre of typical
single-family residential land, during a two-inch rainfall event.
(Prior Code, § 3.25)
§ 52.28 STORM WATER DRAINAGE FEES.
   (A)   Calculation.
      (1)   For the purpose of calculating storm water drainage fees for
parcels of land, the REF for the parcel’s storm water land use classification
shall be multiplied by that parcel’s acreage, and then the resulting product
shall be multiplied by the storm water drainage rate, or, in formula format:
Fee = REF x acreage x rate.
      (2)   The REF values for the various storm water land use classifications
are as follows.
 
Class Storm Water Land Use Classifications                     REF
1     Undeveloped                                              0.0
2     Open areas                                               0.2
3     Residential                                              1.0
4     Medium-density commercial, industrial, and institutional 2.0
5     Heavy-density commercial, industrial, and institutional  2.5
 
      (3)   For the purpose of calculating storm water drainage fees, actual
acreages shall be used except for those parcels having a storm water land use
classification of “Residential”. As residential parcels are the most numerous,
and to simplify the process, the storm water drainage fee for all parcels
classified as “Residential” shall be calculated using an acreage of 0.25 acre,
regardless of their actual acreage.
   (B)   Other land usage. Other land uses not listed in the table in this
section shall be classified by the working foreman by assigning them to classes
most nearly like the uses, from the standpoint of runoff volume for the
standard rainfall event. An appeal of such classification from the
determination of the working foreman may be made to the City Council.
   (C)   Adjustments. The City Council may by resolution adopt policies
providing for the adjustment of charges for parcels based upon land use data
supplied by affected property owners which demonstrate a runoff volume for a
standard rainfall event substantially different from the REF being used for
such parcels. Such adjustments for storm water drainage fees shall not be made
retroactively. A credit of up to 50% of the storm water drainage fee may be
given if the property owner has or develops on-site retention of the storm
water.
   (D)   Exemption. Public street right-of-way and vacant unimproved land with
ground cover are exempt from storm water drainage charges.
(Prior Code, § 3.26)
§ 52.29 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   Statements. Statements for storm water drainage fees shall be made a
part of the utility billing system invoiced through the City Clerk-Treasurer’s
office on a monthly basis. In cases where the property or property owner is not
receiving a monthly utility statement, the statement shall be billed on an
annual basis invoiced through the City Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
   (B)   Recalculation of fee. If a property owner or person responsible for
paying the storm water drainage fee questions the accuracy of an invoice, such
person may have the determination of the charge recalculated by written request
to the working foreman within 60 days following the mailing of the invoice by
the city.
   (C)   Late payment penalty. Bills for storm water drainage charges shall be
rendered on a monthly basis succeeding the period for which the service was
rendered and shall be due 30 days from the date of rendering. Any payment not
received by the due date shall result in a penalty of a late payment charge.
The penalty shall be computed as 10% of the original bill and shall be
increased the same 10% for every month the bill is outstanding.
   (D)   Collection with real estate taxes. Any past-due storm water drainage
fees may be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate
taxes, pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time. In addition, the city may exercise any and all legal remedies available
to it for the collection of unpaid charges.
   (E)   Establishment of tax lien. As authorized by state law, the city may
certify to the County Auditor between October 1 and 15 of each year any charges
that are delinquent, which includes all such charges that are more than 30 days
past due on or before September 30 of that year, which certification shall
include the amount of such charges, the description of the premises serviced,
and the name and address of the owner. The amount so certified shall be
extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls against the premises in the same
matter as other taxes, and collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the
city along with other taxes. lf the property is occupied by any person who is
not the owner, the owner is nonetheless obligated for all service collection
charges incurred.
   (F)   The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to
such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable to the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.27) (Ord. 2019-06, passed 11-25-2019; Ord. 2024-03, passed 5-
13-2024)
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS
§ 52.35 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   The purpose of this subchapter regulating subsurface sewage treatment
systems (SSTS), as defined in Minn. Rules Part 7080.1100, is to provide minimum
standards for and regulation of individual sewage treatment systems (ISTS), as
defined in Minn. Rules Part 7080.1100, and midsized sewage treatment systems
(MSTS), as defined in Minn. Rules Part 7081.0020, including the proper
location, design and construction; their necessary modification and
reconstruction; their operation, maintenance and repair to protect surface
water and groundwater from contamination by human sewage and waterborne
household and commercial wastes; to protect the public's health and safety, and
eliminate or prevent the development of public nuisances pursuant to the
authority granted under M.S. §§ 115.55, 145A.05, 375.51, 394.21 through 394.37,
and 471.82, the Crosby Comprehensive Plan and the Crosby Land Use (Zoning)
Ordinance, City Code
Chapter 154.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.36 INTENT.
   The city intends that this subchapter will promote the following:
   (A)   The protection of lakes, rivers and streams, wetlands, and groundwater
in the City of Crosby essential to the promotion of public health, safety,
welfare, socioeconomic growth and development of the city;
   (B)   The regulation of proper SSTS construction, reconstruction, repair and
maintenance to prevent the entry and migration of contaminants, thereby
protecting the degradation of surface water and groundwater quality;
   (C)   The establishment of minimum standards for SSTS placement, design,
construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance to prevent contamination
and, if contamination is discovered, the identification and control of its
consequences and the abatement of its source and migration; and
   (D)   The appropriate utilization of privy vaults and other non-water
carried sewage collection and storage facilities.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.37 JURISDICTION.
   The jurisdiction of this subchapter shall include all property within the
municipal boundaries of the City of Crosby, Minnesota.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.38 SCOPE.
   This subchapter regulates the siting, design, installation, alterations,
operation, maintenance, monitoring, and management of all SSTS within the
city's jurisdiction including, but not necessarily limited to individual SSTS
and cluster or community SSTS, privy vaults, and other non-water carried SSTS.
All sewage generated in unsewered areas of the city shall be treated and
dispersed by an approved SSTS that is sited, designed, installed, operated, and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter or by a system
that has been permitted by the MPCA.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.39 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Crosby Planning and Zoning Administrator shall administer the SSTS
program and all provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The city's duties and responsibilities include, but are not be limited
to, the following:
      (1)   Review all applications for SSTS;
      (2)   Issue all permits required in this subchapter;
      (3)   Inspect all work regulated in this subchapter;
      (4)   Investigate all complaints regarding SSTS;
      (5)   Issue certificates of installation, certificates of compliance or
notices of noncompliance where applicable;
      (6)   Enact enforcement provisions of this subchapter as necessary;
      (7)   Refer unresolved violations of this subchapter to the City
Attorney;
      (8)   Maintain current records for each permitted SSTS including all site
evaluation documents, design documents, inspection documents, and other
applicable documents;
      (9)   The city shall employ or retain under contract qualified and
appropriately licensed professionals to administer and operate the SSTS
program; and
      (10)   Submit annual reports to MPCA as required.
   (C)   State administration. The owner or owners of a single SSTS or a group
of SSTS under common ownership must obtain an SDS permit from the agency
according to Minn. Rules Ch. 7001 when all or part of proposed or existing soil
dispersal components are within one-half mile of each other and the combined
flow from all proposed and existing SSTS is greater than 10,000 gallons per
day. For proposed SSTS, the flow must be determined according to Minn. Rules
Part 7081.0110. For existing SSTS, the flow is determined by the greater of the
average maximum seven-day measured flow or flow amounts according to Minn.
Rules Part 7081.0110. The highest calculated value of the various methods in
Table I under Minn. Rules Part 7081.0130, Subp. 1, must be used to make this
determination, with no reduction allowed. An SDS permit is not required if a
factor of safety is added to the design flow that results in a design flow that
is in excess of the SDS permit threshold.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.40 LIABILITY.
   The city's involvement in administration of this subchapter does not create
a special duty to any person and, further liability or responsibility shall not
be imposed upon the city or any of its officials, employees, or other contract
agents, for damage resulting from the defective construction, operation, or
abandonment of any onsite or cluster SSTS regulated under this subchapter or by
reason of any standards, requirements, or inspections authorized by this
subchapter hereunder.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.41 ALL SSTS.
   Except as explicitly set forth in §
52.43, all provisions of this subchapter shall apply to any SSTS regardless of
the date it was originally permitted.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.42 EXISTING PERMITS.
   Unexpired permits which were issued prior to the effective date of this
subchapter shall remain valid under the terms and conditions of the original
permit until the original expiration date or until a change in system design,
whichever is earlier.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.43 SSTS ON LOTS CREATED AFTER JANUARY 23, 1996.
   All lots created after January 23, 1996, must have a minimum of two soil
treatment and dispersal areas that can support Type 1 systems as defined by
Minn. Rules Part 7080.2200.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.44 UPGRADE, REPAIR, REPLACEMENT AND ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   SSTS capacity expansions. Expansion of an existing SSTS must include
any system upgrades that are necessary to bring the entire system into
compliance with the prevailing provisions of this subchapter at the time of the
expansion.
   (B)   Bedroom addition. Any addition to a structure that includes bedroom(s)
that requires a land use permit from the city shall require that the SSTS meet
the required design flow according to Minn. Rules Part 7080.1860 or be upgraded
to meet Class I sizing for both the septic tanks and soil absorption area. Any
required upgrades shall be completed within two years.
   (C)   Failure to protect groundwater. An SSTS that is determined not to be
protective of groundwater in accordance with Minn. Rules Part 7080.1500, Subp.
4(B) shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter within ten months upon
receipt of a notice of noncompliance and must meet Class I sizing requirements
according to Minn. Rules Part 7080.1860.
   (D)   Imminent threat to public health or safety. An SSTS posing an imminent
threat to public health or safety shall be pumped within 24 hours and managed
as a holding tank in accordance with Minn. Rules Part 7080.1500, Subp. 4(A) and
said SSTS shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter within ten months upon
receipt of a notice of noncompliance and must meet Class I sizing requirements
according to Minn. Rules Part 7080.1860.
   (E)   Abandonment. Any SSTS, or any component thereof, which is no longer
intended to be used, must be abandoned in accordance with Minn. Rules Part
7080.2500.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.45 SSTS IN FLOODPLAINS.
   SSTS shall not be located in a floodway and wherever possible, location
within any part of a floodplain should be avoided. If no option exists to
locate an SSTS outside of a floodplain, location within the flood fringe is
allowed if the requirements in Minn. Rules Part 7080.2270 and all relevant
local requirements are met.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.46 CLASS V INJECTION WELLS.
   All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are considered to be Class V
injection wells, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part
144, are required by the Federal Government to submit a UIC Class 5 Inventory
Form to the Environmental Protection Agency as described in 40 CFR Part 144.
Further, owners are required to identify all Class V injection wells in
property transfer disclosures.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.47 SSTS PRACTITIONER LICENSING.
   (A)   No person shall engage in site evaluation, inspection, design,
installation, construction, alteration, extension, repair, maintenance, or
pumping of SSTS without an appropriate and valid license issued by MPCA in
accordance with Minn. Rules Ch. 7083 except as exempted in Part 7083.0700.
   (B)   An MPCA license is not required of an individual who is constructing
an SSTS on land that is owned by the individual and functions solely as a
dwelling for that individual pursuant to Minn. Rules Part 7083.0700.
Installation of the system shall be based upon a design by a licensed designer.
The system shall be inspected before it is covered and a 24-hour notification
to the city before such inspection occurs is required.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.48 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Occupancy or use of a building without a compliant SSTS. It is
unlawful for any person to maintain, occupy, or use any building intended for
habitation or that contains plumbing fixtures that is not provided with a
wastewater treatment system or that disposes of wastewater in a manner that
does not comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Sewage discharge to ground surface or surface water. It is unlawful
for any person to construct, maintain, or use any SSTS regulated under this
subchapter that results in raw or partially treated wastewater seeping to the
ground surface or flowing into any surface water. Any surface discharging
system must be permitted under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System program by the MPCA.
   (C)   Sewage discharge to a well or boring. It is unlawful for any person to
discharge raw or treated wastewater into any well or boring as described in
Minn. Rules Part 4725.2050, or any other excavation in the ground that is not
in compliance with this subchapter.
   (D)   Discharge of hazardous or deleterious materials. It is unlawful for
any person to discharge into any treatment system regulated under this
subchapter any hazardous or deleterious material that adversely affects the
treatment or dispersal performance of the system or groundwater quality.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.49 ALTERNATIVE LOCAL STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Adoption of rule by reference.
      (1)   The city hereby adopts by reference the provisions of Minn. Rules
Chs. 7080-7083 in their entirety except as referenced under § 2.17(B), except
as otherwise expressly modified by this subchapter.
      (2)   When "2006 version of Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080" is utilized,
the reference is to the rules effective April 3, 2006, otherwise the city is
referencing the current rules in effect.
      (3)   All new construction or replacement of SSTS shall employ sewage
tanks, distribution media and treatment products which have been registered by
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   (B)   Alternative local standards for new and existing SSTS. The city hereby
adopts the 2006 version of Minn. Rules Ch. 7080 for all new and existing
residential Type I, Type II and Type III SSTS and SSTS that serve any food,
beverage and lodging establishment under 2,500 gallons per day provided the
effluent discharge does not exceed the standards in Minn. Rules Part 7080.2150,
Subp. 3(K).
(Ord 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.50 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The following is a list of minimum standards applicable to SSTS:
   (A)   In no land use district shall a land use permit, shoreline alteration
permit, minor subdivision, plat, conditional use permit or variance be issued
without a current certificate of compliance or certificate of installation that
has not expired according to §
52.56(C).
   (B)   At least one cleanout at or above finished grade shall be installed
between the structure and the septic tank with additional clean outs at
intervals not more than 100 feet.
   (C)   Class I sizing is required on all new construction. New construction
will be defined as placement of a new structure or replacement structure that
is served by pressurized water.
   (D)   Minimum septic tank sizing shall be 1,500 gallons. This can be
accomplished through a compartmentalized tank, multiple tanks in series, or a
single existing 1,500 gallon tank with the use of an effluent filter for the
last baffle. The filter must be of such a design that when the filter is
removed from the filter housing, the flow of water leaving the tank is not
allowed. The first tank or compartment shall be no less than 1,000 gallons in
size and applies to new and replacement SSTS. Any additional septic tanks shall
be a minimum of 1,000 gallons. All other tank sizing shall follow Minn. Rules
Part 7080.1930.
   (E)   Pump tank sizing shall follow Minn. Rules Part 7080.2100.
   (F)   Soil pits shall be required during the construction inspection. The
soil pit shall be excavated at the time of the inspection. The soil pit shall
be dug by a backhoe or other acceptable method and be excavated to a depth that
will allow the verification of redoximorphic features and the three feet of
vertical separation as required. Location of soil pits shall be adjacent to the
lowest trench or next to the down slope side of an elevated treatment area. The
pit shall not impact the hydraulic performance of the ISTS. A certificate of
installation will not be issued until the soils are verified.
   (G)   All dwellings or buildings that contain plumbing fixtures shall meet
the required setbacks to the septic tank and soil absorption area. Accessory
structures, including but not limited to, decks, screen decks, porches, sheds,
garages and pole buildings shall not be required to meet said setbacks provided
that the tank(s) can be maintained properly and that the structure does not
negatively impact the function of the system.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.51 COMPLIANCE CRITERIA FOR EXISTING SSTS.
   For an SSTS built before April 1, 1996, and outside of areas designated as
"SWF" systems in shoreland areas, wellhead protection areas, or systems serving
food, beverage, or lodging establishments there must be at least two feet of
vertical separation between the bottom of the dispersal system and seasonal
saturation or bedrock.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.52 HOLDING TANKS.
   Holding tanks may be allowed for the following applications: as replacements
for existing failing SSTS and SSTS that pose an imminent threat to public
health or safety, on lots with limitations that will not allow for the
installation of a Type 1 SSTS or for uses that are seasonal or intermittent in
nature and will not use more than 150 gallons of water per day.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.53 VARIANCE.
   (A)   A property owner may request a variance from the standards as
specified in this subchapter pursuant to §
154.012.
   (B)   State agency variance requests. Variances that pertain to the
standards and requirements of the State of Minnesota must be approved by the
affected state agency pursuant to the requirements of the state agency. No
permits will be issued by the city until all required state agency variances
have been approved.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.54 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Activities not requiring an SSTS permit. An SSTS permit is not
required for minor repairs or replacements of system components that do not
alter the original function of the system; change the treatment capacity of the
system; change the location of the system; or otherwise change the original
system design, layout, or function. Examples are, but not limited to, pumps,
baffles, and effluent filters.
   (B)   Activities requiring an SSTS permit. An SSTS permit shall be obtained
by the property owner or an agent of the property owner from the city prior to
the installation, construction, replacement, modification, alteration, or
capacity expansion including the use of advanced treatment components of an
SSTS. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, modify or replace an
SSTS without the appropriate permit from the SSTS including repair or
replacement of components that will alter the original function of the system,
change the treatment capacity of the system, change the location of the system,
or otherwise change the original system's design, layout, or function. The
issuing of any permit, variance, or conditional use under the provisions of
this subchapter shall not absolve the applicant of responsibility to obtain any
other required permit.
   (C)   Permit requirements. SSTS Permit applications shall be made on forms
provided by the city and signed by the applicant or applicant's agent, and must
include the following information and documentation:
      (1)   Applicant name, mailing address, telephone number, and email
address;
      (2)   Property identification number, property address and legal
description of property location;
      (3)   Site evaluation report, which shall be made on forms provided by
Crow Wing County;
      (4)   Design report, which shall be made on forms provided by Crow Wing
County;
      (5)   A management plan, as defined by Minn. Rules Part 7082.0600; and
      (6)   Any additional information that may be required by the city to
assure compliance with this subchapter.
   (D)   Application review and response. The city shall review a permit
application and supporting documents according to §
154.009.
   (E)   Appeal. The applicant may appeal any decision of the city in
accordance with
Ch. 154 of this code.
   (F)   Permit expiration. An SSTS permit for a new SSTS is valid for a period
of no more than two years from its date of issue. An SSTS permit for the
replacement of SSTS failing to protect groundwater is valid for ten months. An
SSTS permit for the replacement of SSTS that are imminent threats to public
health is valid for ten months. Satisfactory completion of construction shall
be determined by as-built drawings and a signed certification that the
construction and installation of the system was completed in reasonable
conformance with the approved design documents by a qualified employee of the
city or a licensed inspection business, which is authorized by the city and
independent of the owner and the SSTS installer.
   (G)   Transferability. An SSTS permit may be transferred to a new owner
provided there are no proposed changes to the SSTS design.
   (H)   Suspension or revocation. The city may suspend or revoke an SSTS
permit issued under this section for any false statements, misrepresentations
of facts on which the SSTS permit was issued, or unauthorized changes to the
system design that alter the original function of the system, change the
treatment capacity of the system, change the location of the system, or
otherwise change the original system design, layout, or function. A notice of
suspension or revocation and the reasons for the suspension or revocation shall
be conveyed in writing to the permit holder. If suspended or revoked,
installation or modification of a treatment system may not commence or continue
until a valid SSTS permit is obtained.
   (I)   (I)   SSTS assessment requirements. For those SSTS without a
management plan or operating permit according to the provisions of this
subchapter, the following provisions apply:
      (1)   The owner of an ISTS or the owner's agent shall regularly, but in
no case less frequently than every three years, assess whether sewage tanks
leak below the designed operating depth and whether sewage tank tops, riser
joints, and riser connections leak through visual evidence of major defects and
measure or remove the accumulations of scum, grease, and other floating
materials at the top of each septic tank and compartment, along with the
sludge, which consists of the solids denser than water.
      (2)   All solids and liquids must be removed by pumping from all tanks or
compartments in which the top of the sludge layer is less than 12 inches from
the bottom of the outlet baffle or transfer hole or whenever the bottom of the
scum layer is less than three inches above the bottom of the outlet baffle or
transfer hole. Total sludge and scum volume must not be greater than 25%of the
tank's liquid capacity. Removal of accumulated sludge, scum, and liquids from
septic tanks and pump tanks must be through the maintenance hole. The removal
of solids from any location other than the maintenance hole is not a compliant
method of solids removal from a sewage tank, and this method does not fulfill
the solids removal requirement of this division or a management plan. Liquid
and solids removal from clean-out pipes is allowed for holding tanks.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.55 OPERATING PERMIT.
   (A)   An operating permit shall be required for the following SSTS:
      (1)   SSTS with high strength waste effluent standards that exceed Minn.
Rules Part 7080.2150, Subp. 3(K);
      (2)   Holding tanks;
      (3)   SSTS serving three or more connections;
      (4)   Type 4 and Type 5 SSTS;
      (5)   SSTS that exceed a daily flow of 2,500 gallons per day; or,
      (6)   MSTS designed under Minn. Rules Ch. 7081.
   (B)   Operating permits shall be a signed agreement between the city and the
property owner and shall include monitoring, performance, mitigation, and
reporting requirements.
   (C)   A valid operating permit shall be considered a certificate of
compliance if that system is in compliance with the requirements of the
operating permit.
   (D)   Owners of holding tanks shall provide the city upon request a copy of
a valid monitoring and disposal contract executed between the owner and a
licensed maintenance business, which guarantees the removal of the holding tank
contents in a timely manner and prevents an illegal discharge in accordance
with Minn. Rules Part 7082.0100, Subp. 3(G). This requirement is waived if the
owner is a farmer who is exempt from licensing under M.S. § 115.56, Subd. 3(b)
(3).
   (E)   Operating permits shall be valid for the specific term stated on the
permit as determined by the Department.
   (F)   An operating permit must be renewed prior to its expiration. If not
renewed, the city may require the system to be removed from service or operated
as a holding tank until the permit is renewed. If not renewed within 90
calendar days of the expiration date, the Department may require that the
system be abandoned in accordance with §
52.44(E).
   (G)   Operating permits do not transfer to new property owners. New owners
shall apply for an operating permit in accordance with this section. The city
shall not terminate the current permit until 90 calendar days after the date of
sale unless an imminent threat to public health and safety exists. To consider
the new owner's application, the city may require a performance inspection of
the treatment system certified by a licensed inspector or qualified employee.
   (H)   A report shall be prepared and certified by the licensed inspection
business or licensed service provider. The report shall be submitted to the
city on or before the compliance reporting date stipulated in the operating
permit as required. The report shall contain a description of all maintenance
and servicing activities performed since the last compliance monitoring report
as described in the operating permit.
   (I)   The city may suspend or revoke any operating permit issued under this
section for any false statements or misrepresentations of facts on which the
operating permit was issued.
   (J)   If suspended or revoked, the Department may require that the treatment
system be removed from service, operated as a holding tank, or abandoned.
   (K)   At the Department's sole discretion, the operating permit may be
reinstated or renewed upon the owner taking appropriate corrective actions.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.56 COMPLIANCE INSPECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Department responsibility. It is the responsibility of the city, or
its agent, to perform installation inspections of new SSTS or upgrades of SSTS
to assure that the requirements of this subchapter are met.
      (1)   All compliance inspections must be performed and signed by licensed
inspection businesses or qualified employees certified as inspectors.
      (2)   The city shall be given access to enter a property at any
reasonable time to inspect and/or monitor the SSTS. As used in this section,
PROPERTY does not include a residence or private building.
      (3)   No person shall hinder or otherwise interfere with the city's
employees or agents in the performance of their duties and responsibilities
pursuant to this section. Refusal to allow reasonable access to the property by
the city shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
      (4)   A signed winter agreement may be accepted in lieu of a compliance
inspection for property transfers, permit applications and designs to the city
between November 1 and April 30, at the city's sole discretion, provided the
required information is submitted to the city by June 1 of the subsequent year.
Failure to fulfill all of the obligations of the winter agreement shall be a
violation of this section.
   (B)   New construction or replacement.
      (1)   New installation inspections must be performed on new or
replacement SSTS to determine compliance with Minn. Rules Chs. 7080 or 7081,
respectively, according to this section. SSTS found to be noncompliant with
other applicable requirements must be repaired or replaced according to the
city's requirements.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the SSTS owner or the owner's agent to
notify the city 24 hours prior to the installation inspection.
      (3)   If the installer provides proper notice and the city does not
provide an inspection within one hour after an inspection time was set, the
installer may complete the construction per the following: the installer shall
submit photographs of the entire uncovered system and an as-built drawing with
a certified statement that the installation of the SSTS met the appropriate
standards of this subchapter within five working days of the installation.
      (4)   A certificate of installation for new SSTS construction or
replacement shall be issued by the city within 30 days of inspection if the
city has reasonable assurance that the system was built in accordance with the
applicable requirements as specified in the construction permit.
      (5)   The certificate of installation must include a certified statement
by the certified inspector or qualified employee who conducted the inspection
that the SSTS is or is not in compliance with requirements of this subchapter.
If the SSTS is determined not to be in compliance with the applicable
requirements, a notice of noncompliance must be issued to the owner which
includes a statement specifying those provisions with which the SSTS does not
comply.
      (6)   No SSTS shall be placed into operation until a valid certificate of
installation has been issued.
      (7)   Certificates of installation for new construction or replacement
shall remain valid for five years from the date of issue unless the city finds
evidence of noncompliance.
   (C)   Existing systems.
      (1)   Compliance inspections shall be required when any of the following
conditions occur:
         (a)   When applying for a land use permit, shoreline alteration
permit, minor subdivision, plat, land use map amendment, conditional use permit
or variance and the certificate of installation is more than five years old or
the certificate of compliance is more than three years old.
         (b)   Within 90 days of conveyance of any real property and the
certificate of installation is more than five years old or the certificate of
compliance is more than three years old.
         (c)   Any time there is a change in use of the property being served
by an existing SSTS which may impact the performance of the system.
         (d)   At any time as required by this subchapter or the city deems
appropriate such as upon receipt of a complaint or other notice of a system
malfunction.
      (2)   Compliance inspections of existing SSTS shall be reported on the
inspection report forms provided by MPCA. The following conditions, must be
assessed, or verified:
         (a)   Watertightness assessment of all treatment tanks including a
leakage report;
         (b)   Vertical separation distance between the bottom of the soil
treatment and dispersal system and the periodically saturated soil or bedrock
including a vertical soils separation verification report unless soils have
been verified according to Minn. Rules Part 7082.0700, Subp. 4B; and
         (c)   Sewage backup, surface seepage or surface discharge including a
hydraulic function report.
      (3)   The certificate of compliance must include a certified statement by
a qualified employee or licensed inspection business, indicating whether the
SSTS is in compliance with the requirements of this subchapter. If the SSTS is
determined not to be in compliance with the applicable requirements, a notice
of noncompliance must include a statement specifying those provisions with
which the SSTS does not comply. A construction permit application must be
submitted to the city if the required corrective action is not a minor repair.
      (4)   The certificate of compliance or notice of noncompliance must be
submitted to the city no later than 15 calendar days after the date the
inspection was performed.
      (5)   Certificates of compliance for existing SSTS shall remain valid for
three years from the date of issue unless the city finds evidence of
noncompliance.
   (D)   Transfer of property. Any property on which an SSTS is located shall
not be transferred or sold unless the parties to the transaction have complied
with one of the following:
      (1)   A current certificate of compliance, as provided by §
52.55(C).
      (2)   A winter agreement, as provided by §
52.56(A)(4).
      (3)   In the event the seller does not provide a certificate of
compliance or compliant operating permit, the seller and buyer may establish a
written agreement or contract to repair, replace or upgrade the existing SSTS
according to the terms of this subchapter.
      (4)   The buyer may accept total responsibility of the existing SSTS and
be responsible for the necessary upgrading. In the absence of a written
agreement according to §
52.56(A)(4), the buyer shall be responsible for the necessary upgrading of said
SSTS.
   (E)   Commercial SSTS.
      (1)   Septic tank effluent testing for carbonaceous biochemical oxygen
demand (CBOD), biological oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS),
nitrogen and oil/grease combination is mandatory for all SSTS that serve
commercial establishments that serve food and beverages or have a flow that
exceeds 1,000 gallons per day as part of any compliance inspection.
      (2)   Effluent testing shall not be required for commercial SSTS that
have a current operating permit as of the date this subchapter is effective. If
all provisions of the operating permit are met, the SSTS shall be considered to
be in compliance.
      (3)   An SSTS with effluent testing that does not meet the standards in
the Minn. Rules Part 7080.2150, Subp. 3(K) shall be upgraded within three years
to meet said standards and be placed on an operating permit as provided in this
subchapter.
   (F)   Vertical separation reduction. Minn. Rules Part 7080.1500, Subp. 4(D)
is hereby adopted allowing a 15% reduction in vertical separation distance for
settling of sand or soil, normal variation of measurements and interpretations
of the limiting layer for existing SSTS. This provision does not apply to §
52.50.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.57 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this subchapter shall follow the standards in §
154.014.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.58 STATE NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   The city shall notify the MPCA of any inspection, installation, design,
construction, alteration or repair of an SSTS by a licensed/certified person or
any septage removal by a licensed maintainer that is performed in violation of
the provisions of this subchapter. The city shall also notify the MPCA of any
discovered straight pipes pursuant to M.S. § 115.55, Subd. 11.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.59 RECORD KEEPING.
   The city shall maintain a current record of all permitted systems. The
record shall contain all permit applications, issued permits, fees assessed,
variance requests, certificates of compliance, notices of noncompliance,
enforcement proceedings, site evaluation reports, design reports, record
drawings, management plans, maintenance reports, operating permits, an annual
list of all sewage tanks installed in the city sorted by licensed installation
businesses, and other records the city deems relevant to a particular system.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.60 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The city shall provide an annual report of SSTS permitting activities to
MPCA no later than February 1 for the previous calendar year.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.61 FEES.
   From time to time, the City Council shall set fees for activities and
services undertaken by the city pursuant to this subchapter, by resolution.
Fees shall be due and payable at a time and in a manner to be determined by the
city.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.62 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   Resolution of disputes between SSTS certified individuals regarding
conflicting compliance inspections, determination of seasonally saturation of
soils and other technical issues shall follow Minn. Rules Part 7082.0700, Subp.
5.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be
punished according to §
10.999.
CHAPTER 53: STORM WATER
Section
   
53.01   Statutory authorization
   
53.02   Findings
   
53.03   Purpose
   
53.04   Scope
   
53.05   Greater restrictions
   
53.06   Application
   
53.07   Exemptions
   
53.08   Definitions
   
53.09   Plan review process
   
53.10   Site design and MIDS calculator
   
53.11   Storm water volume reduction performance goals
   
53.12   Storm water management rate control
   
53.13   Other design standards
   
53.14   Inspections and maintenance
   
53.15   Financial securities
   
53.16   Enforcement actions
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies
contained in M.S. Ch. 103B and Ch. 462, as they may be amended from time to
time, Minn. Rules Parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900; and Minn. Rules Ch. 8410 and
Ch. 8420.
   (B)   This chapter is intended to meet the current construction site erosion
and sediment control and post-construction storm water management regulatory
requirements for construction activity and small construction activity (NPDES
permit) as defined in 40 C.F.R. §§ 122.26(b)(14)(x) and 122.26(b)(15),
respectively.
   (C)   This chapter is intended to meet the minimal impact design standards
(MIDS) developed under M.S. § 115.03, Subd. 5c, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.02 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city finds that uncontrolled storm water runoff and construction
site erosion from land development and land disturbing activity can have
significant adverse impacts upon local and regional water resources diminishing
the quality of public health, safety, public and private property, and natural
resources of the city.
   (B)   Uncontrolled soil erosion and storm water runoff can:
      (1)   Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by
increasing runoff volumes and peak flood flows and overburdening storm sewers,
drainage ways, and other storm drainage systems;
      (2)   Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic
life, and recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loadings
of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, toxins, debris,
bacteria, pathogens, biological impairments, thermal stress, and other
pollutants;
      (3)   Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing stream bed scour, diminishing ground water recharge, diminishing
stream base flows, and increasing stream temperatures;
      (4)   Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence
and levels of flooding;
      (5)   Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and
increasing pollutant loads; and
      (6)   Impact ground water by reducing recharge and increasing potential
pollutant loading.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.03 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulatory requirements
for land development and land disturbing activities aimed at minimizing the
threats to public health, safety, public and private property, and natural
resources within the city from construction site erosion and post-construction
storm water runoff.
   (B)   Specifically, this chapter establishes regulatory requirements that:
      (1)   Meet MIDS performance goals;
      (2)   Assist in meeting NPDES/SDS construction storm water general permit
requirements;
      (3)   Assist in meeting total maximum daily load (TMDL) plan waste load
allocations for impaired waters through quantification of load reductions;
      (4)   Protect life and property from dangers associated with flooding;
      (5)   Protect public and private property and natural resources from
damage resulting from storm water runoff and erosion;
      (6)   Ensure the annual storm water runoff rates and volumes from post
development site conditions mimic and/or reduce the annual runoff rates and
volumes from predevelopment site conditions;
      (7)   Ensure site design minimizes the generation of storm water and
maximizes pervious areas for storm water treatment;
      (8)   Provide a single, consistent set of performance goals that apply to
all developments;
      (9)   Protect water quality from pollutant loadings of sediment,
suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, toxics, debris, bacteria, pathogens,
biological impairments, thermal stress, and other pollutants;
      (10)   Promote infiltration and ground water recharge;
      (11)   Provide vegetated corridors (buffers) to protect water resources
from development;
      (12)   Protect functional values of all types of natural water bodies
(e.g., rivers, streams, wetlands, lakes, and seasonal ponds); and
      (13)   Sustain or enhance biodiversity (native plant and animal habitat)
and support riparian ecosystems.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.04 SCOPE.
   As provided herein, land shall not be developed for any use without
providing storm water management measures and erosion and sediment control
measures that control or manage storm water runoff from such developments.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016) Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.05 GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   In case the provisions of this chapter and requirements of other
governmental organizations overlap or conflict, the strictest provisions shall
apply to the permitted land disturbing and/or land development activities.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to repeal, abrogate,
or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.06 APPLICATION.
   (A)   As a requirement of any building permit application, any new or
redevelopment of land meeting the thresholds described below requires a storm
water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) or an erosion and sediment control
(ESC) plan be completed, submitted for review, and approved by the city.
   (B)   Applicants will complete either a SWPPP or an ESC plan, but not both,
as described in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) below.
      (1)   Storm water management. Unless otherwise exempted by § 53.07, an
approved storm water management permit, including a storm water pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP), shall be required prior to any proposed land
development activity that meets any of the following criteria:
         (a)   Any project that creates or fully reconstructs 6,000 square feet
or more of impervious surface;
         (b)   All major subdivisions or minor subdivisions that are part of a
common plan of development;
         (c)   Any project requiring a variance from the current local
impervious surface zoning requirements for the property; or
         (d)   Any land development activity, regardless of size, that the city
determines is likely to cause an adverse impact to an environmentally sensitive
area or other property.
      (2)   Erosion and sediment control permit/plan. Unless otherwise exempted
by §
53.07, a grading and filling permit, including an erosion and sediment control
plan (for projects disturbing less than one acre), or a storm water pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) (for project disturbing one or more acres), shall be
required prior to any proposed land disturbing activity that meets any of the
following criteria:
         (a)   Disturbs a total land surface area of between 3,000 square feet
and one acre;
         (b)   Involves excavation or filling, or a combination of excavation
and filling, in excess of 50 cubic yards of material;
         (c)   Involves the laying, repairing, replacing, or enlarging of an
underground utility, pipe, or other facility, or the disturbance of road ditch,
grass swale, or other open channel for a distance of 300 feet or more; or
         (d)   Is a land disturbing activity, regardless of size, that the city
determines is likely to cause an adverse impact to an environmentally sensitive
area or other property, or may violate any other erosion and sediment control
standard set forth in this chapter.
      (3)   Buffers. A buffer of unmowed natural vegetation shall be required
up slope of wetlands, lakes, and streams prior to any proposed land development
that meets any of the criteria below, unless otherwise exempted in §
53.07, sites that have been:
         (a)   Subdivided or split; or
         (b)   Subject to new primary use for which a necessary rezoning,
special use permit, or variance has been approved.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following activities shall be exempt from all of the requirements of
this chapter:
   (A)   Emergency work necessary to protect life, limb, or property;
   (B)   Routine agricultural activity such as tilling, planting, harvesting,
and associated activities. Other agricultural activities are not exempt,
including construction of structures; and
   (C)   Silvicultural activity.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.08 DEFINITIONS.
   Words or phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings as defined by
Appendix B of the state’s construction storm water permit no. MN R100001
(construction permit) available at http://www.pca.state.mn.us/wfhva5b:. If not
defined in the construction permit, then words or phrases shall be interpreted
to have the meaning they have in common usage. Words or phrases shall be
interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application. For the
purpose of this chapter, the words MUST, SHALL, and WILL are mandatory and not
permissive.
   APPLICANT. The owner of land submitting an application under the provisions
of this chapter for a storm water and/or erosion control permit to be issued by
the city.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). The most effective and practicable means
of erosion prevention and sediment control, and water quality management
practices that are the most effective and practicable means to control,
prevent, and minimize degradation of surface water, including avoidance of
impacts, construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are
exposed, pollution prevention through good housekeeping, and other management
practices published by state or designated area-wide planning agencies.
   BETTER SITE DESIGN. The control and management of storm water quantity and
quality through the application of BETTER SITE DESIGN techniques as outlined in
the current version of the state’s storm water manual: http://
stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Main Page. BETTER SITE DESIGN includes
preservation of natural areas, site reforestation, stream and shoreland
buffers, open space design, disconnection of impervious cover, rooftop
disconnection, grass channels, storm water landscaping, compost and amended
soils, impervious surface reduction, and trout stream protection.
   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at
different times, on different schedules, but under one proposed plan. ONE PLAN
is broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or
physical demarcation indicating that land disturbing activities may occur.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Includes construction activity as defined in 40
C.F.R. §122.26(b)(14)(x), small construction activity as defined in 40 C.F.R. §
122.26(b)(15), and construction activity as defined by Minn. Rules Part
709.0080, Subp. 4. This includes a disturbance to the land that results in a
change in the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-
vegetative), or the existing soil topography that may result in accelerated
storm water runoff, leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment into
surface waters or drainage systems. Examples of CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY include
clearing, grading, filling, and excavating. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY includes the
disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is a part of a larger
common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately
disturb one acre or more. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY does not include a disturbance
to the land of less than five acres for the purpose of routine maintenance that
is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of the facility.
   DEVELOPMENT, NEW. Any development that results in the conversion of land
that is currently prairie, agriculture, forest, or meadow and has less than 15%
impervious surface. Land that was previously developed, but now razed and
vacant, will not be considered NEW DEVELOPMENT.
   DEWATERING. The removal of surface or ground water to dry and/or solidify a
construction site to enable construction activity. DEWATERING may require a
State Department of Natural Resources (DNR) water appropriation permit, and if
DEWATERING water is contaminated, discharge of such water may require an
individual MPCA NPDES/SDS permit.
   ENERGY DISSIPATION. Methods employed at pipe outlets to prevent erosion
caused by the rapid discharge of water. Examples include, but are not limited
to, concrete aprons, riprap, splash pads, and gabions that are designed to
prevent erosion.
   EROSION PREVENTION. Measures employed to prevent erosion. Examples include,
but not limited to, soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch,
temporary erosion protection or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
   GENERAL CONTRACTOR. The party who signs the construction contract with the
owner or operator to construct the project described in the final plans and
specifications. Where the construction project involves more than one
contractor, the GENERAL CONTRACTOR could be the party responsible for managing
the project on behalf of the owner or operator. In some cases, the owner or
operator may be the GENERAL CONTRACTOR. In these cases, the owner may contract
with an individual as the operator who would become the co-permittee.
   GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE. A wide array of practices at multiple scales that
manage wet weather and that maintains or restores natural hydrology by
infiltrating, evapotranspiring, or harvesting and using storm water. On a
regional scale, GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE is the preservation or restoration of
natural landscape features, such as forests, floodplains, and wetlands, coupled
with policies that reduce overall imperviousness in a watershed. On a local
scale, GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE consists of site and neighborhood-specific
practices, such as bioretention, trees, green roofs, permeable pavements, and
cisterns.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or
retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the
surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to
development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking
lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.
   LAND DISTURBANCE. Any activity that result in a change or alteration in the
existing ground cover (both vegetative and non- vegetative) and/or the existing
soil topography. LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES include, but are not limited to,
development, redevelopment, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing,
grading, filling, stockpiling, excavation, and borrow pits. Routine vegetation
management, and mill and overlay/resurfacing activities that do not alter the
soil material beneath the pavement base, are not considered LAND DISTURBANCE.
In addition, other maintenance activities such as catch basin and pipe repair/
replacement, lighting, and pedestrian ramp improvements shall not be considered
LAND DISTURBANCE for the purposes of determining permanent storm water
management requirements.
   LINEAR PROJECT. Construction or reconstruction of roads, trails, sidewalks,
and rail lines that are not part of a common plan of development or sale. Mill,
overlay, and other resurfacing projects are not considered to be
reconstruction.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The program for
issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing
permits under the Clean Water Act (§§ 301, 318, 402, and 405) and 33 C.F.R.
Parts1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345.
   NORMAL WETTED PERIMETER. The area of a conveyance, such as a ditch, channel,
or pipe that is in contact with water during flow events that are expected to
occur from a two-year 24-hour, storm event.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION. Notice to terminate coverage under a permit after
construction is complete, the site has undergone final stabilization, and
maintenance agreements for all permanent facilities have been established, in
accordance with all applicable conditions of a permit.
   OPERATOR. The person designated by the owner who has day to day operational
control and/or the ability to modify project plans and specifications related
to the SWPPP. The OPERATOR must be named on the permit as the permittee.
   OWNER. The person or party possessing the title of the land on which the
construction activities will occur; or if the construction activity is for a
lease, easement, or mineral rights license holder, the party or individual
identified as the lease, easement, or mineral rights license holder; or the
contracting government agency responsible for the construction activity.
   PERMANENT COVER. Surface types that will prevent soil failure under erosive
conditions. Examples include gravel, asphalt, concrete, riprap, rooftops,
perennial cover, or other landscaped material that will permanently arrest soil
erosion. A uniform perennial vegetative cover (e.g., evenly distributed,
without large bare areas) with a density of 70% of the native background
vegetative cover for the area must be established on all unpaved areas and
areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures. PERMANENT COVER does not include the practices listed
under temporary erosion protection.
   PERMITTEE. A person or persons, firm, or governmental agency or other entity
that signs the permit application and is responsible for compliance with the
terms and conditions of the permit.
   PUBLIC WATERS. All water basins and watercourses that are described in M.S.
§ 103G.005, Subd. 15, as it may be amended from time to time.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any development that is not considered new development.
   RETAIN. Manage storm water on site using a low-impact development approach
so that the rate and volume of predevelopment storm water reaching receiving
waters is unchanged.
   SATURATED SOIL. The highest seasonal elevation in the soil that is in a
reduced chemical state because of soil voids being filled with water. SATURATED
SOIL is evidenced by the presence of redoximorphic features or other
information.
   SEDIMENT CONTROL. Methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the
site. SEDIMENT CONTROL practices include silt fences, sediment traps, earth
dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, bio rolls, rock logs,
compost logs, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent
sedimentation basins.
   SMALL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. As defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(15). SMALL
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES include clearing, grading, and excavating that result
in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and less than five
acres. SMALL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY includes the disturbance of less than one
acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or
sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than
one and less than five acres.
   STABILIZED. Exposed ground surface has been covered by appropriate materials
such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, erosion control blanket, mats or other
material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass, agricultural crop, or
other seeding alone is not STABILIZATION. Mulch materials must achieve
approximately 90% ground coverage (typically two ton/acre).
   STANDARD PLATES. General drawings showing a common or repeated construction
activity or practice.
   STORM WATER. Is defined under Minn. Rules Part 7077.0105, Subp. 41(b), and
includes precipitation runoff, storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and any
other surface runoff and drainage.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan for storm water
discharge that includes erosion prevention BMPs, sediment control BMPs, and
permanent storm water management systems that, when implemented, will decrease
soil erosion on a parcel of land and decrease off-site nonpoint pollution.
   SURFACE WATER OR WATERS. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands,
reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, and
irrigation systems, whether natural or artificial, public or private, except
that SURFACE WATERS do not include treatment basins or ponds that were
constructed from upland.
   TEMPORARY EROSION PROTECTION. Methods employed to prevent erosion during
construction activities. Examples of TEMPORARY EROSION PROTECTION include
straw, wood fiber blanket, wood chips, vegetation, mulch, and rolled erosion
control products.
   UNDERGROUND WATERS (GROUND WATER). Water contained below the surface of the
earth in the saturated zone including, without limitation, all waters whether
under confined, unconfined, or perched conditions, in near surface
unconsolidated sediment or regolith, or in rock formations deeper underground.
The term GROUND WATER shall be synonymous with UNDERGROUND WATER.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. As defined in M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 22, as it may be
amended from time to time, includes all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
   WETLAND or WETLANDS. Is defined in Minn. Rules Part 7050.0130, Subp. F and
includes those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas. Constructed WETLANDS designed for wastewater treatment are
not waters of the state. WETLANDS must have the following attributes:
      (1)   A predominance of hydric soils;
      (2)   Inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and
      (3)   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.09 PLAN REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting. All applicants for a storm water permit shall
participate in a pre-application meeting with city staff, or their authorized
representative, and staff of relevant partner agencies (e.g., WCD, WMO, MDNR,
and the like). The purposes of the meeting are to understand the general
parameters of the proposed project and to convey the requirements the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Application completeness review. The city shall make a determination
regarding the completeness of a permit application within ten days of the
receipt of the application and notify the applicant in writing if the
application is not complete, including the reasons the application was deemed
incomplete.
   (C)   Application review. The applicant shall not commence any construction
activity subject to this chapter until a permit has been authorized by the
city. The city will work with the necessary state, county, and local agencies
to complete the review. The city shall review all information in the permit
application including proposed storm water practices, hydrologic models, and
design methodologies and certify compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   Plan authorization. If the city determines that the application meets
the requirements of this chapter, the city may issue approval authorizing the
project or activity. The approval shall be valid for one year. Approval will be
in written form from the city to the applicant.
   (E)   Plan denial. If the city determines the application does not meet the
requirements of this chapter, the application shall be denied. If the
application is denied, the applicant shall be notified of the denial in writing
including reasons for the denial. Once denied, a new application must be
resubmitted for approval before any activity may begin. All land use and
building permits shall be suspended until the applicant has an authorized
permit
   (F)   Plan information requirements. The minimum information requirements of
the application shall be consistent with the erosion and sediment control
requirements in the most recent version of the NPDES/SDS construction storm
water general permit and shall include a fully completed application checklist.
The application information must also include permanent treatment information
showing the proposed project meets the MIDS performance goals.
   (G)   Modification of permitted plans. The applicant must amend an approved
ESC Plan or SWPPP to include additional information such as additional or
modified BMPs designed to correct problems whenever:
      (1)   There is a change in design, construction, operation, maintenance,
weather, or seasonal conditions that has a significant effect on the discharge
of pollutants to surface or ground water;
      (2)   Inspections or investigations by site operators, local, state, or
federal officials indicate the plans are not effectively eliminating or
significantly minimizing the discharge of pollutants to surface or ground water
or that the discharges are causing water quality standard exceedances; or
      (3)   The ESC plan or SWPPP is not achieving the general objectives of
minimizing pollutants in storm water discharges associated with construction
activity.
   (H)   Permit completion. Before work under the permit is deemed complete,
the permittee shall submit as-builts, a long term maintenance plan, and
information demonstrating that the constructed storm water facilities conform
to design specifications.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.10 SITE DESIGN AND MIDS CALCULATOR.
   (A)   Site design process.
      (1)   Better site design. Whenever possible, new development projects
shall be designed using the better site design techniques of the current
version of the state’s storm water manual (available at http://
stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Better_site_design). Better site design
involves techniques applied early in the design process to preserve natural
areas, reduce impervious cover, distribute runoff, and use pervious areas to
effectively treat storm water runoff. Site design should address open space
protection, impervious cover minimization, and runoff distribution,
minimization, and utilization through considerations as follows.
         (a)   Open space protection and restoration.
            1.   Conservation of existing natural areas (upland and wetland);
            2.   Reforestation;
            3.   Re-establishment of prairies;
            4.   Restoration of wetlands;
            5.   Establishment or protection of stream, shoreline, and wetland
buffers; and
            6.   Re-establishment of native vegetation into the landscape.
         (b)   Reduction of impervious cover.
            1.   Reduce new impervious surfaces by redeveloping existing sites
and reuse of existing roadways, trails, and the like;
            2.   Minimize street width, parking space size, driveway length,
and sidewalk width; and
            3.   Reduce impervious surface footprint (e.g., two story
buildings, parking ramp).
         (c)   Distribution and minimization of runoff.
            1.   Utilize vegetated areas for storm water treatment (e.g.,
parking lot islands, vegetated areas along property boundaries, front and rear
yards, building landscaping);
            2.   Direct impervious surface runoff to vegetated areas or to
designed treatment areas (roofs, parking, and driveways drain to pervious
areas, not directly to storm sewer or other conveyances);
            3.   Encourage infiltration and soil storage of runoff through
grass channels, soil compost amendment, vegetated swales, rain gardens, and the
like; and
            4.   Plant vegetation that does not require irrigation beyond
natural rainfall and runoff from the site.
         (d)   Runoff utilization. Capture and store runoff for irrigation use
in areas where irrigation is necessary.
      (2)   Storm water criteria. The following general criteria shall be
incorporated in site design for storm water runoff to protect surface and
ground water and other natural resources by maintaining pre-development
hydrological conditions:
         (a)   Reduce impacts on water;
         (b)   Protect soils;
         (c)   Preserve vegetation;
         (d)   Decrease runoff volume;
         (e)   Decrease erosion and sedimentation and channel erosion;
         (f)   Decrease flow frequency, duration, and peak runoff rates;
         (g)   Increase infiltration (ground water recharge);
         (h)   Maintain existing flow patterns;
         (i)   Reduce peak flows; and
         (j)   Store storm water runoff on-site.
      (3)   Erosion and sediment control criteria. The following general
criteria shall be incorporated in site design for erosion and sediment control:
         (a)   Minimize disturbance of natural soil cover and vegetation;
         (b)   Minimize, in area and duration, exposed soil and unstable soil
conditions;
         (c)   Protect receiving water bodies, wetlands, and storm sewer
inlets;
         (d)   Protect adjacent properties from sediment deposition;
         (e)   Minimize off-site sediment transport on trucks and equipment;
         (f)   Minimize work in and adjacent to water bodies and wetlands;
         (g)   Maintain stable slopes;
         (h)   Avoid steep slopes and the need for high cuts and fills;
         (i)   Minimize disturbance to the surrounding soils, root systems, and
trunks of trees adjacent to site activity that are intended to be left
standing; and
         (j)   Minimize the compaction of site soils.
   (B)   MIDS calculator. Final site design and choice of permanent storm water
volume reduction practices shall be based on outcomes of the MIDS calculator
(or other model that shows the performance goal can be met) and shall meet the
performance goals in §
53.11. The MIDS calculator is available at http://stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/
index.php/Calculator.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.11 STORM WATER VOLUME REDUCTION PERFORMANCE GOALS.
   (A)   Any applicant for a permit resulting in site disturbance that creates
6,000 square feet of new impervious surface or fully reconstructs one or more
acre of impervious surface must meet all of the following storm water
performance goals.
      (1)   New development volume control. For new, nonlinear developments on
sites without restrictions, storm water runoff volumes will be controlled and
the post-construction runoff volume shall be retained on site for one and one-
tenth inches of runoff from all impervious surfaces on the site.
      (2)   Redevelopment volume control. Nonlinear redevelopment projects on
sites without restrictions that create or fully reconstruct impervious surfaces
shall capture and retain on site one and one-tenth inches of runoff from the
new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces.
      (3)   Linear development volume control.
         (a)   Linear projects on sites without restrictions that create new
and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces, shall capture and retain the
larger of the following:
            1.   Fifty-five hundredths of an inch of runoff from the new and
fully reconstructed impervious surfaces on the site; or
            2.   One and one-tenth inches of runoff from the net increase in
impervious area on the site.
         (b)   Mill and overlay and other resurfacing activities are not
considered fully reconstructed.
   (B)   Sites with restrictions (as found in the MIDS design sequence
flowchart).
      (1)   If a site has restrictions where infiltration is not feasible or
advised as determined by the applicant and agreed to by the city or as
determined by the city, the applicant shall follow one of the flexible
treatment options (summarized in the design sequence flow chart in Appendix H).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebcc35272ac16fb8bedf08cd4e5533b5ee31c678/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1544.png]
 
      (2)   Applicant shall attempt to fully comply with the appropriate
performance goals described above. Options considered and presented shall
examine the merits of relocating project elements to address varying soil
conditions and other constraints across the site. If full compliance is not
possible due to any of the factors listed below, the applicant shall document
the reason. If site constraints or restrictions limit the full treatment goal,
the following flexible treatment options shall be used: applicant shall
document the flexible treatment options sequence starting with Alternative #1.
If Alternative #1 cannot be met, then Alternative #2 shall be analyzed.
Applicants must document the specific reasons why Alternative # 1 cannot be met
based on the factors listed below. If Alternative #2 cannot be met, then
Alternative #3 shall be met. Applicants must document the specific reasons why
Alternative #2 cannot be met based on the factors listed below. When all of the
conditions are fulfilled within an alternative, this sequence is completed.
      (3)   Volume reduction techniques considered shall include infiltration,
reuse, and rainwater harvesting, and canopy interception and evapotranspiration
and/or additional techniques included in the MIDS calculator and the state’s
Storm Water Manual. Higher priority shall be given to BMPs that include volume
reduction. Secondary preference is to employ filtration techniques, followed by
rate control BMPs.
      (4)   Factors to be considered for each alternative will include:
         (a)   Shallow bedrock;
         (b)   High ground water;
         (c)   Hotspots or contaminated soils;
         (d)   Drinking water source management areas or within 200 feet of
drinking water well;
         (e)   Zoning, setbacks, or other land use requirements; and
         (f)   Poor soils (infiltration rates that are too low or too high,
problematic urban soils).
   (C)   Alternative #1: Applicant shall attempt to comply with and document
the following conditions.
      (1)   Achieve at least fifty-five hundredths volume reduction from all
impervious surfaces if the site is new development, or from the new and/or
fully reconstructed impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site.
      (2)   Remove 75% of the annual TP load from all impervious surfaces if
the site is new development or from the new and/or fully reconstructed
impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site.
      (3)   Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of
relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other
constraints across the site.
   (D)   Alternative #2: Applicant shall attempt to comply with and document
the following conditions.
      (1)   Achieve volume reduction to the maximum extent practicable.
      (2)   Remove 60% of the annual TP load from all impervious surfaces if
the site is new development or from the new and/or fully reconstructed
impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site.
      (3)   Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of
relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other
constraints across the site.
   (E)   Alternative #3: Off-site treatment. Mitigation equivalent to the
performance of one and one-tenth inches of volume reduction for new development
or redevelopment as described above in this section, including banking or cash,
can be performed off-site to protect the receiving water body. Off-site
treatment shall be achieved in areas selected in the following order of
preference:
      (1)   Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that
receives runoff from the original construction activity;
      (2)   Locations within the same Department of Natural Resource (DNR)
catchment area as the original construction activity;
      (3)   Locations within the next adjacent DNR catchment area upstream; and
      (4)   Locations anywhere within the city’s jurisdiction.
   (F)   The MIDS design sequence flowchart can be found in the state’s Storm
Water Manual: http://stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Flexible_treatment
options.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.12 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT RATE CONTROL.
   For all development sites (new development, redevelopment, and linear
development) the site design shall provide on-site treatment during
construction and post-construction to ensure no increase in off-site peak
discharge for the one-year, two-year, ten-year, and the 100-year, 24-hour storm
events based on Atlas 14 precipitation frequency events. For individual
building lots that are not part of a common plan of development, rate control
requirements do not apply.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.13 OTHER DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   State storm water manual. All volume control for water quality and
quantity and site design specifications shall conform to the current version of
the state storm water manual.
   (B)   Site erosion and sediment control requirements. All erosion and
sediment control requirements shall conform to the current requirements of
NPDES/SDS construction storm water general permit.
   (C)   Minimum setback. A minimum of 20 feet shall be provided on all sides
of all publicly-owned storm water facilities for facility maintenance.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.14 INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Inspections and record keeping.
      (1)   Applicant responsibilities. The applicant is responsible for
inspections and record keeping during and after construction for all privately-
owned storm water treatment practices on the site.
      (2)   City inspections. The city reserves the right to conduct
inspections on a regular basis to ensure that both temporary and permanent
storm water management and erosion and sediment control measures are properly
installed and maintained prior to construction, during construction, and at the
completion of the project city inspections may occur at any time, including:
         (a)   Before any land disturbing activity begins;
         (b)   Before or during the installation of permanent storm water
treatment systems;
         (c)   At the time of footing inspections;
         (d)   At the completion of the project; and
         (e)   Prior to the release of financial securities.
   (B)   Right of entry and inspection.
      (1)   The issuance of a permit constitutes a right-of-entry for the city
and/or its authorized representatives to enter upon the construction site.
      (2)   The applicant shall allow the city and/or its authorized
representatives, upon presentation of credentials, to:
         (a)   Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining
information, examining records, and conducting investigations or surveys;
         (b)   Bring such equipment upon the permitted development as is
necessary to conduct such surveys and investigations;
         (c)   Examine and copy any books, papers, records, or memoranda
pertaining to activities or records required to be kept under the terms and
conditions of the permit;
         (d)   Inspect the storm water pollution control measures;
         (e)   Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to storm
water pollution control measures; and
         (f)   Correct deficiencies in storm water and erosion and sediment
control measures.
   (C)   Fees. Fees will be applied per city ordinance.
   (D)   Enforcement tools/stop-work orders. The city reserve the right to
issue construction stop-work orders when cooperation on inspections is withheld
or when a violation has been identified that needs immediate attention to
protect human health and/or the environment. The following example highlights a
scenario on a site where a stop-work order could be utilized. If storm water
and/or erosion and sediment control management measures malfunction and breach
the perimeter of the site, enter streets, other public areas, or water bodies,
the city should assess the need for issuing a stop-work order. The applicant
shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan, obtain the right-of-
way from the adjoining property owner if necessary, and implement the cleanup
and restoration plan within 48 hours. If in the discretion of the city, the
applicant does not repair the damage caused by the storm water runoff, the city
can complete the remedial work required and charge the cost to the applicant.
If payment is not made within 30 days, payment will be made from the
applicant’s financial securities. An inspection by the city must follow before
the construction project work can resume.
      (1)   Construction stop-work order. The city may issue construction stop-
work orders until storm water management measures meet specifications and the
applicant repairs any damage caused by storm water runoff. An inspection by the
city must verify the storm water management measures meet the specifications
before the construction project work can resume.
      (2)   Other actions to ensure compliance. The city may take any
combination of the following actions in the event of a failure by applicant to
meet the terms of this chapter:
         (a)   Withhold inspections or issuance of certificates or approvals;
         (b)   Revoke any permit issued by the city to the applicant;
         (c)   Conduct remedial or corrective action on the development site or
adjacent site affected by the failure;
         (d)   Charge applicant for all costs associated with correcting the
failure or remediating damage from the failure, if payment is not made within
30 days, payment will be made from the applicant’s financial securities; and
         (e)   Bring other actions against the applicant to recover costs of
remediation or meeting the terms of this chapter.
   (E)   Long term inspection and maintenance of storm water facilities.
      (1)   Private storm water facilities.
         (a)   Maintenance plan required. No private storm water facilities may
be approved unless a maintenance plan is provided that defines who will conduct
the maintenance, the type of maintenance necessary to ensure effective
performance, and the maintenance intervals. At a minimum, all private storm
water facilities shall be inspected annually and maintained in proper condition
consistent with the performance goals for which they were originally designed.
         (b)   Facility access. Access to all storm water facilities must be
inspected annually and maintained as necessary. The applicant shall obtain all
necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to the
facilities for inspection or maintenance for both the responsible party and the
city.
         (c)   Removal of settled materials. All settled materials, including
settled solids, shall be removed from ponds, sumps, grit chambers, and other
devices, and disposed of properly.
         (d)   Inspections. All storm water facilities within the city shall be
inspected by the city during construction, during the first year of operation,
and at least once every five years thereafter.
      (2)   Public storm water facilities; acceptance of publicly-owned
facilities. Before work under the permit is deemed complete, the permittee must
submit as-builts and a maintenance plan demonstrating at the time of final
stabilization that the storm water facilities conform to design specifications.
A final inspection shall be required before the city accepts ownership of the
storm water facilities.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.15 FINANCIAL SECURITIES.
   (A)   Amount. The city shall require financial security from the applicant
in an amount sufficient to cover the entirety of the estimated costs of
permitted and remedial work based on the final design as established in a set
financial security schedule determined by the city.
   (B)   Release. The financial security shall not be released until all
permitted and remedial work is completed.
   (C)   Use by city. The financial security may be used by the city to
complete work not completed by the applicant.
   (D)   Form of security. The form of the financial security shall be one or a
combination of the following to be determined by the city.
      (1)   Cash deposit. The financial security amount for erosion and
sediment control shall be by cash deposit to the city. The amount shall be
determined by the city upon receipt of application. The cash will be held by
the city in a separate account.
      (2)   Security deposit. Deposit with the city, an escrow agent, or trust
company, at the option of the city, either:
         (a)   An irrevocable letter of credit, negotiable bonds of the kind
approved for securing deposits of public money, or other instruments of credit
from one or more financial institutions, subject to regulation by the state and
federal government wherein said financial institution pledges funds that are on
deposit and guaranteed for payment;
         (b)   Cash in U.S. currency; or
         (c)   Other forms and securities (e.g., disbursing agreement) as
approved by the city.
   (E)   City indemnity. This financial security shall hold the city free and
harmless from all suits or claims for damages resulting from the negligent
grading, removal, placement, or storage of rock, sand, gravel, soil, or other
like material within the city.
   (F)   Maintaining the financial security. If at any time during the course
of the work the balance of the financial security falls below 50% of the total
required deposit, the applicant shall make another deposit in the amount
necessary to restore the security to the required amount. If the applicant does
not bring the financial security back up to the required amount within seven
days after notification by the city that the amount has fallen below 50% of the
required amount, the city may:
      (1)   Withhold inspections. Withhold the scheduling of inspections and/or
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or
      (2)   Revoke permits. Revoke any permit issued by the city to the
applicant for the site in question or any other of the applicant’s sites within
the city’s jurisdiction.
   (G)   Action against the financial security. The city may access the
financial security for remediation actions if any of the conditions listed
below exist. The city shall use the financial security to pay for remedial work
undertaken by the city, or a private contractor under contract with the city,
or to reimburse the city for all costs incurred in the process of remedial work
including, but, not limited to, staff time and attorney’s fees.
      (1)   Abandonment. The applicant ceases land disturbing activities and/or
filling and abandons the work site prior to completion of the grading plan.
      (2)   Failure to implement the SWPPP or ESC plan. The applicant fails to
conform to the grading plan and/or the SWPPP as approved by the city.
      (3)   Failure to perform. The techniques utilized under the SWPPP fail
within one year of installation.
      (4)   Failure to reimburse city. The applicant fails to reimburse the
city for corrective action taken.
   (H)   Proportional reduction of the financial security. When more than one-
third of the applicant’s maximum exposed soil area achieves final
stabilization, the city can reduce the total required amount of the financial
security by one-third. When more than two-thirds of the applicant’s maximum
exposed soil area achieves final stabilization, the city can reduce the total
required amount of the financial security to two-thirds of the initial amount.
This reduction in financial security will be determined by the city.
   (I)   Returning the financial security. The security deposited with the city
for faithful performance of the SWPPP or the ESC plan and any related remedial
work shall be released one full year after the completion of the installation
of all storm water pollution control measures as shown on the SWPPP or ESC
Plan.
   (J)   Emergency action. If circumstances exist such that noncompliance with
this chapter poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety, and
welfare, as determined by the city, the city may take emergency preventative
action. The city shall also take every reasonable action possible to contact
and direct the applicant to take any necessary action. Any cost to the city may
be recovered from the applicant’s financial security. In the absence of
financial security, or if the security is insufficient, the city shall follow
the procedure set forth in §
53.16(D)(3)(b).
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.16 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   The city shall notify the permit holder of the failure of the permit’s
measures.
   (A)   Initial contact .The initial contact will be to the party or parties
listed on the application and/or the SWPPP as contacts. Except during an
emergency action, 48 hours after notification by the city or 72 hours after the
failure of erosion and sediment control measures, whichever is less, the city,
at its discretion, may begin corrective work. Such notification should be in
writing, but if it is verbal, a written notification should follow as quickly
as practical. If after making a good faith effort to notify the responsible
party or parties, the city has been unable to establish contact, the city may
proceed with corrective work. There are conditions when time is of the essence
in controlling erosion. During such a condition the city may take immediate
action and then notify the applicant as soon as possible.
   (B)   Erosion off-site. If erosion breaches the perimeter of the site, the
applicant shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan, obtain the
right-of-entry from the adjoining property owner, and implement the cleanup and
restoration plan within 48 hours of obtaining the adjoining property owner’s
permission. Unless written approval is received from the city, corrective
action shall be initiated within seven days after failure of erosion control
measures. If in the discretion of the city, the permit holder does not repair
the damage caused by the erosion, the city may undertake the remedial work
required. Applicant shall obtain all required permits and adhere to all
applicable local, state, and federal regulations when restoring the site.
   (C)   Erosion into streets, wetlands, or water bodies. If eroded soils,
including tracked soils from construction activities, enter or appear likely to
enter streets, wetlands, or other water bodies, cleanup and repair shall be
immediate. The applicant shall provide all traffic control and flagging
required to protect the traveling public during the cleanup operations.
   (D)   Failure to do corrective work. When an applicant fails to conform to
any provision of this policy within the time stipulated, the city may take the
following actions:
      (1)   Stop-work order. Issue a stop-work order, withhold the scheduling
of inspections, and/or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
      (2)   Permit revocation. Revoke any permit issued by the city to the
applicant for the site in question or any other of the applicant’s sites within
the city’s jurisdiction; and/or
      (3)   Correction by city. Correct the deficiency or hire a contractor to
correct the deficiency.
         (a)   The applicant will be required to reimburse the city for all
costs incurred in correcting storm water pollution control deficiencies. If
payment is not made within 30 days after costs are incurred by the city,
payment will be made from the applicant’s financial securities as described in
§
53.13.
         (b)   If there is an insufficient financial amount in the applicant’s
financial securities as described in §
53.13, the city may assess the remaining amount against the property. As a
condition of the permit, the owner shall waive notice of any assessment hearing
to be conducted by the city, concur that the benefit to the property exceeds
the amount of the proposed assessment, and waive all rights under M.S. Ch. 429,
as it may be amended from time to time, to challenge the amount or validity of
the assessment.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation failing to comply with or violating this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND SNOW EMERGENCIES
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
72.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND SNOW EMERGENCIES
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Authority over streets and the like
   
70.02   Definition
   
70.03   Unreasonable acceleration
Truck Routes
   
70.15   Adoption of state law
   
70.16   Definitions
   
70.17   Truck travel restricted
   
70.18   Maximum axle limits
   
70.19   Shortest route to destination
   
70.20   Emergency vehicles
   
70.21   Street repair or construction
   
70.22   Posting required
   
70.23   Police authority
   
70.24   Owner’s responsibility
   
70.25   Official map
   
70.26   Seasonal restrictions
   
70.27   Garbage and rubbish collection
Snow Emergencies
   
70.40   Purpose
   
70.41   Definitions
   
70.42   Parking restricted
   
70.43   Enforcement
   
70.44   Immediate removal after snowfall
   
70.45   Winter parking
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parking schedules, see
Ch. 72
   Recreational vehicles, see
Ch. 71
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 92
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 AUTHORITY OVER STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 412.221, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time,
the City Council has the power to lay out, open, change, widen, or extend
streets, alleys, parks, squares, and other public ways and grounds, and to
grade, pave, repair, control, and maintain the same; to establish and maintain
drains, canals, and sewers; to alter, widen, or straighten water courses; to
lay, repair, or otherwise improve or discontinue sidewalks, paths, and
crosswalks and to, by ordinance, regulate the use of streets and other public
grounds, to prevent encumbrances or obstructions, and to require the owners or
occupants of buildings and the owners of vacant lots to remove any snow, ice,
dirt, or rubbish from the sidewalks adjacent thereto and in default thereof to
cause such encumbrances, obstructions, or substances to be removed and the cost
to be assessed against the property as a special assessment.
(Prior Code, § 6.1)
§ 70.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.
      (1)   Acceleration without apparent reason, and accomplishment in such
manner as to cause squealing or screeching sounds by the tires or the throwing
of sand or gravel by the tires of the vehicle or both.
      (2)   Prima facie evidence of such UNNECESSARY AND UNREASONABLE
ACCELERATION shall be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires, or
the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the vehicle, or both.
(Prior Code, § 6.2.1.1)
§ 70.03 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION.
   Unreasonable acceleration of any motor vehicle on any public or private road
or way within the city is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6.2.1.2) Penalty, see §
70.99
TRUCK ROUTES
§ 70.15 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   Reference is made to the state’s Highway Traffic Regulation, M.S. Ch. 169,
as it may be amended from time to time. All regulations of M.S. §§ 169.80
through 169.88, as they may be amended from time to time, concerning trucks
shall govern except as further restricted by this subchapter.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVIATING TRUCK. A truck which leaves or departs from a truck route.
   TRUCK. Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property
and whose total weight loaded or unloaded exceeds 10,000 pounds, or is
registered with a gross weight of 12,000 pounds or greater.
   TRUCK ROUTE. Any street designated as such in this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.17 TRUCK TRAVEL RESTRICTED.
   No truck shall be operated on any street other than a truck route, except as
permitted in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 MAXIMUM AXLE LIMITS.
   The maximum axle limits are determined by the two roadway authorities (the
state’s Department of Transportation and the county) that have jurisdiction
over truck route roadways within the city limits. Load limits on these roadways
are dynamic and may alter from year to year. All axle limitations concerning
front steering axles and consecutive axles, as listed in M.S. Ch. 160, as it
may be amended from time to time, still must be followed.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.19 SHORTEST ROUTE TO DESTINATION.
   Subject to posted seasonal load restriction and state law prohibitions of
vehicular traffic, the operation of trucks is permitted upon any street where
necessary to conduct the business at a destination point, provided streets upon
which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection
nearest the destination point.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.20 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The operation of emergency vehicles is permitted upon any street in any
city.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.21 STREET REPAIR OR CONSTRUCTION.
   The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, and
any contractor or material people while engaged in the repair, maintenance, or
construction of streets, street improvement, or street utilities is permitted
within the city.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.22 POSTING REQUIRED.
   The city’s Public Works Department shall cause all truck routes and streets
upon which truck traffic is permitted to be so sign-posted.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.23 POLICE AUTHORITY.
   Any police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or
in control of any truck not proceeding over a truck route or street upon which
truck traffic is permitted, to proceed to any public or private scale available
for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this subchapter has been
complied with.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.24 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   In addition to the driver or operator, the owner of any truck being operated
with their permission and consent shall be liable for any violation of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.25 OFFICIAL MAP.
   Truck routes are identified on the official route map below. The city’s
Public Works Department shall keep and accurately maintain the map identifying
the truck routes or streets upon which truck traffic is permitted and the map
shall be available to the public.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebcc35272ac16fb8bedf08cd4e5533b5ee31c678/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1537.png]
 
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.26 SEASONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   During the spring thaw period, when road restrictions are imposed by the
state’s Department of Transportation on highways under its jurisdiction, the
maximum weight on a single axle of a deviating truck shall be 14,000 pounds.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 70.27 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION.
   Trucks used for garbage and rubbish collection are not considered a
deviating truck while conducting their collection routes. Collection routes are
expected to be designed to minimize travel on non-truck routes and are
restricted to use on the day of the week for collection. When not on a
collection route, the trucks must stay on designated truck routes.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 11-10-2014)
SNOW EMERGENCIES
§ 70.40 PURPOSE.
   To facilitate the removal of snow from city streets, avenues, and alleys
during a snow emergency, the city shall give reasonable notice on the local
radio stations of the names of the streets which shall be cleared and upon
which parking shall be prohibited. The Mayor or public works supervisor shall
be empowered, in the event of the necessity for snow removal, to declare a snow
emergency.
(Prior Code, § 6.8)
§ 70.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLISHED NOTICE. The broadcasting on the local radio stations at least
hourly of the streets upon which parking will be prohibited due to snow
removal.
   SNOW EMERGENCY. Any time when the City Clerk-Treasurer shall determine that
it is necessary to clear snow from the streets and avenues and alleys of the
city.
   VEHICLE. Any automobile, snowmobile, truck, trailer, or motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6.9)
§ 70.42 PARKING RESTRICTED.
   During a snow emergency, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked
upon any street, avenue, or alley designated for snow removal.
(Prior Code, § 6.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.43 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any vehicle illegally parked upon a street, alley, or avenue designated for
snow removal during a snow emergency shall be towed away at the expense of the
owner of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6.11)
§ 70.44 IMMEDIATE REMOVAL AFTER SNOWFALL.
   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this subchapter as to the permitted
time for parking or leaving standing any motor vehicle or trailer on any street
or alley, all vehicles must be removed from all streets and alleys as soon as
possible after a snowfall, but at a time not exceeding 24 hours after a
snowfall, to facilitate the plowing of streets and alleys. Those vehicles
remaining after 24 hours will be ticketed and towed at the vehicle owner’s
expense.
(Prior Code, § 6.12)
§ 70.45 WINTER PARKING.
   (A)   Time limitations. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, to
leave unattended, whether the engine is running or not, any motor vehicle,
trailer, or conveyance on any street, avenue, or alley in the city between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the dates of November 1 through March
31 in any year.
   (B)   Towing authorized. Any motor vehicle, trailer, or conveyance parked in
violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be towed away at the
expense of the owner of the vehicle, trailer, or conveyance, except when the
owner of the vehicle requests and receives the hardship exception provided in
division (C) below. Such vehicle, trailer, or conveyance shall not be released
until the towing and storage fees are paid, in addition to any fine imposed for
violation of this section.
   (C)   Hardship exception.
      (1)   Authorized. Any person who does not own or lease enough lot area to
possess off-street parking for his or her vehicle may provide for the moving of
his or her own vehicle or guest vehicle as long as he or she furnishes a
written request to the City Clerk-Treasurer in the form provided by the city.
      (2)   Form of request. The requesting party shall state his or her name,
circumstances, address, home phone number, permission for city crew to call in
early morning hours, and statement to the effect that the person will move his
or her vehicle or the vehicle of the guest upon being telephoned by city crew
or Police Department when it snows. Upon receiving written request, the Police
Department will inquire into the circumstances to verify that a hardship
exists.
(Prior Code, § 6.14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles
   
71.01   Purpose
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   Prohibitions
   
71.04   Equipment
   
71.05   Unattended snowmobiles
   
71.06   Snowmobile routes
   
71.07   Crossings
All-Terrain Vehicles
   
71.20   Purpose
   
71.21   Definitions
   
71.22   Prohibitions
   
71.23   Equipment
   
71.24   Unattended all-terrain vehicles
   
71.25   Exceptions
Golf Carts and Mini-Trucks
   
71.40   Purpose
   
71.41   Definitions
   
71.42   Operation regulations
   
71.43   Permit requirement
   
71.44   Rearview mirror
   
71.45   Slow moving vehicle emblem
   
71.46   Rights and duties of drivers
   
71.47   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
71.48   Number of occupants
   
71.49   Equipment requirements
   
71.50   Permit exception for city staff
Bicycles
   
71.60   Purpose
   
71.61   Definitions
   
71.62   Restrictions
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 92
SNOWMOBILES
§ 71.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The city shall have the authority to regulate snowmobile use within
the city limits to protect and provide for the safety of its citizens.
   (B)   The City Council, by resolution, may prohibit the operation of
snowmobiles within the right-of-way of the public roads or streets or other
city property when, in the opinion of the City Council, the public safety and
welfare so requires.
(Prior Code, § 6.15)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATE. To control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain, steered by wheels, skis, runners, or power-driven drum or
tracks.
(Prior Code, § 6.16)
§ 71.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of the property;
   (B)   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, and recreational
areas without express permission to do so by proper public authority;
   (C)   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise so as
to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons;
   (D)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety of any person or the property of any person;
   (E)   Without having the snowmobile registered as provided for in M.S. §
84.82, as it may be amended from time to time;
   (F)   Within the right-of-way of any public street within the city unless
the operator shall have a valid motor vehicle driver’s license issued to him or
her by the state;
   (G)   Upon or over any sidewalk, boulevard, or road shoulder in the city; or
   (H)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or habit-
forming drugs.
(Prior Code, § 6.17) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 EQUIPMENT.
   All snowmobiles operated within the city shall have the following equipment:
   (A)   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of the
operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the
vehicle. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device on
such vehicles;
   (B)   Adequate brakes as prescribed by the State Commissioner of Highways
and at least one headlight and one taillight; and
   (C)   A safety or so-called dead man throttle in operating condition; a
SAFETY OR DEAD MAN THROTTLE is defined as a device which, when pressure is
removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged
from the driving track.
(Prior Code, § 6.18)
§ 71.05 UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILES.
   It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to
be or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running or with
the keys to start the snowmobile in the ignition switch.
(Prior Code, § 6.19) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 SNOWMOBILE ROUTES.
   (A)   The official snowmobile routes through the city are as described
below:
      (1)   West entrance. Enter the west side of the city via the alley
between First and Second Streets South (the road on the south side of Minnesota
Automation). Proceed east along the alley to Eleventh Avenue West and then
north to First Street South. Go east on First Street South to Sixth Avenue
West, then south on Sixth Avenue West to Second Street South and east on Second
Street South to Third Avenue West (Hwy. 210 at northwest corner of Memorial
Park). Proceed east on Second Street South to the City Hall and go south out
onto Serpent Lake; and
      (2)   North entrance. Enter the city on the north side on Eighth Street
North via old railroad tracks. Proceed south between the two sets of tracks to
Second Street North then west to First Avenue East (Hallett Avenue). Go south
on First Avenue East (Hallett) to Second Street South, then west to Cross
Avenue and then south on Cross Avenue out onto Serpent Lake.
   (B)   An official map of the proposed route is attached to Res. 27-84, and
the map shall be available to the public at the City Hall upon request.
(Prior Code, § 6.20)
§ 71.07 CROSSINGS.
   A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway provided:
   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
   (B)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main-traveled way of the highway;
   (C)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
   (D)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 6.21)
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 71.20 PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of public safety and the common welfare, the city shall have
the authority to regulate the use of all-terrain vehicles within the city
limits as it deems is in the best interest of its citizens.
(Prior Code, § 6.23)
§ 71.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV). A self-propelled vehicle which is designed for
off-the-road use on snow, ice, dirt, mud, or other natural terrain. It shall
not be licensed for highway use or be eligible for licensing for highway use.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV) RECREATIONAL AREA. An area of land designated by
the City Council for the use of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs).
   NON-OWNED PROPERTY. Real property owned by any person other than the
operator of an all-terrain vehicle (ATV).
   OPERATE. To control the operation of an all-terrain vehicle (ATV).
   OPERATOR. A person who is in actual control of an all-terrain vehicle (ATV).
   OWNED PROPERTY. Real property owned by the operator or owner of an all-
terrain vehicle (ATV) being operated on the property.
   OWNER. The person in whose name the all-terrain vehicle (ATV) is registered.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Personal property owned by any person other than the
operator or owner of the all-terrain vehicle (ATV).
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Real property owned by any person or corporation other than
the operator or owner of the all-terrain vehicle (ATV).
(Prior Code, § 6.24)
§ 71.22 PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate an all-terrain vehicle (ATV) within the city
under the following circumstances:
   (A)   Upon private property unless upon owned property or with written
permission of the owner;
   (B)   On public property, parks, playgrounds, railroad rights-of-way,
boulevards, and recreational areas unless the areas shall be designated an all-
terrain vehicle recreational area by the City Council;
   (C)   Upon any property in a manner that will tend to create loud,
unnecessary, or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and
quiet of other persons;
   (D)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety of any person or the property of any person;
   (E)   Within the right-of-way of any public street within the city unless
the operator shall have a valid motor vehicle driver’s license issued to him or
her by the state;
   (F)   Upon or over any sidewalk or boulevard in the city except upon proper
driveway, alley, or street; and
   (G)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or habit-
forming drugs.
(Prior Code, § 6.25) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.23 EQUIPMENT.
   All all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) operated within the city shall have the
following equipment:
   (A)   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of the
operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the
vehicle. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device on
such vehicles; and
   (B)   A safety or so-called deadman throttle in operating condition; a
SAFETY OR DEADMAN THROTTLE is defined as a device which, when pressure is
removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged
from the driving track.
(Prior Code, § 6.26)
§ 71.24 UNATTENDED ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow an all-terrain
vehicle (ATV) to be or remain unattended on public property while the motor is
running or with the keys to start the vehicle in the ignition switch.
(Prior Code, § 6.27) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.25 EXCEPTIONS.
   Snowmobiles shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter, as shall
the use of ATVs for the purposes of snow plowing and other emergency services
that are deemed by the Council to be in the best interest of the public
welfare.
(Prior Code, § 6.28)
GOLF CARTS AND MINI-TRUCKS
§ 71.40 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted to address the interest of public safety under
the provisions of M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from time to time, which
provides the city authority to regulate the use of golf carts and mini-trucks
on the roadways under its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
§ 71.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over the motorized
golf cart or mini-truck and being the licensee.
   GOLF CART. A four-wheeled recreational vehicle generally used for
transportation of person(s) in the sport of golf that is either electric
powered or gas powered with an engine displacement of less than 300 cubic
centimeters, and a total weight of less than 800 pounds;
   MINI-TRUCK. A motor vehicle that has four wheels; is propelled by an
electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts, or less, or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters,
or less; has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds; contains an enclosed
cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator; commonly resembles a pickup truck or
van, including a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle; and was
not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards
required of motor vehicles in 49 C.F.R. §§ 571.101 to 571.404, and successive
requirements.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
§ 71.42 OPERATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Golf carts and mini-trucks may be operated on the streets of the city,
from sunrise to sunset as hereinafter further provided; motorized golf carts or
mini-trucks may not be operated on state or federal highways, except to cross
at designated intersections.
   (B)   Golf carts or mini-trucks shall not be operated during inclement
weather conditions or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly
see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.43 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart or mini-truck on the
streets of the city without first obtaining a permit as provided herein.
   (B)   An application for a permit shall be submitted to the City Hall on a
form provided by the city and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant; and
      (2)   Model name, make, and year of manufacture and serial number, if
applicable, of the motorized golf cart or mini-truck.
   (C)   No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following conditions
are met:
      (1)   The applicant must be at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance complying with the
provisions of M.S. § 65B.48, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time,
and proof of insurance shall be maintained on or within the mini-truck or golf
cart at all times that it is operated on city streets; and
      (3)   The applicant for a mini-truck permit must have a valid driver’s
license.
   (D)   All permits shall be issued for a specific golf cart or a specific
mini-truck (permit holders will be issued a number and a sticker to affix to
the left side rear fender or similar component) in the applicant’s (permitee’s)
name. Operators of any golf cart or mini-truck permitted herein shall be at
least 18 years of age.
   (E)   The fee for such permit shall be an amount as set forth by the City
Council from time to time. Permits will be granted for three-year periods,
valid from January 1 through December 31. Permits may be purchased at any time
during the year but will be valid only for three calendar years, including the
year of issuance and will expire on December 31 of the third calendar year.
   (F)   (1)   The permit may be suspended or revoked by the City Council upon
finding that the permit holder has violated the conditions of the permit, has
abused the privilege of being a permit holder, or upon finding that the
permittee cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart or mini-truck on the
designated roadways.
      (2)   There will be no refund of the permit fee.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.44 REARVIEW MIRROR.
   Motorized golf carts and mini-trucks shall be equipped with a rearview
mirror to provide the operator with adequate vision from behind as required by
M.S. § 169.70, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
§ 71.45 SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM.
   Motorized golf carts shall display a slow moving vehicle emblem, provided
for in M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from time to time, when operated on
designated roadways.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
§ 71.46 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF DRIVERS.
   Every person operating a motorized golf cart, an all-terrain vehicle, or
mini-truck on designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to
the driver of any vehicle under the provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be
applied to motorized golf carts or mini-trucks and except as otherwise
specifically provided in M.S. § 169.045(7), as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
§ 71.47 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any provisions of this subchapter
or of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, or if there is
evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart
or mini-truck on the designated roadways.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
§ 71.48 NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS.
   The number of occupants on a motorized golf cart or mini-truck cannot exceed
the design occupant load.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
§ 71.49 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   A mini-truck and/or golf cart may be operated under permit on designated
roadways if it is equipped with all of the following:
   (A)   At least two headlamps (not required of a golf cart);
   (B)   At least two taillights (not required of a golf cart);
   (C)   Front and rear turn signal lamps (not required of a golf cart);
   (D)   Rearview mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind
is required by M.S. § 169.70, as it may be amended from time to time;
   (E)   A windshield (a windshield is not required for a golf cart);
   (F)   A seatbelt for the driver and front passenger (a seatbelt is not
required for a golf cart); and
   (G)   A parking brake.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
§ 71.50 PERMIT EXCEPTION FOR CITY STAFF.
   Authorized city staff may operate city owned motorized golf carts and/or
mini-trucks without obtaining a permit within the city when conducting city
business.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 11-26-2012)
BICYCLES
§ 71.60 PURPOSE.
   Cycling is an important part of the recreational opportunities of the city
and cyclists frequent the city’s downtown area. State law provides that no
person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district unless
permitted by local authorities, pursuant to M.S. § 169.222, subd. 4(d). The
city wishes to allow bicycle riding on the sidewalk in the city’s business
district and adjacent areas subject to certain restrictions that enhance the
safety of all sidewalk users. The city will complete annual reviews on safety.
(Ord. 2022-02, passed 3-14-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.61 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGULATED AREA. The restrictions set forth in this subchapter apply to the
sidewalks on both sides of the following streets within the city:
      (1)   W. Main Street (State Highway 210/State Highway 6) from 2nd Ave.
N.E. West to 3rd Ave. N.W.
      (2)   3rd Ave. N.W. from mid-block between 4th St. N.W. and 3rd St. N.W.,
where the sidewalk/trail begins on the west side of the street, south to 2nd
St. S.W.
   PEDESTRIANS. A person walking a bicycle is a pedestrian, not a cyclist. The
restrictions set forth in this subchapter do not apply to a person walking a
bicycle.
(Ord. 2022-02, passed 3-14-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.62 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   One-way traffic. Cyclists riding on sidewalks within the regulated
area must ride in the same direction as the flow of traffic in the adjacent
lane of the abutting street on the sidewalk area closest to the street.
   (B)   Speed limit. Cyclists riding on sidewalks within the regulated area
are not to exceed four miles per hour (walking pace).
(Ord. 2022-02, passed 3-14-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 72: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking regulations
SCHEDULE I.PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. For the safety of its citizens and for benefit of the public,
the city shall have the right to regulate parking within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 6.3)
   (B)   Prohibitions. No motor vehicle shall at any time be parked on that
part of Main Street lying east of Third Avenue West between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day, and appropriate signs so indicating such parking
shall be posted on that part of Main Street lying east of Third Avenue West.
(Prior Code, § 6.4)
   (C)   Specification. All motor vehicles when parked within the limits
prescribed in division (B) above shall be parked parallel to and within 18
inches of the curb-line, and not closer than 20 feet from the prolongation of
the curb-line of any intersecting street or avenue.
(Prior Code, § 6.5)
   (D)   Double parking.
      (1)   No person shall at any time park any kind of a motor vehicle
parallel to any other motor vehicle parked next to the curb or at any other
place except parallel to and within 18 inches of the curb within the area
defined in division (B) above.
      (2)   This division (D) shall not apply to vehicles stopped for the
purpose of loading or unloading commercial merchandise within the Central
Business or Industrial Districts of the city, but said vehicles may only be
stopped for so long as is reasonably necessary for loading or unloading.
(Prior Code, § 6.6)
   (E)   Parking restriction. Except for the Main Street area described in
division (B), the following parking restrictions apply. City streets and alleys
are not intended for long term parking. No motor vehicle or trailer that is
otherwise allowed to park pursuant to this chapter shall be persistently parked
or left standing on city streets or alleys more than 72 hours. A violation of
this provision is a misdemeanor and the vehicle or trailer may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 6.7) (Ord. 1-2012, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
      
92.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
95.   CEMETERIES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Purpose
   
90.02   General provisions
   
90.03   Definitions
   
90.04   Impounding
   
90.05   Licensing requirements
   
90.06   Commercial kennel
   
90.07   Rabies vaccination
   
90.08   Impounding, quarantine, or destruction of animals
   
90.09   Muzzling proclamation
   
90.10   Sale of gift of animals for advertising or promotional purposes
   
90.11   Keeping of certain animals regulated
   
90.12   Animal enclosure
   
90.13   Keeping of certain animals prohibited
   
90.14   Animals running at large
   
90.15   Confinement of certain animals
   
90.16   Animals declared a public nuisance
   
90.17   Limitation on number of dogs or cats
   
90.18   Noise
   
90.19   Special requirements for dogs
   
90.20   Opening pound or city vehicle
   
90.21   Interference with officer
   
90.22   Exception
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 91
§ 90.01 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 412.221, Subd. 21, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Council shall have power by ordinance to regulate the keeping of
animals, to restrain their running at large, to authorize their impounding and
sale or summary destruction, and to establish pounds, and to license.
(Prior Code, § 12.1)
§ 90.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep
within the limits of the city any horse, cattle, swine, goat, chicken, duck,
turkey, goose, or any other livestock or poultry except as in the manner
provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Enclosures. Any person desiring to keep any of the animals specified
in division (A) above shall keep the animal in an enclosure which will not
permit the animal to escape, and it shall be constructed in a secure and
sanitary manner.
   (C)   Application. Any person desiring to keep any of the animals specified
in division (A) above within the limits of the city shall make application to
the City Council for a permit to do so, which application shall first have been
presented to the Board of Health and Planning and Zoning Commission for its
approval or disapproval.
   (D)   Permits. Upon the presentation to the City Council of such application
as specified in division (C) above, together with the recommendation of the
Board of Health and Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council may issue
to such applicant a permit to keep such animals listed in division (A) above
within the limits of the city; but such permit shall be for no definite length
of time and may be terminated at any time complaint is made to the Board of
Health that such enclosure is not secure or that the enclosure is unsanitary or
at any time that the Board of Health deems the enclosure unsanitary, the permit
to be revoked only by the City Council. A conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction of the violation of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter
shall automatically terminate such permit.
   (E)   Manner of keeping. No person shall keep any dog, cat, bird, or any of
the animals specified in division (A) above in an unsanitary place or condition
or in a manner resulting in objectionable odors, or in such a way as to
constitute a nuisance or disturbance by reason of barking, howling, fighting,
or other noise, or in such a way as to permit the animal to annoy, injure, or
endanger any person or property.
   (F)   Regulation of horses, similar animals, limitations.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a horse, burro,
donkey, or ox to cross or travel upon any public property, including, but not
limited to, sidewalks, boulevards, parks, school grounds, athletic fields, or
cemeteries. Streets and alleys are exempt from the provisions of this division
(F).
      (2)   Any person in violation of division (F)(1) above shall be required
to pay all expense of repair or restoration required to repair damage to public
lands, in addition to punishment as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 12.2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or portion of a main building
which is located on the same lot as the main building and the use of which is
clearly incidental to the use of the main building.
   ANIMAL. Without limitation, livestock, rodents, dogs, cats, birds, reptiles,
and other animals.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any officer of the city’s Police Department, Peace
Officer, and any Animal Control Officer appointed or contracted by the city.
   ANIMAL ENCLOSURE. Any building, or portion thereof, structure, or area
including pens, dog houses, kennels, and outside runs that are principally used
or designed for use as a place for the keeping of animals. For purposes of this
section, an electronic pet containment system shall not be deemed to be an
ANIMAL ENCLOSURE.
   COMMERCIAL KENNEL. A place where more than two dogs or other animals over
six months of age are kept, and where the business of selling, boarding,
breeding, showing, treating, or grooming dogs or other animals is conducted.
   DOMESTICATED ANIMAL. An animal domesticated by humans so as to live and
breed in a tame condition.
   ELECTRONIC PET CONTAINMENT SYSTEMS. A system created by the installation of
conductors on the ground or under the ground which emit or cause to be emitted
an electronic signal for the purpose of confining animals within a
predetermined area.
   IMPOUND. Seize and hold in legal custody.
   LIVESTOCK. Farm animals kept for use, pleasure, or profit, including,
without limitation, horses, mules, sheep, goats, cattle, swine, and fowl.
   OWN. To own, harbor, keep, or have custody of an animal or be the parent or
guardian of a person under 18 years of age who owns, harbors, keeps, or has
custody of an animal.
   OWNER. Any person who shall own, harbor, keep, or have custody of an animal
or the parent or guardian of a person under 18 years of age who shall own,
harbor, keep, or have custody of an animal.
   PICKET. To restrain an animal by means of a chain, leash, or other
attachment to a fixed object, thereby confining the animal to a determined
area.
   REAR YARD. A portion of an improved lot between the principal building
located on such lot and the rear lines of the lot, which space is unoccupied
except for accessory buildings and the lateral boundaries of which space are
coterminous with the lateral boundaries of such lot.
(Prior Code, § 12.3)
§ 90.04 IMPOUNDING.
   The Animal Control Officer, police officers, community service officers, or
other person or persons designated by the Council may impound any animal found,
or, by complaint of the city, believed to be, in violation of this section.
   (A)   Notice. If the identity of the owner of an impounded animal is known,
the impounder of such animal shall notify such owner as soon after such
impounding as is reasonably possible. If the identity of the owner of an
impounded animal is not known, the impounder of such animal, within 24 hours of
such impounding, shall file an impounding notice describing the animal and
stating the date and place where it was seized. Such notice shall be filed at
the animal pound, if any, and the city’s Police Department.
   (B)   Redemption. Any animal impounded for a reason other than rabies
observation or for biting a person in violation of §
90.08 may be redeemed from the animal pound by its owner within ten days of
impounding by paying to the city the redemption fees in the amounts set forth
herein, and a license fee if the animal is required to be licensed and is
unlicensed. The Police Department shall release any redeemed animal to its
owner.
   (C)   Animal disposal. The Animal Control Officer may dispose of any animal
either alive or deceased upon:
      (1)   The request of its owner;
      (2)   The payment to the city of a fee in the amount set forth herein or
as from time to time set by the city; and
      (3)   The receipt by the city of a liability release signed by such
animal’s owner.
   (D)   Disposition of unredeemed animals.
      (1)   Any animal not redeemed within ten days after impounding may be
sold at a reasonable price which shall be not less than the amount of fees
which the owner would have to pay to redeem the animal. During the three-day
period preceding such a sale of an animal, other than a dog or a cat, a notice
of the time and place of such sale shall be posted by the Animal Control
Officer in at least three conspicuous places within the city and at the animal
pound. If the animal is not sold on the date set forth on such notice, the city
may sell the animal as soon thereafter as possible without further notice. The
proceeds of the sale shall be applied first to the payment of the expenses of
impounding and selling the animal and the balance shall be placed in the
General Fund.
      (2)   Any animal not redeemed within ten days after impounding and not
sold as provided herein shall either be painlessly disposed of or surrendered
for research purposes to any educational or scientific institution licensed
pursuant to state law.
   (E)   Objection by owner; court order.
      (1)   Any owner may object to the impounding or disposition of the animal
by signing and filing an objection with the city within five days after the
action objected to was taken. Within 20 days after impounding of an animal, if
the animal is not redeemed or if the city is unable to reach agreement with the
owner regarding the keeping of the animal in a manner consistent with the
provisions of this section, the city may bring an action in the appropriate
court by serving on the owner a complaint setting forth the violation of this
section which caused the city to take action.
      (2)   The court may then order:
         (a)   The return of the animal to its owner with or without payment of
redemption fees by the owner;
         (b)   The disposal, destruction, or sale of the animal;
         (c)   If the animal has been improperly disposed or sold, the payment
to the owner of the reasonable value of the animal;
         (d)   Imposition on the owner of the same penalty as that for
commission of a misdemeanor; or
         (e)   Any two or more of the foregoing or any other remedy the court
determines just and proper.
      (3)   When an objection has been filed with the city, the city shall not
dispose of or sell the animal referred to in the objection if it is still in
the pound, but shall within ten days after filing of such objection, either
return the animal to the owner, without liability on the owner’s part for any
fees, or keep it, pending agreement with the owner or order of the court as
provided above. If the animal has been disposed of or sold without a court
order, the city after such filing shall either pay to the owner the reasonable
value of the animal or begin the action described in this division (E).
(Prior Code, § 12.4)
§ 90.05 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   License required. Any owner of a dog or cat over six months of age
shall secure a license for such dog or cat from the city.
   (B)   Proof of vaccination. Proof of rabies vaccination must be presented at
the time of initial licensing and each subsequent license renewal.
   (C)   License fee. Each owner of a dog shall pay the amount set forth herein
or as from time to time adopted by the city as required for the initial
licensing fee, the renewal fee, the neutered dog fee, or the duplicate fee. The
renewal fee shall be due on or before January 1 of each year.
   (D)   Receipts and tags. Upon payment of the license fee, as required by
division (C) above, the city shall deliver an original receipt to the owner and
retain a duplicate of such receipt. At the time of initial licensing, the city
shall also deliver a metallic tag to the owner of the dog.
      (1)   The owner shall cause the tag to be fastened to the collar of the
dog with a permanent metal fastening in a manner so that the tag may be easily
seen by the officers of the city.
      (2)   If a tag is lost, a duplicate tag may be issued by the city upon
presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the
current year. The city shall charge a fee for each duplicate tag in the amount
set forth in this section.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit the
tag or to take from any dog such a tag legally placed upon it by its owner with
the intent to place it upon another dog, or to place such tag upon another dog.
      (4)   The tag shall not be transferable and no refunds shall be made on
any dog license fee because of leaving the city or death of dog before the
expiration of the license period.
(Prior Code, § 12.5) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 COMMERCIAL KENNEL.
   (A)   License required. No person shall maintain a commercial kennel without
first having obtained a license pursuant to the provisions of this section.
However, prior to issuing a commercial kennel license under this provision of
the code, the applicant for a commercial kennel must also first comply with the
planning and zoning provisions of the city code and obtain planning and zoning
approval. Any such approval shall include appropriate conditions to minimize
noise, visual effects and screening, and comply with §§
154.009,
154.180, and
154.230.
   (B)   Kennel license application. The application for a commercial kennel
license or renewal thereof shall contain or have attached thereto, in addition
to the information required by this code, a detailed plan and description of
the premises and structures wherein the kennel is to be operated, unless the
application is for renewal of a previous license and no change in the premises
or structure has been made or is contemplated to be made.
   (C)   Kennel license fee. The fee for a commercial kennel license shall be
in the amount as determined by the Council from time to time, except under no
circumstances shall said license be less than $2,500 per annum.
   (D)   Condition of kennel. A commercial kennel shall be kept in a clean,
sanitary, and well-ventilated condition at all times, and shall be open to
inspection by the Sanitarian, the Animal Control Officer, or police officer of
the city at all reasonable times.
   (E)   Outside runs prohibited. No commercial kennel shall provide outside
runs or penned areas designed for the confinement of animals outside of the
principal building.
(Prior Code, § 12.6) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 RABIES VACCINATION.
   All dogs and cats over six months of age must have current rabies
vaccination. Dogs must wear their current vaccination tags at all times.
(Prior Code, § 12.7) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 IMPOUNDING, QUARANTINE, OR DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Bites. Any animal which has bitten or is reported to have bitten a
person shall be quarantined under the care of a licensed veterinarian for ten
days, or if proof of current rabies vaccination is presented, the animal may be
quarantined at the owner’s residence for ten days. When quarantined at the
owner’s residence, the animal must be kept separate from other animals and be
kept within a building or fenced area at all times unless on a leash held by an
adult.
   (B)   Quarantine. Any quarantined animal shall be inspected by a licensed
veterinarian at the end of the ten day quarantine period. If such animal
becomes ill or dies during the quarantine period, the Animal Control Officer
shall be notified immediately and the animal, if alive, shall be quarantined
under the care of a licensed veterinarian, and if deceased, shall be delivered
to the Animal Control Officer for rabies examination.
   (C)   Inspection of quarantined animal. The owner of any quarantined animal
shall deliver to the city the “notice of quarantine” served on the owner by the
city at the time such quarantine is established, duly completed and signed by a
licensed veterinarian acting as the inspecting veterinarian. Such notice shall
be delivered to the Animal Control Officer not earlier than ten days, or later
than 14 days, from the date of the establishment of the quarantine. If the
inspecting veterinarian finds the animal to be rabid, it shall be destroyed. If
the inspecting veterinarian finds the animal to be not rabid, the animal shall
be returned to its owner provided that the owner shall first pay the costs set
out in this chapter as well as reimburse the city for any actual out-of-pocket
expenses incurred by the city.
   (D)   Impounding or boarding fee. The owner of any animal that has been
quarantined shall pay any impounding or boarding fees and any costs incurred
for veterinarian services.
   (E)   Destruction of animal. Any animal which has bitten or is reported to
have bitten a person may be destroyed immediately if the animal cannot be
impounded after reasonable effort, or cannot be impounded without serious risk
to persons attempting to impound it.
(Prior Code, § 12.8)
§ 90.09 MUZZLING PROCLAMATION.
   (A)   Upon written advice that a dog found in the city is infected with
rabies or hydrophobia and that the safety and general welfare of the public is
at risk, the Administrator may order, by proclamation:
      (1)   That all dogs be muzzled when off the premises of the owner; and
      (2)   That all un-muzzled dogs found off the premises of the owner be
immediately impounded.
   (B)   Forty-eight hours after the proclamation has been published, either by
posting or printing in the official newspaper, the Administrator may further
order that all un-muzzled dogs found off the premises of the owner shall be
impounded and destroyed, except that an officer may immediately destroy such an
un-muzzled dog if it cannot be impounded with reasonable effort. Any dog
impounded during the first 48 hours after the publishing of any such
proclamation, if claimed within ten days and if not infected with hydrophobia
or rabies, shall be returned to its owner after payment of all fees and costs
set out in this chapter as well as reimburse the city for any actual out-of-
pocket expenses incurred by the city, but after said ten days, such dog may be
destroyed.
(Prior Code, § 12.9)
§ 90.10 SALE OF GIFT OF ANIMALS FOR ADVERTISING OR PROMOTIONAL PURPOSES.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or give away for advertising or
promotional purposes any animal less than 30 days old as a pet or novelty.
(Prior Code, § 12.10) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS REGULATED.
   No person shall keep any rabbits, mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, or other
rodents, ferrets, or any bird on any premises used for residential purposes
except in a metal cage so constructed that it may be completely and easily
cleaned and that the animal or animals kept therein are completely enclosed and
protected from children and animals on the outside. Such animals at all times
shall be kept within the dwelling or an accessory building.
(Prior Code, § 12.11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 ANIMAL ENCLOSURE.
   An animal enclosure, whether now existing or hereafter constructed, shall
not exceed 300 square feet in area and shall be placed only in the rear yard
and no closer than 20 feet to any property line.
(Prior Code, § 12.12)
§ 90.13 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep within the city:
   (A)   Any livestock;
   (B)   Any mammal belonging to the order of Carnivore except dogs, cats, and
ferrets. For the purposes of this section, the bloodline of an individual
animal must comprise not less than 51% domestic breeds;
   (C)   Honeybees and apiaries; and
   (D)   Venomous snakes.
(Prior Code, § 12.13) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No owner shall allow any animal to run at large on any property without the
consent of the owner or possessor of the property.
(Prior Code, § 12.14) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.15 CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   Animal in heat. Any animal in heat shall be kept confined in a manner
which will prevent its escape and access thereto by other animals.
   (B)   Fierce animal. Any domesticated animal of a fierce, dangerous, or
vicious nature or disposition shall be confined:
      (1)   In a manner which will prevent its escape and its causing harm to
persons; and
      (2)   In a place from which it cannot be released except by its owner and
except when muzzled and under the control of a competent person.
(Prior Code, § 12.15)
§ 90.16 ANIMALS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   Animals which chase vehicles. Any animal which habitually chases motor
vehicles on public streets, or threatens, worries, chases, or attacks
pedestrians, bicyclists, or other persons on public property, public areas, or
private property other than property owned or possessed by the owner of the
animal shall be deemed a public nuisance.
   (B)   Attacking animals. Any domesticated animal which attacks, wounds,
worries, injures, or kills any domestic animal or wildlife shall be deemed a
public nuisance.
   (C)   Animals which bite. Any animal which has bitten a person, other than
its owner or a member of its owner’s immediate family shall be deemed a public
nuisance. Such animal shall be quarantined pursuant to this chapter and shall
also be subject to the procedures and penalties set out in this chapter.
   (D)   Animals which damage property. Any animal which damages plantings or
structures or defecates on public property or on private property without the
consent of the owner or possessor of the property shall be deemed a public
nuisance.
   (E)   Animals running at large. Any animal described in this section found
running at large shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer or police
officers in the manner described in this section; provided that such animal may
be immediately destroyed by the Animal Control Officer or by a police officer
if it cannot be impounded after reasonable effort, or cannot be impounded
without serious risk to persons attempting to impound it.
(Prior Code, § 12.16)
§ 90.17 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS.
   (A)   Generally. No more than two dogs and two cats in the aggregate which
are over six months of age shall be kept or harbored at any place in the city,
except in a pet shop, animal hospital, or commercial kennel, unless a permit
has been issued pursuant to this section by the Council.
   (B)   Permit application and hearing. Persons who wish to keep or harbor
more than the number of dogs or cats permitted by this section may apply for a
permit from the Council. After the receipt of the permit application and the
fee as set forth in this chapter, the Council shall conduct a public hearing
regarding the application. A notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of
the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days before the date of the hearing to
each owner of property situated wholly or partly within 200 feet of the
property to which the application relates.
   (C)   Issuance of permit. After hearing the oral and written views of all
interested persons, the Council shall make its decision. The Council shall not
grant a permit unless it finds that keeping or harboring more than the allowed
number of dogs or cats on the applicant’s property:
      (1)   Will not be a nuisance; or
      (2)   Will not be detrimental to the public health and safety of the
applicant or other persons in the vicinity.
   (D)   Permit not transferable. No permit may be transferred to any person or
place by the person or from the place to whom and for which the permit was
granted. The permit shall be granted only for the dogs or cats described in the
application. No dogs or cats described in the application may be replaced by
the applicant without first obtaining a new permit from the Council.
   (E)   Conditions and restrictions. The Council may impose conditions and
restrictions as it deems necessary for the protection of the public interest
and adjacent properties and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
section and other applicable provisions of this code. Each permit issued
pursuant to this section shall remain in effect only so long as the conditions
and restrictions imposed by the Council are observed and not violated.
(Prior Code, § 12.17)
§ 90.18 NOISE.
   (A)   Disturbing peace and quiet. No person owning, operating, having charge
of, or occupying any building or premises shall keep or allow to be kept any
animal which shall, by any noise, unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of
any person in the vicinity. The phrase UNREASONABLY DISTURB THE PEACE AND QUIET
shall include, but is not limited to, the creation of any noise by any animal
which can be heard by any person, including the Animal Control Officer or a law
enforcement officer, from a location outside of the building or premises where
the animal is being kept and which animal noise occurs repeatedly over at least
a five-minute period of time with one minute or less lapse of time between each
animal noise during the five-minute period.
   (B)   Complaint. Any person may call or deliver a complaint to the Animal
Control Officer stating facts and circumstances of an alleged violation of this
section. The Animal Control Officer shall investigate such complaint. If a
violation occurs in the presence of the Animal Control Officer, a summons may
be issued. If probable cause of a violation exists, which violation did not
occur in the presence of the Animal Control Officer, all reports, witness
statements, and evidence may be submitted to the city prosecuting attorney for
a formal complaint.
(Prior Code, § 12.18) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.19 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DOGS.
   (A)   Off premises of owner. No dog shall be permitted to be off the
premises of its owner unless it is restrained with a leash measuring six feet
or less in length, provided that this requirement shall not apply to any
portion of a park which has been designated by the Administrator as an area
where dogs are not required to be restrained by a leash.
   (B)   Dogs which damage property. No owner of a dog shall permit the dog to
damage any lawn, garden, or other private or public property, or to defecate on
public property or private property, without the consent of the owner or
possessor of the property. It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog to
remove any feces left by such dog and to dispose of such feces in a sanitary
manner. It shall also be the duty of each owner of a dog when such dog is off
the owner’s premises to have in possession a device or equipment for the
picking up and removal of dog feces; at a minimum, this equipment must include
at least two bags. The provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to a
guide dog accompanying a blind person or to a dog when used in police or rescue
activities by or with the permission of the city. This division (B) shall not
be construed, by implication or otherwise, to allow dogs to be where they are
otherwise prohibited by this code.
   (C)   Picketing. No dog shall be picketed in such a manner as to create a
nuisance by reason of odor or unreasonably disturbing the peace and quiet, as
defined in the city code, or which allows it to occupy any area within 20 feet
of a property line.
   (D)   Electronic pet containment systems. No electronic pet containment
system shall be installed which allows any animal confined by the system to
occupy any area within ten feet of a public sidewalk or within ten feet of the
traveled portion of a public street if there is no public sidewalk. Electronic
pet containment systems installed within any public right-of-way or public
easement shall be owned and maintained by the owner of the system. The Engineer
may direct the removal or relocation of an electronic pet containment system
from any public right-of-way or public easement at the sole cost and expense of
the owner of the electronic pet containment system if the Engineer determines
the system interferes with the public’s use of the right-of-way or easement.
The cost of any repair to electronic pet containment systems which are damaged
due to the public’s use of a public right-of-way or public easement shall be
borne solely by the owner of the system.
   (E)   Clean yard and enclosure. A dog owner shall regularly clean any yard
occupied by the dog, or dog enclosure occupied by the dog, whether now existing
or hereafter constructed, and any area in which the dog has been picketed, and
shall not permit feces or food scraps to remain for more than 24 hours.
   (F)   Dangerous dogs.
      (1)   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 347 and M.S. §§ 343.20 to 343.40, as
they may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference and
adopted as part of this section. The persons authorized to enforce this section
shall also enforce the provisions of M.S. Ch. 347 and M.S. §§ 343.20 to 343.40,
as they may be amended from time to time. A violation of the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 347 and M.S. §§ 343.20 to 343.40, as they may be amended from time to time,
shall also be a violation of this section. Incorporation of said statutes shall
not be a release by the city of any powers or authority which it has without
such incorporation.
      (2)   The Animal Control Officer may declare a dog to be a potentially
dangerous dog as defined by M.S. § 347.50, as it may be amended from time to
time. A notice declaring a dog to be potentially dangerous shall be served upon
the owner of the dog either personally or by certified mail. The Animal Control
Officer may require that a potentially dangerous dog be confined or restrained
when on the owner’s property and restrained and muzzled when off the owner’s
property.
      (3)   The Police Chief may declare a dangerous dog under M.S. Ch. 347, as
it may be amended from time to time. Said declaration may be appealed to the
City Council for a public hearing.
      (4)   A person who deems himself or herself aggrieved by an alleged error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
officer in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, may appeal to
the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk-Treasurer
within ten days after the date of such order, requirement, decision, or
determination. The appeal shall fully state the order to be appealed and the
relevant facts of the matter.
      (5)   The City Council shall hear such appeal within 30 days of receipt.
Mailed notice of such hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the
date of the hearing to the owner of the dog and to the owners of all property
within 250 feet of the property where such dog is usually kept. The Council
shall make its decision at such hearing or any continuation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 12.19) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 OPENING POUND OR CITY VEHICLE.
   No person except an officer duly authorized by law shall break open or aid
or assist in, counsel, or advise, the breaking open of a pound or city vehicle
used in the enforcement of this chapter, or take or let out or attempt to take
or let out, any animal placed therein.
(Prior Code, § 12.20) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Take or attempt to take from any officer, any animal seized by the
officer in compliance with this section; or
   (B)   Interfere in any manner with such officer in the discharge of the
duties under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.21) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 EXCEPTION.
   Any dog under the control of a public law enforcement agency and used in law
enforcement activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.22)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Assessable current services
   
91.02   Tree diseases and shade tree pest control
Nuisances
   
91.15   Public nuisance
   
91.16   Public nuisances affecting health
   
91.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
91.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
91.19   Nuisance parking and storage
   
91.20   Inoperable motor vehicles
   
91.21   Building maintenance and appearance
   
91.22   Duties of city officers
   
91.23   Abatement
   
91.24   Recovery of cost
Weeds
   
91.35   Short title
   
91.36   Jurisdiction
   
91.37   Definitions; exclusions
   
91.38   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like
   
91.39   Filing complaint
   
91.40   Notice of violations
   
91.41   Appeals
   
91.42   Abatement by city
   
91.43   Liability
Open Burning
   
91.60   Definitions
   
91.61   Prohibited materials
   
91.62   Permit required for open burning
   
91.63   Purposes allowed for open burning
   
91.64   Permit application for open burning; permit fees
   
91.65   Permit process for open burning
   
91.66   Permit holder responsibility
   
91.67   Revocation of open burning permit
   
91.68   Denial of open burning permit
   
91.69   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
91.70   Rules and laws adopted by reference
   
91.71   External solid fuel-fired heating devices (outdoor wood burning stoves)
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CURRENT SERVICE. Shall mean one or more of the following: snow, ice, or
rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous
building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they may amended from
time to time; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling,
street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust treatment of streets;
repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of
unsound and insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property;
and the operation of a street lighting system.
   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.
      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk
safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt or
rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.
      (2)   Removal by city. The City Clerk or other person designated by the
City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt
and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after any matter has been
deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The City Clerk or other
designated person shall keep a record showing the cost of removal adjacent to
each separate lot and parcel.
   (C)   Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates
public health or safety hazards from private property under the following
provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing
the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against
each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the
City Clerk.
   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city
installs or repairs water service lines serving private property, the City
Clerk shall keep a record of the total cost of the installation or repair
against the property.
   (E)   Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment,
object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be
liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a
result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment
or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any
vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum
weight permitted by statute or this code. When the driver is not the owner of
the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but is operating, driving or
moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner
and the driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any such damage. Any
person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by that act damages
any public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall
be collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended
from time to time.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 TREE DISEASES AND SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL.
   (A)   Declaration of policy. The health of the trees in the city is
threatened by shade tree pests, and the loss or ill health of trees growing
upon public and private property substantially depreciates the value of
property within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare
and convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with M.S. §§
89.001, 89.01 and 89.51 through 89.64, as those sections may be amended from
time to time, the provisions of this section are adopted to attempt to control
and prevent the spread of these shade tree pests.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The city shall have control of all street trees, shrubs,
and other plantings now or hereafter in any street, park, public right-of-way
or easement, or other public place within the city limits, and shall have the
power to plant, care for, maintain, remove, and replace such trees, shrubs and
other plantings.
   (C)   Declaration of a shade tree pest.   The Council may declare any
vertebrate or invertebrate animal,   plant pathogen, or plant threatening to
cause significant damage to a shade tree or community forest as defined by M.S.
§ 89.001, as it may be amended from time to time, to be a shade tree pest and
prescribe control measures to effectively eradicate, control or manage the
shade tree pest including necessary timelines for action.
   (D)   Public nuisances declared. A shade tree pest declared by Council
occurring within a declared control zone is a public nuisance.
   (E)   Shade tree pest nuisances are unlawful. It is unlawful for any person
to permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on any
premises the person owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be
abated as provided in this section.
   (F)   Definition of control areas. Upon declaring a shade tree pest, the
Council may define one or more locations within the geographic boundaries of
the city to be within a shade tree pest control area provided such locations
are characterized by biologic, composition, environmental and size factors
favorable to successful application of the control measures prescribed by
Council.
   (G)   Tree Inspector. The Council may appoint a Tree Inspector to coordinate
the activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of damage by
shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector will recommend to the Council the details
of any program for the declaration, control and prevention of shade tree pests.
The Tree Inspector is authorized to enforce or cause to be enforced the tasks
incident to such a program adopted by the Council. The term TREE INSPECTOR
includes any person designated by Council or the Tree Inspector to carry out
activities authorized in this section.
   (H)   Abatement of shade tree pest nuisances.
      (1)   In abating a nuisance declared by ordinance under divisions (B) and
(C), the organism, condition or plant and any tree, wood or material identified
as injurious to the health of shade trees shall be removed or effectively
treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the
shade tree pest. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance
with the control measures and areas prescribed by ordinance according to
divisions (C) and (K) and (O) .
      (2)   In addition, should the appropriate abatement procedure be removal
and the tree(s) and/or hedge(s) be within the limits of a highway in a rural
area within the city’s jurisdiction, M.S. § 160.22, as it may be amended from
time to time, shall be complied with as necessary.
   (I)   Reporting discovery of shade tree pest. Any owner or occupier of land
or any person engaged in tree trimming or removal who becomes aware of the
existence of public nuisance caused by a shade tree pest as defined under
division (C) shall report the same to the city.
   (J)   Registration of tree care firms. Any person, firm or corporation that
provides tree care, tree trimming or removal of trees, limbs, branches, brush,
or shrubs for hire must be registered with the Minnesota Commissioner of
Agriculture under M.S. § 18G.07, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (K)   Inspection and application of control measures.
      (1)   The Tree Inspector is authorized to inspect premises and places
within the city to determine whether shade tree pests exist thereon and to
investigate all reported incidents of shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector is
authorized to take all reasonable measures to prevent the maintenance of public
nuisances and may enforce the provisions relating to abatement in this section.
Diagnosis of shade tree pests may be by the presence of commonly recognized
symptoms or by tests as may be recommended by the Commissioner of the Minnesota
Department of Agriculture or the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources or other reliable means.
      (2)   Except in situations of imminent danger to human life and safety,
the Tree Inspector shall not enter private property for the purpose of
inspecting or preventing maintenance of public nuisances without the permission
of the owner, resident or other person in control of the property, unless the
Tree Inspector has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
      (3)   No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with the Tree
Inspector acting under his or her authority while engaged in activities
authorized by this section.
   (L)   Standard abatement procedure. Except as provided in divisions (M) and
(O), whenever a Tree Inspector determines with reasonable certainty that a
public nuisance as described by this section is being maintained or exists on
premises in the city, the Tree Inspector is authorized to abate a public
nuisance according to the following procedure.
      (1)   The Tree Inspector will notify in writing the owner of record or
occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated
or abated. The notice may be given in person or by mail. Failure of any party
to receive the mail does not invalidate the service of the notice. A copy of
the notice shall be filed with the City Clerk.
      (2)   The notice of abatement shall state that unless the public nuisance
is abated by the owner or occupant, it will be abated by the city at the
expense of the owner or occupant. The notice shall specify the control measures
to be taken to abate the nuisance, and provide a reasonable amount of time to
abate the nuisance. The notice will also state that the owner or occupant has
the right to appeal the determination that a public nuisance exists by
submitting a request in writing to the City Clerk within seven days after
service of the notice, or before the date by which abatement must be completed,
whichever comes first.
      (3)   If no timely appeal is submitted, and the notice of abatement and
its prescribed control measures are not complied with within the time provided
by the notice or any additional time granted, the Tree Inspector or designated
person shall have the authority to obtain permission or an administrative
search warrant, enter the property and carry out abatement in accordance with
the notice of abatement.
   (M)   High cost abatement. If the Tree Inspector determines that the cost of
abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good faith
estimate, the written notice referred to in division (L) must provide that if
the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of time provided, the
matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing. The date, time, and
location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.
   (N)   Appeal procedure. If the City Clerk receives a written request for a
hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance in fact exists, the City
Council shall hold a hearing within seven calendar days following receipt by
the Clerk of the written request. At least three days notice shall be given to
the individual who made the written request for the hearing. The Council may
modify the abatement notice or extend the time by which abatement must be
completed. Each owner, agent of the owner, occupant and lienholder of the
subject property or properties in attendance, if any, shall be given the
opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. After holding the hearing, the
City Council may issue an order requiring abatement of the nuisance.
   (O)   Abatement procedure in event of imminent danger.
      (1) If the Tree Inspector determines that the danger of infestation to
other shade trees is imminent and delay in control measures may put public
health, safety or welfare in immediate danger, the Tree Inspector may provide
for abatement without following (L) or (M). The Tree Inspector must reasonably
attempt to notify the owner or occupant of the affected property of the
intended action and the right to appeal the abatement and any cost recovery at
the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
      (2)   Immediate Abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition
which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
   (P)   Recovery of cost of abatement; liability and assessment.
      (1)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the
city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement,
including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the
cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall prepare a bill for the
cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due
and payable at the office of the City Clerk.
      (2)   After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may
be amended from time to time, the City Clerk may list the total unpaid charges
along with all other charges as well as other charges for current services to
be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The
City Council may then certify the charges against the property under that
statute and other pertinent statutes to the County Auditor for collection along
with current taxes the following year or in annual installments as the City
Council may determine in each case.
   (Q)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which
may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this section,
including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a
sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which
a violation occurs or continues.
      (3)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this section shall not subject the officer or employee
to the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (4)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this section,
the City Council or any official designated by it, may institute appropriate
proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
   (R)   Declared shade tree pests, control measures and control areas.
      (1)   Oak Wilt. Oak Wilt is declared a shade tree pest and is defined as
any living or dead tree, log, firewood, limb, branch, stump or other portion of
a tree from any species of the genus Quercus existing within the control area
defined that has bark attached and that exceeds three inches in diameter or ten
inches in circumference and contains to any degree any spore or reproductive
structures of the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum. Control measures prescribed
for abating Oak Wilt Disease are:
         (a)   Installation of a root graft barrier. A root graft barrier can
be ordered installed to prevent the underground spread of Oak Wilt Disease. The
city will mark the location of the root graft
barrier. The barrier disrupts transmission of the fungus within the shared
vascular systems of root grafted trees. The barrier is created by excavating or
vibratory plowing a line at least 42 inches deep between any oak tree infected
with Oak Wilt Disease and each nearby and apparently healthy oak tree within 50
feet of the infected tree.
         (b)   Removal and disposal of trees on property zoned for residential
and commercial use. On property that is zoned residential and commercial the
city may mark for removal trees that have the potential to produce spores of
the fungus Ceratocvstis fagacearum. After, and in no case before the
installation of the root graft barrier and no later than May 1 of the year
following infection all marked trees must be felled. The stump from such felled
trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller,
must be completely debarked. If, however, after the city prescribes the
location for a root graft barrier, the city determines that installation of the
barrier is impossible because of the presence of pavement or obstructions such
as a septic system or utility line, the city may mark for removal all oak trees
whether living or dead, infected or not and located between an infected tree
and the marked barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and disposed
of no later than May 1 of the year following infection. The stump from such
felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if
taller, must be completely debarked.
         (c)   Removal and disposal of trees on all other property. On all
other property the city may mark for removal all oak trees whether living or
dead, infected or not and located between an infected tree and the marked
barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and disposed of no later
than May 1 of the year following infection. The stump from such felled trees
must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller, must be
completely debarked.
         (d)   Wood disposal. All wood more than three inches in diameter or
ten inches in circumference from such felled trees must be disposed of by
burying or debarking or chipping or sawing into wane-free lumber or by
splitting into firewood, stacking the firewood and immediately covering the
woodpile with unbroken 4-mil or thicker plastic sheeting that is sealed into
the ground until October 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in
which the tree was felled or by burning before May 1 of the year following
infection. Wood chips from infected trees may be stockpiled or immediately used
in the landscape.
         (e)   The control area for Oak Wilt Disease is defined as all lands
within the boundaries of the city.
      (2)   Emerald Ash Borer. Emerald Ash Borer is declared a shade tree pest
and is defined as an insect that attacks and kills ash trees. The adults are
small, iridescent green beetles that live outside of trees during the summer
months. The larvae are grub or worm-like and live underneath the bark of ash
trees.
         (a)   Control measures prescribed for abating Emerald Ash Borer are
those provided in the document, Guidelines to Slow the Growth and Spread of
Emerald Ash Borer from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.
         (b)   Definition of control areas. The control area for Emerald Ash
Borer is defined as all lands within the boundaries of the city.
      (3)   Dutch Elm Disease. Dutch Elm Disease is declared a shade tree pest
and is defined as a disease of elm trees caused by the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi
or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi, and includes any living or dead tree, log, firewood,
limb, branch, stump or other portion of a tree from any species of the genus
Ulmus existing within the control area defined that has bark attached and that
exceeds three inches in diameter or ten inches in circumference and could
contain bark beetles or any spore or reproductive structures of the fungus
Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi.
         (a)   Control measures prescribed for abating Dutch Elm Disease are:
            1.   Use of fungicide. Fungicides may be effective in preventing
Dutch elm disease when injected into living trees that do not already show
symptoms of Dutch elm disease. Fungicide injections on private lands are
optional and, if performed, are at the landowner’s expense.
            2.   Removal and disposal of trees. Prompt removal of diseased
trees or branches reduces breeding sites for elm bark beetles and eliminates
the source of Dutch elm disease fungus. Trees that wilt before July 15 must be
removed within 20 days of detection [alternative: 30 days]. Trees that wilt
after July 15 must be removed by April 1 of the following year. Diseased trees
not promptly removed will be removed by the city at the landowner's expense.
Wood may be retained for use as firewood or sawlogs if it is de-barked or
covered from April 15 to October 15 with 4 mil plastic. The edges of the cover
must be buried or sealed to the ground.
         (b)   Definition of control areas. The control area for Dutch Elm
Disease is defined as all lands within the boundaries of the city.
NUISANCES
§ 91.15 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   A person must not act, or fail to act in a manner that is or causes a public
nuisance. For purpose of this chapter, a person who does any of the following
is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Does any other act or omission declared by law or §§
91.16,
91.17 or
91.18, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no
sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license.
   (L)   All unnecessary and annoying vibrations.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized and permitted by federal, state or local law;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor
is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and
other property used for maintaining that place. For the purposes of this
section INTOXICATING LIQUOR shall mean any ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented,
spirituous, vinous or malt beverage containing more than ½% alcohol by volume;
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal
purpose.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as it may
be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into
this code;
   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any recreational device
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
   (F)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly
audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person
nearby. Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line
of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of 50
feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this section;
   (G)   No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people
giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of
another person. When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating
such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than
the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to
disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a
police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has
knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
disturbance is stopped;
   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties;
   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation;
   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;
   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance;
   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone.
   (V)   (1)   Noises prohibited.  
         (a)   General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made
any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of
any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property's
value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of
this section.
         (b)   Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle so
out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling, or other noise.
         (c)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud or
excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.
         (d)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like. No person
shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for the
production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible manner as
to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person nearby.
Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if
the source is located outside a structure or building, shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
         (e)   Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like. No person shall
create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church or hospital when the noise unreasonably
interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its
occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such
institution.
      (2)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.
         (a)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn
mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or
other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this
provision.
         (b)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or
refuse in any residential district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
any weekend or holiday.
         (c)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
      (3)   Noise impact statements. The Council may require any person
applying for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license for any
structure, operation, process, installation or alteration or project that may
be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a
form prescribed by the Council. It shall evaluate each such statement and take
its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving the license or permit
applied for or the zoning change requested.
   (W) Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting
is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one footcandle when
abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles,
materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes
in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public
nuisance because it (a) obstructs views on streets and private property, (b)
creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas, (c) prevents the full use of
residential streets for residential parking, (d) introduces commercial
advertising signs into areas where commercial advertising signs are otherwise
prohibited, (e) decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of
their property and neighborhood, and (f) otherwise adversely affects property
values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.
      (1)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage
of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent
structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front-yard area
of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front property
line.
      (2)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage
of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials, including all
materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property,
unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the following requirements:
         (a)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be
parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except as otherwise
permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential characteristics of
the property. This maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional
guests who do not reside on the property.
         (b)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard
area must be on a paved or graveled parking surface or driveway area.
         (c)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on
residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that property.
Students who are away at school for periods of time but still claim the
property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the property.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.20 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Declaration of a nuisance. Any motor vehicles described in this
section constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the
community in that such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter
and breeding place for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and
well-being of children and citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if
released into the environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the
community.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle
which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for repair of
parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, kept
for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly
licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. § 168.13, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building
and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which does not
foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is permissible.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.21 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other structures that
have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance
detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances
because they (a) are unsightly, (b) decrease adjoining landowners and
occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and (c) adversely
affect property values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Standards. A building, fence or other structure is a public nuisance
if it does not comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes,
breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.
      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint
applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No
wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise
deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
         (a)   Any one wall or other flat surface; or
         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.
      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and
similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water.
All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.
      (7)   Chimneys, antennae, air vents, and other similar projections must
be structurally sound and in good repair. These projections must be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.
      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   For purposes of §§
91.22 and
91.23, the Police Department, or Sheriff or person designated by the City
Council, if the city has at the time no Police Department, may enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace officer or designated person shall
have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions
to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. Except in
emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police
officer or designated person shall enter private property for the purpose of
inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner,
resident or other person in control of the property, unless the officer or
person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
§ 91.23 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or occupant of the
premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises
is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or
occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be
served by posting it on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record
and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council
hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard
Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17
(Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Procedure. Whenever a peace officer or designated person determines
that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the premises in the
city, the officer or person designated may notify in writing the owner of
record or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be
taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified, the officer or designated person shall report that fact forthwith to
the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner
or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the
city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain an administrative search and
seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where
delay in abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements
set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section will permit a continuing
nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with
summary enforcement, the officer or designated person shall determine that a
public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that
delay in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health,
safety or welfare. The officer or designated person shall notify in writing the
occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the
city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the City
Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement. The City
Council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice
to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or
welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to
complete the procedure set forth in division (A) of this section, and may order
that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is not
immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.24 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city or a person who has caused a public nuisance on a property
not owned by that person shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of
the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount
shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as
it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or
safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk shall,
on or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the
total unpaid charges along with all other charges as well as other charges for
current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from
time to time against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are
attributable. The City Council may then spread the charges against the property
under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County
Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.
Penalty, see §
91.99
WEEDS
§ 91.35 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be cited as the “Weed Ordinance.”
§ 91.36 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or regulation or
county ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.
§ 91.37 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice served by the City Council or designated
city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance
violation that shall conform to M.S. § 18.83, Subd. 2, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      MEADOW VEGETATION. Grasses and flowering broad-leaf plants that are
native to, or adapted to, the state of Minnesota, and that are commonly found
in meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds as defined herein.
      PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal
title or a person having control over the property of another, such as a right-
of-way, easement, license or lease.
      WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION. Includes but is not limited to the
following:
         (a)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be
limited to: alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle,
Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed, French Weed, Hairy
Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle, Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge,
Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle, Poison
Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle,
Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild
Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;
         (b)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned,
sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive years;
         (c)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
         (d)   Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers,
or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches;
         (e)   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth
of annuals and perennial plants;
         (f)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants
or crops.
         (g)   Any other weed designated by M.S. § 18.77, Subd. 8, as it may be
amended from time to time, as noxious.
   (B)   In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have
been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being noxious or
detrimental plants.
§ 91.38 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or
disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other
uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice, is in
excess of 12 inches in height.
   (B)   These provisions shall not apply to an area established with meadow
vegetation if:
      (1)   The prior vegetation is eliminated and the meadow vegetation is
planted through transplanting or seed by human or mechanical means; and
      (2)   A sign is posted on the property in a location likely to be seen by
the public, advising that a meadow or prairie is being established. This sign
must be no smaller than ten inches square, no larger than one square foot, and
no higher than three feet tall.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.39 FILING COMPLAINT.
   Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located
within the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant matter in
violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint signed, dated and
filed with the City Clerk. If the city makes the complaint, an employee,
officer or Council Member of the city shall file the complaint in all respects
as set out above.
§ 91.40 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds in violation
of this subchapter, a person designated by the City Council shall make an
inspection and prepare a written report to the City Council regarding the
condition. The City Council, upon concluding that there is a probable belief
that this subchapter has been violated, shall forward written notification in
the form of a “Destruction Order” to the property owner or the person occupying
the property as that information is contained within the records of the City
Clerk or any other city agency. The notice shall be served in writing by
certified mail. The notice shall provide that within seven regular business
days after the receipt of the notice that the designated violation shall be
removed by the property owner or person occupying the property.
   (B)   (1)   All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with
the City Clerk.
      (2)   Certified mailing to the City Clerk or others is deemed filed on
the date of posting to the United States Postal Service.
§ 91.41 APPEALS.
   (A)   The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of objections
with the City Council within 48 hours of the notice, excluding weekends and
holidays, if the property owner contests the finding of the City Council. It is
the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that the matter in question
is shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops or is not otherwise in violation
of this subchapter, and should not be subject to destruction under the
subchapter.
   (B)   An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the City
Council and shall be decided by a majority vote of the Council Members in
attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the City
Council.
§ 91.42 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the
“Destruction Order” within seven regular business days and has not filed a
notice within 48 hours to the City Clerk of an intent to appeal, the City
Council may employ the services of city employees or outside contractors and
remove the weeds to conform to this subchapter by all lawful means. No person
shall enter the property to abate the nuisance, except with the permission of
the owner, resident or other person in control of the property or has obtained
a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 91.43 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting or
destruction of weeds as defined by this subchapter.
   (B)   The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated
with weed destruction, including but not limited to court costs, attorney’s
fees and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the city. If the city uses
municipal employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate per hour rate for
employees, equipment, supplies and chemicals which may be used.
   (C)   All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the City
Clerk and to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for expenses and
costs incurred by the city.
   (D)   All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special
assessment as provided by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time.
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices
such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers, and propane or
natural gas devices are not defined as “open burning.”
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three
feet in height, contained within the border of a “recreational fire site” using
dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished
completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions,
neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety
hazards will not be created. No more than one recreational fire is allowed on
any property at one time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a three foot diameter circle
(measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by
non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural
rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only and which area is
depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included are
permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a
“recreation fire site” as defined herein. Recreational fire sites shall not be
located closer than 25 feet to any structure or combustible material.
   RUNNING FIRE. An attended fire allowed to spread through surface vegetative
matter under controlled conditions for the purpose of vegetative management,
forest management, game habitat management, or agricultural improvement.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter
fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   VEGETATIVE MATERIALS. Dry leaves, dry grass clippings, twigs, branches, tree
limbs, untreated or unpainted wood that contains no glues or resins, and other
similar materials. Paper and cardboard are not considered vegetative materials.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, manufactured
fireplace logs, charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. “Wood”
does not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil
soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used
for recreational fires when cut into three foot lengths.
§ 91.61 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of oils,
petroleum fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other
materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as but not limited to:
tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar
paper, insulation, composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint
fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of: hazardous
waste or materials from salvage operations; solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process; materials from a service or commercial
establishment; or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.62 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city
without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not
required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in §
91.60.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.63 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of fire or health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means.
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are
not practical.
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives.
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical.
      (6)   Running fires.
   (B)   Fire training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.
   (C)   Permits for the operation of permanent tree and brush burning sites
may only be issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.64 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire
Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing those
applications.
   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees
shall be in the amount established in the Ordinance Establishing Fees and
Charges.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.65 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   If the established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit
are not met, the application will be denied.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and
permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals, if he or
she reasonably believes necessary, may require a preliminary site inspection to
locate the proposed burn site, note special conditions, and set dates and time
of permitted burn and review fire safety considerations.
§ 91.66 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible
for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every
open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her
competent representative. The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire
safety plan.
   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit
holder or his or her representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to
smolder with no person present. It is the responsibility of the permit holder
to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available for
inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA
representative or DNR forest officer.
   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of
all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.67 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   An open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR
forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals.
Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard existing or
developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit
being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions
developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame
present.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.68 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not
met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
§ 91.69 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   (A)   The designated fire official is authorized to determine when
conditions make open burning potentially hazardous and declare a burning ban
within the city.
   (B)   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or
DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire
conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.70 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22, as these statutes may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
§ 91.71 EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICES (OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING
STOVES).
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICE. A device designed for
external solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the interior
of a building, and includes solid fuel-fired stoves, solid fuel-fired cooking
stoves, and combination fuel furnaces or boiler which burn solid fuel. Solid
fuel-fired heating devices do not include natural gas-fired fireplace logs or
wood- burning fireplaces or wood stoves in the interior of a dwelling.
      (2)   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, company or other
association.
      (3)   STACKS OR CHIMNEYS. Any vertical structure incorporated into a
building and enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a
solid fuel-fired heating device, especially, the part of such a structure
extending above a roof.
   (B)   Requirements for operation.
      (1)   Any dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities, or any use of an external solid fuel-fired heating
device to burn solid fuels other than those solid fuels for which the external
solid fuel-fired heating device was designed, is declared a public nuisance.
      (2)   No person may install, use or operate an external solid fuel fired
heating device on a lot less than four acres in size.
      (3)   All stacks or chimneys must be so constructed to withstand high
winds or other related elements and in accordance to the specifications of the
manufacturer of the external solid fuel-fired heating device. The stack height
shall be a minimum of 25 feet above ground level, but shall also extend at
least as high as the height of the roofs of residents within 500 feet. All
stacks or chimneys must be of masonry or insulated metal with a minimum six-
inch flue.
      (4)   All external solid fuel-fired heating devices must be setback a
minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
      (5)   All external solid fuel-fired heating devices must be setback a
minimum of ten feet from any principal or accessory structure.
   (C)   Fuels.
      (1)   Only fuels designed for burning in an external solid fuel-fired
heating device may be burned. No garbage may be burned in an external solid
fuel-fired heating device.
      (2)   The only fuel permitted to be burned is untreated fuel. Wood may
not be treated, processed, stained, finished or painted - specifically
prohibited woods include plywood, particle board and similar products. Other
fuels, such as corn, shall not contain any additives, treatments or chemicals.
No petroleum products or processed materials of any kind may be burned.
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a nuisance
after being notified in writing by first class mail of a violation of any
provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and punished as provided in §
10.999
CHAPTER 92: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Sidewalks
   
92.01   Generally
   
92.02   Impediment to pedestrian traffic
   
92.03   Water runoff
   
92.04   Protection of sidewalk, curb required
Streets and Rights-of-Way
   
92.15   Compliance with other laws
   
92.16   Prohibited work
   
92.17   Interference with right-of-way
Vacation of Streets
   
92.30   Purpose and intent
   
92.31   Scope
   
92.32   City to determine vacation petitions
   
92.33   Road vacation procedure
   
92.34   Vacation by city
   
92.35   Vacation by petition
 
   
92.99   Penalty
SIDEWALKS
§ 92.01 GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any of the conditions specified
in this subchapter to occur upon the sidewalks adjacent to his or her property.
(Prior Code, § 4.3.1) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 IMPEDIMENT TO PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall allow any tree, bush, or other shrub to encroach upon
or block or impede pedestrian traffic upon any sidewalk within the city.
   (B)   Any property owner in violation of this section shall be notified in
writing by the City Clerk- Treasurer of such violation and shall be given 14
days to remove such obstruction.
   (C)   Failure of the property owner to remove the obstruction within the 14-
day period shall result in its removal by the city.
   (D)   The city shall keep accurate records of all expenses involved in the
removal of the obstruction and then shall assess all such costs against the
adjacent property.
(Prior Code, § 4.3.2) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 WATER RUNOFF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow water runoff from
adjacent land or buildings upon or across any sidewalk within the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.3.3) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 PROTECTION OF SIDEWALK, CURB REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or to drive or lead
any horses onto the sidewalk or curb of any sidewalk in the city without first
protecting the sidewalk or curb from injury with planks or other suitable
material.
(Prior Code, § 4.3.4) Penalty, see §
92.99
STREETS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 92.15 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to
obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees
required by the city or other applicable rule, law, or regulation. A permittee
shall comply with all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including
M.S. §§ 216D.01 - 216D.09 (“One Call Excavation Notice System”), as it may be
amended from time to time. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance
with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is
responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit,
regardless of who does the work.
(Prior Code, § 4.5.1)
§ 92.16 PROHIBITED WORK.
   Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no right-of-way
obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when
conditions are unreasonable for such work. Additionally, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall not issue any excavation permits for street openings from November 1
through April 1 unless an emergency exists as determined by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.5.2) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and
clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterway shall be
interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may
not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance
with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done
solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
(Prior Code, § 4.5.3) Penalty, see §
92.99
VACATION OF STREETS
§ 92.30 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to establish a procedure,
consistent with M.S. §§ 412.851 and 505.14, as they may be amended from time to
time, for the vacation of streets, alleys, public ground, and the public ways
or any part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4.6.1)
§ 92.31 SCOPE.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the method of vacating
roads, streets, and public ways, as provided herein, shall apply to all
property located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.6.2)
§ 92.32 CITY TO DETERMINE VACATION PETITIONS.
   The city has determined that it is in the best interests of the city that
all street and road vacation petitions be submitted to and determined by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 4.6.3)
§ 92.33 ROAD VACATION PROCEDURE.
   The following procedure shall be followed for all petitions for vacation of
streets, alleys, public grounds, public ways, plats, and/or auditor’s
subdivisions located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.6.4)
§ 92.34 VACATION BY CITY.
   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, vacate any street, alley, public
ground, public way, or any part thereof upon its own motion after a four-fifths
vote of all members of the City Council.
   (B)   The City Council shall not vacate any such street, alley, public
ground, public way, or any part thereof, unless it appears in the interest of
the public following a hearing preceded by two weeks’ published and posted
notice.
   (C)   Prior to hearing before the City Council, the petition shall be
referred to the city’s Planning and Zoning Commission for its consideration and
recommendation.
   (D)   (1)   The Council shall cause written notice of the hearing, at least
ten days before the hearing, to be mailed to:
         (a)   Each property owner whose property abuts the area sought to be
vacated;
         (b)   Those persons who own property within the plat, if the area
sought to be vacated is located within a plat; and
         (c)   All property owners within 350 feet of the area sought to be
vacated.
      (2)   The notice must contain, at a minimum, a copy of the proposed
resolution as well as the time, place, and date of hearing.
   (E)   If the street, alley, public ground, public way, or any part thereof
terminates at or abuts upon any public water, no vacation shall be made unless
written notice of the proposed resolution is served by certified mail upon the
Commissioner of Natural Resources at least 30 days before the hearing on the
matter. The notice to the Commissioner of Natural Resources is for notification
purposes only and does not create a right of intervention by the Commissioner.
   (F)   If, following a hearing, the Council adopts a resolution vacating
street, alley, public ground, public way, or any part thereof, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall prepare a notice of completion of the proceedings, which shall
contain the name of the city and identification of the vacation, a statement of
the time of completion thereof, and a description of the real estate and lands
affected thereby. The notice shall be presented to the County Auditor who shall
enter the same in the transfer records and note upon the instrument, over
official signature, the words “entered in the transfer record”. The notice
shall then be filed with the County Recorder. Any failure to file the notice
shall not invalidate any such vacation proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 4.6.4.1)
§ 92.35 VACATION BY PETITION.
   (A)   A majority of the owners of land, on a front footage basis, abutting a
street, alley, public ground, public way, or part thereof may submit a petition
to vacate such street, alley, public ground, public way, or part thereof.
   (B)   A petition to vacate shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee in the amount as set by the City Council from time to time. The
applicant shall file the petition and required application fee with the City
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall schedule the matter for hearing before the City
Council.
   (C)   (1)   The applicant shall provide a list of the property owners to be
affected by the proposed vacation along with a current mailing address for each
such property owner. The applicant shall provide the city with mailing labels
containing the name and address of the property owners to be affected, which
mailing labels are available at the County Auditor’s office.
      (2)   The property owners to be affected includes:
         (a)   Each property owner whose property abuts the area sought to be
vacated;
         (b)   Those persons who own property within the plat; and
         (c)   All property owners within 350 feet of the area sought to be
vacated.
   (D)   Prior to a hearing before the City Council, the petition shall be
referred to the city’s Planning and Zoning Commission for its consideration and
recommendation.
   (E)   (1)   The city shall cause written notice of the hearing to be mailed
to each property owner affected by the proposed vacation, identified by the
applicant as division (C) above, at least ten days before the hearing for the
City Council.
      (2)   PROPERTY OWNER TO BE AFFECTED includes:
         (a)   Each property owner whose property abuts the area sought to be
vacated;
         (b)   Those persons who own property within the plat, if the area
sought to be vacated is located within a plat; and
         (c)   All property owners within 350 feet of area sought to be
vacated.
      (3)   The notice must contain, at a minimum, a copy of a proposed
resolution as well as the time, place, and date of hearing.
(Prior Code, § 4.6.4.2)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   General prohibitions
   
93.02   Vehicles
   
93.03   Animals
   
93.04   Camping
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   Because city parks are provided for the use and enjoyment of the general
public, it shall be unlawful for any person to litter or commit vandalism or
destroy or misuse any property in the city parks. It shall be unlawful to
deposit dish water, garbage, refuse, or any human excretion on any city park
ground.
(Prior Code, § 4.4) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle, motor vehicle,
minibike, motorcycle, or dune buggy, as those terms are defined in M.S. §
169.011, as it may be amended from time to time, on any highway lane or street
in any city park in excess of ten mph; and no vehicle, motor vehicle, minibike,
motorcycle, or dune buggy shall be allowed anywhere in any city park except on
an established road, lane, street, or parking area.
(Prior Code, § 4.4.1) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any horse owned or controlled
by that person to enter any city park. It shall further be unlawful for any
person to allow any pet owned by that person to be within any public eating
place or on any swimming beach in any city park, or to allow any pet owned by
that person to be within the city park except when under physical restrictive
control or if the animal is a disability assistance animal.
(Prior Code, § 4.4.2) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 CAMPING.
   (A)   The pitching of tents or parking of trailers or other camping units
will be permitted only at such areas in the city parks as the City Council
shall from time to time designate, and then only after such camping fees as the
City Council may from time to time determine have been paid.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be within the city parks within
the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as provided by
this section.
   (C)   Persons with a valid receipt from the City Clerk-Treasurer’s office
for all-night camping, as provided herein, shall be permitted to use the city
parks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 4.4.3) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person in violation of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with
§
10.999.
CHAPTER 94: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Purpose
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Permit required, procedure exceptions
   
94.04   Duties of permit holder
   
94.05   Indemnification agreement
Application for Permit
   
94.20   Time for application
   
94.21   Content of application
Permit Review
   
94.35   Permit review
   
94.36   Permit denial
   
94.37   Permit conditions
   
94.38   Permit issuance
Issuance Requirements
   
94.50   Liability insurance required
   
94.51   Minimum limits
   
94.52   Waiver or reduction of required limits
Violations
   
94.65   Revocation of permit
   
94.66   Unlawful to sponsor a special event without a permit
   
94.67   Unlawful to exceed the scope of the permit
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Provide a systematic application process for events having an effect
on public property and/or public services;
   (B)   Lessen undue impact on private property;
   (C)   Ensure that city, state, and federal codes are adhered to; and
   (D)   Recapture any city expenditures lost for the development of, and
operational costs for, a privately sponsored event.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.1) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EVENT. Any parade, race, or special event that requires closure of a public
street, special traffic control, or services of the city beyond the normal and
ordinary services of the city.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, or procession in or upon any street except the
sidewalks thereof, or in or upon any alley in the city.
   RACE. Any organized bicycle race, foot race, race walking, wheelchair
racing, rollerblading, marathon, jogging event, and similar events.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any privately sponsored event, as defined by above, which
occurs on a public street, sidewalk, or any municipal property. This includes,
but is not limited to, any fair, show, carnival, sporting event, school event,
and grand opening.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.2) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.03 PERMIT REQUIRED, PROCEDURE EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any
event, unless a permit has been procured therefor.
   (B)   No permit shall be required for:
      (1)   Wedding or funerals, including wedding or funeral processions;
      (2)   Governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions;
      (3)   Lawful picketing or other public discourse that constitutes the
free exercise of constitutionally protected activities and does not disrupt or
interfere with traffic on public streets or the use of public places by other
members of the public; or
      (4)   Any event involving 99 or fewer people, that is less than three
hours in duration, that does not involve the closing of city streets or
diversion of traffic, does not require any special city services, and does not
involve sales or consumption of alcohol.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.3) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 DUTIES OF PERMIT HOLDER.
   (A)   A permit holder hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The permit holder shall
carry the event permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the event.
   (B)   (1)   Within the two-hour period immediately following the end of the
event, the permit holder will clean up, remove, and dispose of all litter or
material of any kind, which is placed or left on the street, park, or other
public property because of such event. Should the permit holder fail to do so,
the city may bill the permit holder for all costs related to the clean-up.
      (2)   In addition, no future applications will be considered until all
obligations are satisfied.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.6) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.05 INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.
   If the event or any portion of the event is to be held on city property or
right-of-way, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit
applicant and authorizing officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, must
sign an agreement to indemnify, defend, and hold the city, its officials,
employees, and agents harmless from any claim that arises in whole or in part
out of the special event, except any claims arising solely out of the negligent
acts or omissions of the city, its officials, employees, and agents.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.7) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
§ 94.20 TIME FOR APPLICATION.
   A person seeking issuance of an event permit shall file an application with
the Clerk-Treasurer on forms provided by the Clerk-Treasurer. The application
shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in §
30.04. To ensure an orderly approval process, permit applications should be
filed as soon as possible in advance of the event. Permit applications must be
filed not less than 30 days or more than one year before the date on which the
event is proposed to take place. Failure to file in a timely manner may be
grounds for denial of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.4.1) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.21 CONTENT OF APPLICATION.
   The application for a permit shall set forth the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and telephone numbers, daytime and nighttime, of
the natural person who will be responsible for performance of the duties of the
permit holder;
   (B)   The date and time when the event is to be conducted;
   (C)   Proposed location of the event, including a map of the proposed area
to be used which shows any barricades, street route plans (including the
starting point, the termination point, and the desired location of any assembly
areas), or perimeter/security fencing;
   (D)   Estimated numbers of event staff, participants, and spectators;
   (E)   Any public health plans, including supplying water to the site, solid
waste collection, and provision of toilet facilities;
   (F)   Any fire prevention and emergency medical service plans, including
services to be provided by city personnel;
   (G)   Any security plans, including services to be provided by city
personnel;
   (H)   Any special services to be provided by city employees;
   (I)   Whether food or alcohol is to be served or sold at the event,
including all licensing information for food or alcohol vendors, such licensing
information to be provided at least 14 days before the event;
   (J)   Signature of the applicant;
   (K)   If the event is an event planned within a residential area in which a
street is to be closed, the applicant must collect and submit with the
application a list of signatures from all properties whose vehicular access to
their properties will be affected consenting to the street closure; and
   (L)   Such other information as the Clerk-Treasurer shall find necessary to
evaluate the application.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.4.2) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
PERMIT REVIEW
§ 94.35 PERMIT REVIEW.
   The City Council shall review the event permit application and make a
determination on whether to issue the permit or deny it.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.5.1) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.36 PERMIT DENIAL.
   The City Council may deny an application for an event permit if it
determines from a consideration of the application or other pertinent
information, that:
   (A)   The information contained in the application or supplemental
information requested from the applicant is false or nonexistent in any
material detail;
   (B)   The applicant fails to supplement the application after having been
notified by the city of additional information or documents needed;
   (C)   The applicant fails to agree to abide or comply with all of the
conditions and terms of the event permit;
   (D)   The time, route, hours, location, or size of the event will
unnecessarily disrupt the movement of other traffic within the area of the
event;
   (E)   The event is of the size or nature that requires the diversion of too
many law enforcement officers to properly police the event, site, and
contiguous areas that allowing the event would unreasonably deny law
enforcement protection to the remainder of the city and its residents;
   (F)   Another event permit application has already been approved to hold
another event at the same time and place requested by the applicant or so close
in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion, or the city is unable
to meet the needs to provide for law enforcement and other city services for
both events;
   (G)   The location of the event would cause undue hardship for adjacent
businesses or residents;
   (H)   The location of the event will substantially interfere with any
construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along public
property or right-of-way;
   (I)   The event would endanger public safety or health;
   (J)   The event would seriously inconvenience the general public’s use of
public property, services, or facilities;
   (K)   The applicant fails to comply with the liability insurance
requirements or the applicant’s insurance lapses or is canceled;
   (L)   The event would create or constitute a public nuisance;
   (M)   The event would be likely to cause significant damage to public
property or facilities; or
   (N)   The event would engage in or encourage participants to engage in
illegal acts.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.5.2) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.37 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may condition the issuance of an event permit by
imposing reasonable conditions concerning the time, place, and manner of the
event, and such conditions are necessary to protect the safety of persons and
property, and the control of traffic; provided that such conditions shall not
unreasonably restrict the right of free speech.
   (B)   Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Alteration of the date(s), time(s), route, or location of the event
proposed;
      (2)   Elimination of an activity at the event which cannot be mitigated
to a point as to ensure public safety and welfare, or which causes undue
liability to the city;
      (3)   Requirements concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of a
parade or other events occurring along a route;
      (4)   Requirements concerning the accommodation of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of the
street or right-of-way;
      (5)   Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;
      (6)   Requirements for the use of city personnel and equipment;
      (7)   Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities
at the special event;
      (8)   Requirements for the use of event monitors and the providing notice
of the special permit conditions to the events participants;
      (9)   Requirements on the number and type of vehicles, animals, or
structures to be allowed at the event and the inspection and approval of
floats, structures, and decorated vehicles by the city for safety purposes;
      (10)   Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws;
      (11)   Requirements for the use of garbage containers and the cleanup and
restoration of any public property;
      (12)   Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with
noise ordinances, regulations, and laws;
      (13)   Requirements to provide notice of the event to surrounding
property owners; and
      (14)   Restrictions on the sale or consumption of food and alcohol.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.5.3) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.38 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the special events permit once the
application has been approved by the City Council and the applicant has agreed
to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit as well as the
requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.5.4) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS
§ 94.50 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   The applicant or sponsor of an event must possess or obtain liability
insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on
account of bodily injury or property damage arising from the event. A
certificate of insurance must be filed with the city prior to issuance of the
event permit. The certificate of insurance must name the city, its officials,
employees, and agents as additional insureds. Insurance coverage must be
maintained for the duration of the event.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.8.1) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.51 MINIMUM LIMITS.
   Insurance coverage must be a commercial general liability policy. The
minimum limits must be at least an amount as set forth by the City Council from
time to time. If alcoholic beverages are to be sold or distributed at the
event, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability. The
City Council may require additional endorsements depending upon the type of
event and proposed activities. The city shall be listed as an additional
insured on the insurance certificate.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.8.2) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.52 WAIVER OR REDUCTION OF REQUIRED LIMITS.
   The city may waive or reduce the insurance requirements of this subchapter
under the following circumstances:
   (A)   The applicant or officer of the sponsoring organization signs a
verified statement that it believes that the event’s purpose is First Amendment
expression and that the cost of obtaining the insurance is so financially
burdensome that it would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of
First Amendment expression;
   (B)   The applicant or an officer of the sponsoring organization signs a
verified statement that the insurance coverage required by this subchapter is
impossible to obtain; or
   (C)   The City Council determines that the insurance requirements are in
excess of the reasonable risk presented by the proposed event.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.8.3) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
VIOLATIONS
§ 94.65 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may be summarily revoked by
the city’s law enforcement officer at any time when, by reason of disaster,
public calamity, riot, or other emergency, the law enforcement officer
determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation.
The City Clerk-Treasurer may also summarily revoke any event permit issued
pursuant to this subchapter if he or she finds that the permit has been issued
based upon false information or when the permit holder exceeds the scope of the
permit. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing
to the permit holder by personal service or certified mail at the address
specified by the permit holder in its application.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.9) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 94.66 UNLAWFUL TO SPONSOR A SPECIAL EVENT WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   It is unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct an event requiring a
permit pursuant to this chapter unless a valid special event permit has been
issued for the event.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.10.1) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.67 UNLAWFUL TO EXCEED THE SCOPE OF THE PERMIT.
   The special event permit authorizes the event permit holder to conduct only
such an event as is described in the permit, and in accordance with the terms
and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permit holder to willfully
violate the terms and conditions of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 4.7.10.2) (Ord. 2012-2, passed 6-25-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 95: CEMETERIES
Section
   
95.01   Establishment
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Sale of lots
   
95.04   Conditions of lot purchase
   
95.05   Handling of funds
   
95.06   Burial permits
   
95.07   Interments
   
95.08   Burial vaults
   
95.09   Funeral supervision
   
95.10   Disinterment and removal
   
95.11   Transfer of lots
   
95.12   City repurchase of unused cemetery lot
   
95.13   Conduct of persons in the cemetery
   
95.14   Monuments, markers, and benches
   
95.15   Foundations
   
95.16   Installation of monuments, markers, and benches
   
95.17   Mausoleums
   
95.18   Columbarium niches
   
95.19   Decoration of lots
   
95.20   Hours
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A cemetery has been established and is continued upon land owned by the city
and described as Lakewood Cemetery. The plat of the cemetery filed with the
County Recorder is adopted as the official plat of the cemetery. No person
shall lay out or establish any cemetery, or use any lot of land within this
city for the burial of dead except in Lakewood Cemetery, or some other tract of
land duly designated as a cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 3.29)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BENCH. A memorial of granite or other approved material.
   BURIAL PERMIT. Legal written permission for burial to occur.
   BURIAL VAULT. A container that houses a casket for final interment in the
cemetery.
   CEMETERY. A tract of land used for burials or above-ground interment.
   CITY. The City of Crosby, Minnesota, owning and controlling the cemetery.
   COLUMBARIUM. Above-ground hexagonal repository composed of niches to hold
cremation urns.
   INTERMENT. Disposition of human remains or cremains by burial or entombment.
   MARKER. A memorial of granite or other approved material that does not
extend above the surface of the lawn.
   MAUSOLEUMS. An external free-standing building enclosing the interment space
or burial chamber of a deceased person or persons.
   MEMORIAL. A monument, marker bench, or large urns (marked or unmarked).
   MONUMENT. A memorial of granite or other approved material that extends
above the surface of the lawn.
   RIGHT OF BURIAL ZONE. The area within the boundaries of the cemetery lot.
(Prior Code, § 3.30) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 7-14-2014)
§ 95.03 SALE OF LOTS.
   The prices of cemetery lots and services will be set by resolution of the
City Council. Any person paying for a lot is entitled to a license agreement
conveying the lot. A license agreement conveying a lot gives the purchaser only
the right of burial therein and shall be considered as a license that restricts
the use to burial purposes.
(Prior Code, § 3.31)
§ 95.04 CONDITIONS OF LOT PURCHASE.
   All lot agreements are subject to reasonable rules and regulations as the
Council may adopt relative to the use of the cemetery. No lot shall be used for
any purpose other than the burial of human remains and the placing of memorials
as permitted by this chapter or any additional regulation that the Council may
provide.
(Prior Code, § 3.32) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   All money received from the sale of lots and other services must be paid to
the City Clerk- Treasurer. No lot agreement to any cemetery lot shall be
issued, nor any cemetery service performed, until a receipt showing payment to
the city of the cost thereof is exhibited to the person who issues the deed or
performs the services. All money received from the sale of lots and performance
of services shall be placed in the Cemetery Fund. The Fund may be used only for
payment of the purchase price of grounds, or maintenance and improvements to
the cemetery. The Treasurer shall keep an account of all receipts and
disbursements of money belonging to the Cemetery Fund and shall pay money out
of the Fund as approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3.33) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 BURIAL PERMITS.
   Before any interment, a burial permit shall be obtained from the funeral
home or State Registrar of Vital Statistics. No interment shall be made unless
the city is notified and a copy of such burial permit is filed with the city.
Within 36 hours after the death of any person in the city and before the body
is removed for burial within the city, the mortician funeral director, or
person having charge of the interment shall apply for the permit. This
application shall be accompanied by a death certificate as prescribed by the
state’s Department of Health. No burial permit shall be issued until the
application and death certificate is completed and presented. The body of a
deceased person shall not be brought into the city for burial unless
accompanied by a death certificate and permit for removal issued by the
registrar of the registration district wherein the death occurred.
(Prior Code, § 3.34) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.07 INTERMENTS.
   Permission in writing from a lot owner must accompany all requests for
permission to bury bodies of persons that are not members of the immediate
family of the lot owner. All excavations shall be made under the direction of
the Cemetery Superintendent. When graves are requested to be dug by the
Superintendent or his or her agents, at least 24-hour notice shall be given,
and the outside dimensions of the case to be used and the location shall be
specified. No interment may be made in the cemetery unless all laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations regarding interments have been complied with
and until purchase price of the lot and all burial fees are paid.
(Prior Code, § 3.35) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 BURIAL VAULTS.
   All caskets must be encased in a permanent type burial case or vault.
Fiberglass vaults are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 3.36) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.09 FUNERAL SUPERVISION.
   All funerals, on reaching the cemetery, shall be under the supervision of
cemetery management.
(Prior Code, § 3.37)
§ 95.10 DISINTERMENT AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Before any grave may be opened, written permission of the lot owner
and the next of kin shall be filed with the Cemetery Superintendent, a permit
from the County Health Officer shall be secured and presented, and the required
fees paid. This provision does not apply when disinterment is ordered by a duly
authorized public authority.
   (B)   Removal of a body by the heirs so that the lot may be sold for profit
to themselves, or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the
original lot owner is forbidden.
   (C)   A body may be removed from its original lot to a larger or better lot
in the cemetery when there has been an exchange or purchase for that purpose.
   (D)   The city shall assume no liability for damage to any casket or burial
case in making the disinterment and removal.
(Prior Code, § 3.38)
§ 95.11 TRANSFER OF LOTS.
   No cemetery lot or fractional lot may be resold or otherwise disposed of,
except by will, without the approval of the City Council, in accordance with
the procedures outlined in M.S. § 306.15, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 3.39)
§ 95.12 CITY REPURCHASE OF UNUSED CEMETERY LOT.
   A lot owner may sell his or her unused lot back to the city. The city may
repurchase a cemetery at the purchase price established by the city from time
to time. At the time of the adoption of this chapter, the city has authorized
the repurchase of cemetery lots at the original cost.
(Prior Code, § 3.40)
§ 95.13 CONDUCT OF PERSONS IN THE CEMETERY.
   (A)   No person may discharge any firearm within the cemetery grounds
without written permission of the Superintendent.
   (B)   No person may remove any object from any place in the cemetery or make
any excavation without the written permission of the Superintendent.
   (C)   No person may obstruct any drive or path in the cemetery or in any way
injure, deface, or destroy any structure, grave, flower, tree, or other thing
in the cemetery.
   (D)   No person may drive any vehicle at a speed exceeding ten mph. All
automobiles must be kept off the grass.
   (E)   No person may disturb the quiet of the cemetery by noise or improper
conduct of any kind.
   (F)   No person may enter or leave the cemetery except at the entrances
provided.
   (G)   No person may use the cemetery grounds or any road therein as a public
thoroughfare, nor drive any vehicle through the cemetery grounds except for
purposes relating to the cemetery.
   (H)   Children shall not be permitted to engage in playing within cemetery
grounds, and children under ten years of age shall not be admitted to the
grounds unless accompanied by an adult, who shall be responsible for their
conduct while therein.
   (I)   No pets allowed.
(Prior Code, § 3.41) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 4-14-2014) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.14 MONUMENTS, MARKERS, AND BENCHES.
   All monuments, markers, and benches shall be placed in the space shown on
the cemetery plat or as directed by the Superintendent. No monument may be
placed on a lot platted for less than the number of burials determined by the
Council or Superintendent. Placement of benches is allowed in the boulevard of
the east/west streets with the permission of the city or in place of a monument
or marker, rather than a headstone or footstone, on the cemetery lot within the
right of burial zone. No monument, marker, or bench may be placed unless the
location has been approved by the Superintendent and the full purchase price of
the lot has been paid. Monuments, markers, and benches must be constructed of
granite, marble, bronze, or other materials permitted by state statutes and
ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.42) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 2014-05, passed 7-
14-2014)
§ 95.15 FOUNDATIONS.
   All monuments, markers, and benches shall be placed on foundations of solid
masonry. Monuments and benches require a six-inch concrete apron with
sufficient gravel for leveling. Markers require a four- inch concrete apron
with sufficient gravel for leveling. The top of all foundations shall not be
higher than two inches below the established grade. The city reserves the right
to excavate and build all foundations.
(Prior Code, § 3.43) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 7-14-2014)
§ 95.16 INSTALLATION OF MONUMENTS, MARKERS, AND BENCHES.
   (A)   Upon placement of an order for a monument, marker, or bench, the lot
owner or monument salesperson shall furnish the dimensions of the proposed
monument, marker, or bench to the Cemetery Superintendent, who in turn will
authorize the construction of the foundation, and all charges must be paid
before the monument, marker, or bench is placed thereon. In no case shall the
base and monument, marker, or bench exceed the size of the right of burial
zone.
   (B)   Persons engaged in erecting monuments, markers, or benches, and other
structures shall provide adequate planking to protect turf and shall remove all
materials, equipment, and refuse immediately upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Scattering of materials on adjoining lots or leaving materials on the
ground longer than absolutely necessary is prohibited. In all cases, the work
is subject to the control of the Cemetery Superintendent and work must be
conducted within the regulations of the cemetery. Ropes and cables may be
attached to trees or other objects only on approval of the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 3.44) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 7-14-2014)
§ 95.17 MAUSOLEUMS.
   Mausoleums may be placed only on cemetery lots designated by the City
Council for such structures.
(Prior Code, § 3.45)
§ 95.18 COLUMBARIUM NICHES.
   Each niche may contain two cremation urns of appropriate size. The cost of a
niche will include burial opening and closing costs. Two four-inch by ten-inch
bronze plaques will be included per niche. Each plaque must be engraved
according to cemetery specifications. No other additional ornamentation will be
allowed on or in front of the columbarium.
(Prior Code, § 3.46)
§ 95.19 DECORATION OF LOTS.
   (A)   No plants, shrubs, or flowers may be planted on cemetery lots. No
trees or vines may be planted, nor may fences be erected. The city reserves the
right to remove any tree, shrub, vine, plant, or flower that may become
unsightly, dangerous, or not in keeping with the landscape design of the
cemetery. The city shall not be responsible for damaged, lost, or misplaced
flower containers.
   (B)   Two plant stands are allowed per headstone and must be placed in the
concrete apron of the headstone or footstone. The plant stand must be one
legged. Plant stands decorating monuments placed after August 1, 2014 must be
installed in concrete adjacent to the monument. Plant stands decorating
monuments placed prior to August 1, 2014 must be installed in concrete adjacent
to the monument no later than August 1, 2015. Hook style plant hangers
(shepherds hooks) are allowed in place of plant stands and must be installed in
the concrete apron. The curve of the hook must extend over the monument. Solar
lights are allowed in the plant stands only. No solar lights may be placed in
the ground. Solar lights may be installed in the concrete apron adjacent to the
monument. Plant stands not in use by July 1 will be removed and disposed of by
the city. No floral sprays or decorative arrangements are permitted to be
affixed or secured to the top of upright monuments. Other decorations are
allowed on the cemetery lots one week prior to Memorial Day. Cemetery lots must
be cleared of all decorations two weeks following Memorial Day. Any items
remaining will be removed and disposed of by the city. Decorations are allowed
one day prior to, the day of, and one day following special occasions defined
as the Mother’s Day (mother only), Father’s Day (father only), and anniversary
of death and birthday of the person buried in the cemetery lot. Christmas
wreaths will be allowed from November 15 to January 3.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to remove all monuments, markers, benches,
flowers, plants, trees, decorations, or other similar things without liability
whenever any of these objects become unsafe.
(Prior Code, § 3.47) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 2014-05, passed 7-
14-2014) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.20 HOURS.
   Excepting the hours that may from time to time be determined by the
Superintendent or City Council, the cemetery will be open to visitors at all
other times of the day.
(Prior Code, § 3.48)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with §
10.999.
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOL
      
111.   LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      
112.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
113.   PAWNBROKER REGULATIONS
      
114.   ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
      
115.   SHORT-TERM RENTALS
      
116.   CANNABIS BUSINESS
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOL
Section
   
110.01   State law adopted
   
110.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
110.03   Definitions
   
110.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
   
110.05   Consumption in public places
   
110.06   Raffles, silent auctions, and the like for charities
   
110.07   Number of licenses which may be issued
   
110.08   Term and expiration of licenses
   
110.09   Kinds of liquor licenses
   
110.10   License fees; pro rata
   
110.11   Council discretion to grant or deny a license
   
110.12   Application for license
   
110.13   Description of premises
   
110.14   Application for renewal
   
110.15   Transfer of license
   
110.16   Investigation
   
110.17   Hearing and issuance
   
110.18   Restrictions on issuance
   
110.19   Conditions of license
   
110.20   Hours and days of sale
   
110.21   Minors on premises
   
110.22   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
110.23   Suspension and revocation of license
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of
the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if
they had been in existence at the time this chapter is adopted.
(Prior Code, § 10.1)
§ 110.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 10.2)
§ 110.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter:
   LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or “3.2% malt” includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt
liquor.
   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a RESTAURANT as
defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state
as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet
the definition of either a “small establishment”, “medium establishment”, or
“large establishment” as defined in M.S. § 157.16, Subd. 3d, as it may be
amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that
receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is
heated and served, shall not be considered to be a RESTAURANT for purposes of
this chapter unless it meets the definitions of a “small establishment”,
“medium establishment”, or “large establishment”.
(Prior Code, § 10.3)
§ 110.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
(Prior Code, § 10.4) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in a public
park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, or alley, or in any public
place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this
chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where
the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted. Notwithstanding
the above, intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor may be consumed on a public
sidewalk if the liquor license includes the sidewalk as part of the premises
described on the liquor license and a sidewalk use permit under §
111.01 is obtained from the city.
(Prior Code, § 10.5) (Ord. 2018-03, passed - -) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 RAFFLES, SILENT AUCTIONS, AND THE LIKE FOR CHARITIES.
   No person shall conduct a silent auction, raffle, of other fund raising
event pursuant to M.S. § 340A.707, as it may be amended from time to time, with
prizes or awards of wine, beer, or intoxicating liquors without notifying the
City Clerk-Treasurer of the event at least ten days prior to the occurrence of
the event. The event holder shall provide the city with the following
information: the person or organization holding the event; the day, time, and
location of the event; type of fund raising event (silent auction, raffle, or
otherwise); type and amount of wine, beer, and intoxicating liquor to be
awarded as prizes; and the charitable purposes to which the event proceeds will
be donated.
(Prior Code, § 10.6) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue.
The Council, in its sound discretion, may provide by ordinance for a number of
licenses available to be issued up to the number of licenses authorized by M.S.
Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 10.7) (Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 110.08 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses,
except temporary licenses, shall expire on June 13 of each year unless another
date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same date.
Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and display
permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the accompanying city
consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 10.8)
§ 110.09 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
   The council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is
authorized to issue the following licenses and permits, up to the number
specified in §
110.07:
   (A)   3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf
courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks;
   (B)   3.2% malt liquor off-sale license;
   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a
club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization;
   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to
exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off-sale license which was
first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off-sale intoxicating
liquor license established by the Council under §
110.10 shall not exceed $240 or a greater amount which may be permitted by M.S.
§ 340A.408, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the
following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers,
theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, theaters,
and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval
of the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by
the Council under §
110.10 shall not exceed the amounts provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, Subd. 2b,
as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may, in its sound
discretion, authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor
off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to
time. The Council may, in its sound discretion, authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to
time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor
to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being
held on the premises;
   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization
to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as provided by M.S.
§ 340A.504, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in §
110.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least
30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which
serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food. The maximum fee for
this license, which shall be established by the Council under the provisions of
§
110.10, shall not exceed an amount as set forth by City Council from time to
time, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. § 340A.504, Subd. 3c, as it may be
amended from time to time;
   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city
has a population less than 10,000;
   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with
a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit
corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for
longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12
days worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year;
   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety to theaters and restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25
guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 5, as it may
be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant in §
110.03; to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in
M.S. § 340A.401, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time, and to
theaters that meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404(b), as it may be amended
from time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license established by the
Council under the provisions of §
110.10, shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also
holds an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor
with a content over 3.2% (strong beer) without an additional license;
   (J)   One day consumption and display permits, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a
social activity in the city sponsored by the organization;
   (K)   The maximum amount of the additional fee which may be imposed by the
Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and display permit under
the provisions of §
110.10 shall not exceed an amount as set forth by City Council from time to
time, or the maximum amount permitted by M.S. § 340A.14, Subd. 6, as it may be
amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on June
30 of each year;
   (L)   Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business
establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which
payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The
license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class,
at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine
or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for
consumption on the licensed premises only;
   (M)   Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commission
of Public Safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction. A
license issued under this division (M) authorizes the sale of only vintage wine
of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale by any
wholesaler in the state. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine for not
more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of wine are
sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license
fee, imposed by §
110.10;
   (N)    Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued
to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture and who meet
the criteria established at M.S. §§ 340A.301, Subd. 6(d) and 340A.24, as may be
amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on-sale may not exceed
3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed under this section possesses a
license for off-sale under division (O) below, the brew pub’s total combined
retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year,
provided that off-sales may not total more than750 barrels;
   (O)    Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee
under division (N) above or that produces fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt
liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria established at M.S. §§
340A.301, Subd. 6(d) and 340A.24, as may be amended from time to time. Off-sale
of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive
liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the
premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor
stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in the manner
required by M.S. § 340A.301, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time.
Sales under this license may not exceed 750 barrels per year. If a brewer
licensed under this section possesses a license under division (N) above, the
brewer’s total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels
per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 750 barrels;
   (P)    Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued,
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers who
manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale
of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the brewer; and
   (Q)   Brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses may also be issued, with approval
of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to a holder of a brewer’s license under
M.S. § 340A.301, Subd. 6(c), (i), or (j) and meeting the criteria established
by M.S. § 340A.29 as may be amended from time to time. The amount of malt
liquor sold at off-sale under this license may not exceed 128 ounces per
customer per day. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours
for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the jurisdiction in which the brewer
is located, and the malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises
before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores.
Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale under this license must comply with the
provisions of Minnesota Rules, parts 7515.1080 to 7515.1120.
(Prior Code, § 10.9) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-22-2023)
§ 110.10 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a
liquor license.
   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time, in the ordinance
establishing fees and charges, the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws
and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing
mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees
at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is
filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only
if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (F)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in
their annual license fee by the amount specified in M.S. § 340A.408, as it may
be amended from time to time, if at the time of initial application or renewal
they:
      (1)   Agree to have a private vendor approved by the city train all
employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to
the sale alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the responsibilities
of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
      (2)   Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons
appearing to be 30 years old or less;
      (3)   Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award
employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to punish
employees in the event of a failed compliance check; and
      (4)   Failure to abide by the provisions of this division (F) may result
in suspension of the license until the conditions of the fee reduction are met
and may result in suspension and/or revocation of the license pursuant to §
110.23.
(Prior Code, § 10.10)
§ 110.11 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
   The Council, in its sound discretion, may either grant or deny the
application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No
applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.11)
§ 110.12 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the applicant’s
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant
is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from
time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Operation of a business, which is required to be
licensed by this chapter, without having on file with the city at all times
effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the
license.
(Prior Code, § 10.12)
§ 110.13 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may
not include any parking lot or sidewalk unless the licensee holds a sidewalk
permit from the city pursuant to §
111.01.
(Prior Code, § 10.13) (Ord. 2018-03, passed - -)
§ 110.14 APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL.
   At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision
whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
(Prior Code, § 10.14)
§ 110.15 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval
of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 10.15)
§ 110.16 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial
application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in
the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so,
on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may
contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The
applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of an amount as
set forth by City Council from time to time, which shall be in addition to any
license fee. If the cost of the preliminary investigation is less than an
amount as set forth by City Council from time to time, the unused balance shall
be returned to the applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation
shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either
conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public
Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be an
amount as set forth by City Council from time to time, less any amount paid for
the initial investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the
state, and an amount as set forth by City Council from time to time, less any
amount paid for the initial investigation, if the investigation is required
outside the state. The unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the
applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in
advance of any investigation and the amount actually expended on the
investigation shall not be refundable in the event the application is denied.
The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
(Prior Code, § 10.16)
§ 110.17 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall, in its sound discretion, grant or deny the application. No
license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 10.17)
§ 110.18 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued
within the city to any one person.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under state law.
   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the
state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders shall be
residents of the state. The provisions of this division (E) shall not apply to
any license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to the renewal of
an existing license.
   (F)   No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church.
The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the church to the
closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to be
sold.
(Prior Code, § 10.18)
§ 110.19 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   (A)   Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving
liquor in an establishment which has an on-sale license shall receive training
regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training shall be
provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof of training shall be
provided by the licensee.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally
with the employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee
during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and
of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
   (F)   Failure by on off-sale intoxicating liquor license who has received a
fee reduction pursuant to §
110.06 to abide with the provisions of §
110.06.
(Prior Code, § 10.19) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.20 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall generally be those set
by M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, and specifically
with respect to brewer taprooms, those set by M.S. § 340A.26, Subd. 5 and M.S.
§ 340A.28, Subd. 1, as they may be amended from time to time, as they relate to
the City Council’s authority to authorize Sunday on-sale and off-sale
respectively, except that the City Council may, by resolution or ordinance,
provide for more restrictive hours than state law allows.
   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (C)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container
containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon any table,
bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes
after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on
the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale
can legally occur.
   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
(Prior Code, § 10.20) (Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-11-2016) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.21 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed
as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host, or dishwashing
services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel, or other multi-
purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2%
malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment
except to work, consume meals on premises that quality as a restaurant, or
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor
is not sold.
(Prior Code, § 10.21) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.22 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of
business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it
may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and
no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
(Prior Code, § 10.22) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.23 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating
to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as they may be amended from time to time. The Council
may act as the hearing body under that Act, or it may contract with the office
of hearing examiners for a hearing officer.
   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation
which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, or any rules
promulgated under that chapter as it may be amended from time to time:
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor, or
violation of §
110.04, the license shall be revoked;
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under
division (A) above that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable
statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as
follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year period, at least
one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed;
         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year period, at least
three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed;
         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year period, at least
seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed; and
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which the license
will be suspended.
   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the Clerk-Treasurer, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within
ten days. Any suspension under division (B) above shall continue until the
Council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state law
and this chapter have again been met.
   (D)   The provisions of §
110.99 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in
lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.23)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 111: LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
Use of Sidewalks for Commercial Purposes
   
111.01   Issuance of permits
   
111.02   Conditions on use of sidewalks
Applicants for City License
   
111.15   Purpose
   
111.16   Police to conduct investigations
   
111.17   Manner of investigation, sharing results
   
111.18   Consent to investigation
Gambling License
   
111.30   Purpose
   
111.31   Declaration of policy
   
111.32   Provisions of state law adopted
   
111.33   License required
   
111.34   Application for license
   
111.35   Granting license
   
111.36   Organizations ineligible for license approval
   
111.37   Conditions of license approval
   
111.38   Revocation and suspension of license
 
   
111.99   Penalty
USE OF SIDEWALKS FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES
§ 111.01 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   Any business located in the Central Business District may apply to the City
Clerk-Treasurer for a permit to conduct business on the public sidewalk
immediately adjoining the building where the business is located. Permits are
valid from April 1 through March 31. Use of the permit shall be subject to all
the terms in this section.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed - -)
§ 111.02 CONDITIONS ON USE OF SIDEWALKS.
   Each permit that is issued shall be subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Sidewalk remaining for use by pedestrians shall be a minimum of five
feet in width in addition to the area presently occupied by trees, transformer
boxes, or other permanent installations;
   (B)   The sidewalk shall be used for the permitted purpose only;
   (C)   Each permittee shall fully indemnify the city against claims for
injury to persons or damage to property;
   (D)   Each permittee shall maintain general liability insurance that
includes premises and operations insurance and products and completed
operations insurance with minimum coverage amounts of $50,000 per occurrence,
$10,000 per occurrence for property damage, and $300,000 aggregate for personal
injury or death, and which names the city as an additional insured;
   (E)   Property placed on the sidewalk by a permit holder shall not obstruct
or interfere with building exits, fire hydrants, standpipes, or other public
safety equipment;
   (F)   No food or beverage shall be sold on the public sidewalk for immediate
consumption except by a licensed restaurant and only in compliance with all
state and local regulations for restaurants. No alcoholic beverages shall be
sold or served on the public sidewalk for immediate consumption or otherwise
except by an establishment holding a valid license encompassing such public
sidewalk, and only in compliance with all state and local regulations for the
sale of alcoholic beverages. All waste liquids and foods; disposable cups,
glasses, plates, and utensils; and waste paper shall be placed in covered
garbage receptacles;
   (G)   All furniture placed on the sidewalk by a permit holder shall be
suitable for and manufactured for outdoor use and shall be maintained in good
condition;
   (H)   No tables, chairs, or other furniture intended to enable or promote
public seating shall be placed or allowed to remain on the sidewalk from
November 1 through March 31. All furniture placed on the sidewalk must be
removed from the sidewalk at the close of business and brought indoors, and may
not be placed on the sidewalk before 8:00 a.m.; and
   (I)   A garbage receptacle with a cover must be provided by the permittee
and placed on the sidewalk within the permitted area at all times when the
sidewalk is being used pursuant to the permit.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed - -) Penalty, see §
111.99
APPLICANTS FOR CITY LICENSE
§ 111.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will
allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized criminal history
information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks.
(Prior Code, § 5.5.2)
§ 111.16 POLICE TO CONDUCT INVESTIGATIONS.
   The city’s Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity
within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the
applicants for the following all licenses within the city for which a
background check is required.
(Prior Code, § 5.5.2)
§ 111.17 MANNER OF INVESTIGATION, SHARING RESULTS.
   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to
screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data
maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions computerized
criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department
under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her
designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data
may be released by the Police Department to the licensing authority, including
the City Council, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or other city staff involved the
license approval process.
(Prior Code, § 5.5.2)
§ 111.18 CONSENT TO INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   (1)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance, and use of the information.
      (2)   Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for a license
on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly
related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.
   (B)   If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city
shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. §
364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license; and
      (4)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 5.5.2)
GAMBLING LICENSE
§ 111.30 PURPOSE.
   The city is authorized to pass regulations and to restrain, license, or
regulate certain business activities. This section of the code shall be
referred to as business regulations.
(Prior Code, § 9.1)
§ 111.31 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   In order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
city, it is necessary that measures relating to the licensing and conduct of
lawful gambling within the city be established. The Council shall grant,
suspend, and revoke licenses subject to the applicable state laws and
regulations relative to lawful gambling within the state and shall endeavor to
prevent syndicates, outside influences, and the like from infiltrating the
organizations licensed to conduct such lawful gambling within the city. The
Council shall be satisfied that each applicant for a license is the operator-
in-fact of its establishment and will conduct it in conformance with the laws
of the state and this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.2)
§ 111.32 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, as well as the adopted
rules of the Charitable Gambling Control Board, are adopted by reference and
made a part of this subchapter as if fully set out in this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.2.1)
§ 111.33 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person or organizations shall conduct lawful gambling as defined by the
laws of the state without the required state license issued through the
Charitable Gambling Control Board and as approved by the city under the terms
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.2.3.1)
§ 111.34 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Every application for a gambling license shall be verified and filed with
the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall be in compliance with the statutes and the
rules adopted by the state and the Charitable Gambling Control Board.
(Prior Code, § 9.2.3.2)
§ 111.35 GRANTING LICENSE.
   The Police Department shall investigate the facts set out in the application
and perform a background check on the applicant, making its recommendation to
the City Council based on such investigation concerning the applicant. After
investigation and recommendation, the City Council shall act on the application
in granting it or refusing it at its discretion.
(Prior Code, § 9.2.3.3)
§ 111.36 ORGANIZATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE APPROVAL.
   No license shall be approved as to any organization or person not eligible
for such license under state law. Applicants must be an organization which
serves the residents of the city and whose past actions have proven the
applicant to be a benefit to the residents of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.2.3.4)
§ 111.37 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE APPROVAL.
   Every license shall be approved subject to the following conditions, and all
other provisions of this subchapter, and of any other applicable ordinance of
the city or state law.
   (A)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of its place of
operation as described in its license application. Any peace officer of the
city shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and search such
premises of the licensee during business hours in order to ensure that the
premises are conducted in compliance with this subchapter and applicable state
laws and regulations.
   (B)   The premises within which lawful gambling may be conducted pursuant to
this subchapter must be duly licensed for the sale of on-sale intoxicating
liquor.
   (C)   All gambling operations conducted by the applicant must be managed by
bona fide members of the organization applying for the license, or a designated
representative of the organization.
(Prior Code, § 9.2.3.5)
§ 111.38 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may revoke or suspend any gambling license for violation of
any provision or condition of this subchapter or any state law or rule
incorporated in this subchapter, subject to the requirements and conditions as
contained in state law and applicable rules of the Charitable Gambling Control
Board.
(Prior Code, § 9.2.3.6)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
112.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
112.04   License ineligibility
   
112.05   License suspension and revocation
   
112.06   License transferability
   
112.07   Registration
   
112.08   Prohibited activities
   
112.09   Exclusion by placard
   
112.10   Effectiveness
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to- street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or
otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
“hawker.”
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as regular business days.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street- to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the
same as the term “canvasser.”
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for
more than 14 consecutive days.
§ 112.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or
any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict
door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be
required to register as solicitors under §
112.07. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and
other ideas.
§ 112.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S. Ch.
329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a license for
the activity.
   (B)   City license required. Pursuant to M.S. § 437.02, as it may be amended
from time to time, except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person
shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without
first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need not be licensed,
but are still required to register pursuant to §
112.07.
   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting business operations in the
city. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall
be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name.
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers.
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence.
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence.
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business (if any).
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant,
including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines.
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license.
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city, with a maximum 14 consecutive
days.
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses.
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
      (15)   Proof of any required county license.
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
      (19)   The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form
of identification.
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number (VIN) for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business, and a physical description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established in the Ordinance Establishing Fees and
Charges.
   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the City Clerk, within two regular business days, must
determine if the application is complete. An application is determined to be
complete only if all required information is provided. If the City Clerk
determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the
application is complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation, including
background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the
application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application the City Clerk must issue the license unless there exist grounds
for denying the license under §
112.04, in which case the Clerk must deny the license application. If the City
Clerk denies the license application, the applicant must be notified in writing
of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal
the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a
public hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal
within 20 days of the date of the request for a public hearing. The decision of
the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning
the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.
   (F)   Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid
for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted to
peddlers and transient merchants under this chapter shall be valid only during
the time period indicated on the license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of
place-to-place movement when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that
person’s State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech,
press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the
person's exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license.
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant.
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General, or other state attorney
general’s office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or
agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed against the
applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 112.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or
incorrect statements provided by the applicant on the application form.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      (3)   Subsequent conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under §
112.04.
      (4)   Engaging in prohibited activity as provided under §
112.08.
      (5)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within ten regular
business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall
be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a
public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular
business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.07 REGISTRATION.
   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter under §
112.03, shall be required to register with the city. Persons engaging in door-
to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for
the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. Registration shall
be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall
be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Clerk shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of
the registration. Certificates of Registration shall be non- transferable.
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person.
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conducting business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient
Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign
or placard under this section.
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.10 EFFECTIVENESS.
   The provisions of §§
112.01,
112.02,
112.08 and
112.09 shall automatically apply upon adoption of this chapter. Sections
112.03,
112.04,
112.05,
112.06 and
112.07 shall not be effective until the adoption of a City Council resolution
or ordinance authorizing the licensing of persons covered by those sections.
CHAPTER 113: PAWNBROKER REGULATIONS
Section
   
113.01   Statement of policy
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   License required
   
113.04   License term
   
113.05   Licensee ineligibility
   
113.06   Change in ownership
   
113.07   Application content
   
113.08   Bonds, insurance, renewals, and transfers
   
113.09   City codes
   
113.10   Execution of application and investigation of applicant
   
113.11   Approval and issuance
   
113.12   License and application fees
   
113.13   Records required
   
113.14   Inspection of records; retention
   
113.15   Daily reports to Police Department
   
113.16   Effect of non-redemption
   
113.17   Holding period
   
113.18   Permitted charges
   
113.19   Police Chief’s order to hold property
   
113.20   Labels required
   
113.21   Hours of operation
   
113.22   Minors
   
113.23   Inspection of items
   
113.24   License display
   
113.25   Prohibitions
   
113.26   Redemption risk of loss
   
113.27   Pawnshop location
   
113.28   Suspension or revocation
 
   
113.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and business regulations, see
Ch. 111
   Peddlers and solicitors, see
Ch. 112
§ 113.01 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Ch. 325J, as it may be amended from
time to time, entitled “Pawnbroker Regulation”, the city has the power, for the
purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, and welfare, to adopt an ordinance
to regulate “pawn transactions” and issue licenses to qualified applicants to
enable applicants to engage in business as a “pawnbroker”.
   (B)   To help the Police Department better regulate current and future pawn
businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the
pawn industry, and increase identification of criminal activities through the
timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction information, this section
also implements and establishes the required use of the automated pawn system
(APS).
(Prior Code, § 9.11)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker
except renewals, redemptions, or extensions of existing pawns on items
previously reported and continuously in the licensee’s possession, voided
transactions, and confiscations.
   PAWN TRANSACTION. Any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase
of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the
pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price
within a fixed period of time.
   PAWNBROKER. A person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of
lending money on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the business
of purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition
that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a
fixed period of time. To the extent that a PAWNBROKER’S business includes
buying personal property previously used, rented, or leased, or selling it on
consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
   PAWNSHOP. The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly
conducts business.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity, however
organized.
   PLEDGED GOODS. Tangible personal property other than those in action,
securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, that are
purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the
possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction.
   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which
merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment, or trade, or in
which a pawn is renewed, extended, or redeemed, or for which a unique
transaction number or identifier is generated by their point-of-sale software,
or an item is confiscated by law enforcement, is reportable except:
      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a
merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of
business, and the retail sale of merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must
maintain record of the purchase or consignment which describes each item and
must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record;
and
      (2)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by
pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods
have expired.
(Prior Code, § 9.12)
§ 113.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker within the city
without first obtaining a license from the city.
   (B)   Any pawn transaction made without the benefit of a license is void.
   (C)   Licenses shall be issued only upon approval by the City Council.
   (D)   A separate license is required for each place of business. More than
one license may be issued to a person if all provisions of this section and
state law are complied with.
   (E)   No expiration, revocation, suspension, or surrender of any license
shall impair or affect the obligation of any preexisting lawful contract
between the licensee and any pledger.
   (F)   A licensee obtains no vested interest in a license issued under this
section and the city reserves the right to not renew the same.
(Prior Code, § 9.13) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE TERM.
   Each license shall be granted for a calendar year and shall expire at the
conclusion of business on December 31 of the license year.
(Prior Code, § 9.14)
§ 113.05 LICENSEE INELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to a person if the applicant:
      (1)   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   Is not a citizen of the United States;
      (3)   Is not of good moral character and repute; or
      (4)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation
licensed, unless the person has shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under
M.S. Ch. 325J, as it may be amended from time to time, this chapter and as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   No license shall be granted to an applicant who fails to provide all
information required under state statutes or who provides false or misleading
information in the application.
   (C)   No license shall be granted for a location where a building is under
construction or otherwise is not ready for occupancy.
   (D)   No license shall be granted on any premises which the Council
determines is unsuitable for this type of business. This determination shall
not be made by the Council except after a public hearing following notice to
the applicant.
   (E)   No license shall be issued to an applicant that is a partnership if
the applicant has any general partner or managing partner in violation of, or
who is non-qualifying, under this section.
   (F)   No license shall be issued to an applicant that is a corporation or
other business organization if the business has a manager, proprietor, or agent
in charge of the organization/business to be licensed if the person or persons
are in violation of, or are nonqualifying, under this section.
   (G)   No application for initial or renewal license will be accepted if
there are past due property taxes on the property described in the license
application.
   (H)   No license will be issued if there are past due property taxes on the
property described in the license application.
   (I)   If property taxes become past due for any property described in a
license application, any license issued pursuant to that application shall be
immediately suspended by operation of this chapter without further notice.
Reinstatement of a suspended license can only be obtained by payment in full of
past due property taxes.
(Prior Code, § 9.15)
§ 113.06 CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.
   Licenses issued hereunder are not assignable and any change, directly or
beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed pawnshop shall require the
application for a new license, and the applicant must satisfy all eligibility
requirements and pay all licensing fees.
(Prior Code, § 9.16)
§ 113.07 APPLICATION CONTENT.
   (A)   Any person desiring a pawnbroker’s license shall file with the City
Clerk-Treasurer an application in writing upon a form furnished by the City
Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
   (B)   Applications shall require that any or all of the following
information be set forth upon the application:
      (1)   If the applicant is a natural person:
         (a)   The name, place, and date of birth, resident street address, and
telephone number of the applicant;
         (b)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States;
         (c)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places where used;
         (d)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation name or style other than the name of the applicant and a copy of
the certificate as required by M.S. § 333.01, as it may be amended from time to
time;
         (e)   The street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding five years;
         (f)   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and partner(s), if any,
for the preceding five years;
         (g)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
crime, or violation of any ordinance or law other than traffic laws. If so, the
applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for
which the convictions were had; and
         (h)   The physical description of the applicant.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership:
         (a)   The name(s) and addresses of all general and limited partners
and all information concerning each general partner required in division (B)(1)
above;
         (b)   The name(s) of managing partner(s) and the interest of each
partner in the pawnbroker business; and
         (c)   A copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the
application, if the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade
name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as it may be amended from time to time, a copy
of the certificate shall be attached to the application.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
         (a)   The name of the corporation or business form, and if
incorporated, the state of incorporation;
         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, certificate of
organization, articles of incorporation, articles of organization or other
organizational documents, and bylaws or operating agreement shall be attached
to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority, as required by M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, shall be attached; and
         (c)   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), other agent(s) in
charge of the business, and all owners of 10% or more of the business, and all
information concerning each manager, proprietor, agent, or owner as required in
division (B)(1) above.
      (4)   For all applicants:
         (a)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker license from
any other governmental unit and whether the applicant is licensed under M.S. §
471.924, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (b)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a pawnbroker
license from any other governmental unit, or had a license revoked or canceled:
         (c)   The names, resident street addresses, and business addresses of
three references who are of good moral character and who are not related to the
applicant, and not holding any ownership in the premises or business, who may
attest to the character of the applicant or manager;
         (d)   The location of the business premises and a diagram or blueprint
of the premises to be licensed;
         (e)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due
and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid;
         (f)   Whether the application is for premises either planned or under
construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed
premises to be licensed. If the plans or design are already on file with the
city, no plans need to be submitted; and
         (g)   Such other information as the City Council or issuing authority
may require.
(Prior Code, § 9.17)
§ 113.08 BONDS, INSURANCE, RENEWALS, AND TRANSFERS.
   (A)   Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit to the
City Clerk-Treasurer a bond with a corporate surety in an amount as set forth
by City Council from time to time for approval by the City Council. All bonds
shall be conditioned that the principal will observe all laws in relation to
the licensed business, including, in particular, compliance with each and every
requirement under state statutes; will pay when due all fees, taxes, penalties,
and other charges provided by law; and will account for the delivery to any
person legally entitled thereto any goods of that person which have come into
the principal’s possession through the principal’s business as a pawnbroker,
or, in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value of the goods in money to the
person. The bond shall contain a provision that it may not be canceled except
upon 30 days written notice to the city, which shall be served upon the
licensing authority. All bonds shall be for the period of the license year. The
amount specified in the bond required is declared to be a penalty; provided,
however, that the surety thereof shall not be liable for any amount in excess
of the penal amount of the bond. Such bond shall run to the city, as obligee,
and in the event of a forfeiture of any such bond for violation of the
conditions, the County District Court may forfeit the penal sum of the bond to
the city.
   (B)   The licensed business and its principals shall obtain and keep current
all insurance as required by the state, including workers compensation
coverage, and shall provide proof thereof upon demand to the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (C)   An application for renewal of a pawnbroker’s license shall require the
applicant to re-verify or update all of the information contained on the
original license application.
   (D)   An applicant seeking to obtain approval for the transfer of a
pawnbroker’s license which is currently held by another person or organization,
shall complete and furnish to the City Clerk-Treasurer an application form as
in the case of an original application for the same type and class of license.
In addition, the current license holder must sign the application form
indicating its approval of the transfer.
(Prior Code, § 9.18)
§ 113.09 CITY CODES.
   The licensed business shall at all times be located and operated in
compliance with all existing requirements of the zoning, building, fire,
health, and all other applicable codes of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.19)
§ 113.10 EXECUTION OF APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   The application shall be signed, verified, and sworn to at the City
Clerk-Treasurer’s office. If the application is that of a natural person, it
shall be signed and sworn to by the person; if that of a corporation, by an
officer thereof authorized to execute documents on behalf of the corporation;
if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
   (B)   Each application shall be referred by the City Clerk-Treasurer to the
Police Department, the Building Official, and the Fire Chief for investigation
and comment. Each official shall conduct such investigation as the official
deems necessary to determine whether the statements contained in the
application accurately reflect the facts as discovered in the investigation,
and whether or to what extent the proposed premises or the applicant appear to
have violated any laws or regulations for which the agency has enforcement
responsibility.
   (C)   All applications with reports, as well as recommendations if deemed
necessary, shall be returned to the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall thereafter
be presented to the City Council. The City Council may order and conduct such
additional investigation as it deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 9.20)
§ 113.11 APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   An application for a pawnbroker’s license shall be deemed completed
when all of the information required on the application form has been provided
to the City Clerk-Treasurer; all fees, bonds, insurance documents, and other
required documentary materials have been paid or filed, as appropriate with the
City Clerk-Treasurer; and all investigative reports have been submitted to the
City Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   At the first meeting of the Council following receipt of the afore
described documents and fees, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall present same to
the City Council. The City Council, if it deems the applicant is suitable and
proper, shall by motion approve the issuance of the license to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 9.21)
§ 113.12 LICENSE AND APPLICATION FEES.
   (A)   The license fee shall be established by City Council action.
   (B)   The license fee shall be paid in full when the application is filed.
The fee shall be refunded if the application is withdrawn before City Council
approval or if the City Council rejects the application except, however, in the
instance where the rejection is for a willful misstatement in the license
application.
   (C)   The license fee shall be paid annually, the initial fee to be prorated
from the date of issuance.
   (D)   All new applicants shall pay a non refundable initial investigative
fee as set forth in the city fee schedule to cover the costs involved in
verifying the matters set forth in the license application and to cover the
expense of any investigation needed to assure compliance with this chapter and
other applicable laws.
   (E)   Applicants who are reapplying for their annual license shall pay an
investigative fee, as set forth in the city fee schedule, to cover the costs of
re-verifying application data and compliance with applicable laws since the
initial application.
(Prior Code, § 9.22)
§ 113.13 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Transaction records. At the time of any reportable transaction other
than renewals, extensions, redemptions, or confiscations, every licensee must
immediately record in English the following information by using ink or other
indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the Police
Department:
      (1)   A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item;
      (2)   The full name, current residence address, current residence
telephone or cell phone number, date of birth, and accurate description of the
pledger or seller, including, sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and
color of hair;
      (3)   Date and time of pawn or purchase transaction, and the unique alpha
and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other
transactions in the licensee’s records;
      (4)   The identification number and state of issue from one of the
following forms of identification of the seller or pledger: current valid
Minnesota driver’s license; current valid Minnesota identification card; or
current valid photo identification card issued by another state or a province
of Canada;
      (5)   The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged
therefor;
      (6)   The maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount due,
including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges;
      (7)   The signature of the person identified in the transaction;
      (8)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Police
Department of acceptable video standards, the licensee must also take a color
photograph or color video recording of:
         (a)   Each customer involved in a billable transaction; and
         (b)   Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
      (9)   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches in length
by two inches in width and must be maintained in a manner that the photograph
can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction
to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the Police
Department, or the Police Chief’s designee, upon request. The major portion of
the photograph must include an identifiable front facial image of the person
who owned or sold the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The
licensee must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises. If
a video photograph is taken, the video camera must record the person pawning or
selling the item so as to include an identifiable image of that person’s face.
Items photographed by video must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must
be electronically referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched
and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate.
The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being videotaped by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises.
The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for three months;
      (10)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Police
Department, licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in this
section by submitting them as digital images, in a format specified by the
issuing authority, electronically cross-referenced to the reportable
transaction they are associated with. Notwithstanding the digital images may be
captured from required video recordings, this provision does not altar or amend
the requirements in division (A)(8) above; and
      (11)   For renewals, extensions, redemptions, and confiscations, the
licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the
current transaction, and the type of transaction.
   (B)   Receipt required. Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party
identified in every reportable transaction, except voids and confiscations, and
must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three years. The receipt must
include all the transaction record information required under state statutes,
and at least the following information:
      (1)   The, name, street address, mailing address if different from the
street address, and the phone number of the pawnbroker;
      (2)   The statement that “Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker
within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment
made on the account for a period of not less than 60 days past the date of the
pawn transaction renewal or extension no further notice is necessary. There is
no obligation for the pledger to redeem pledged goods.”;
      (3)   The statement that “The pledger of this item attests that it is not
stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledger has the
right to sell or pawn the item.”;
      (4)   The statement that “This item is redeemable only by the pledger to
whom the receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written and
notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or a
person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledger. Written authorization for release of
property to person other than the original pledger must be maintained along
with the original transaction record.”; and
      (5)   A blank line for the pledger’s signature.
   (C)   Pawn ticket. The pledger shall sign the pawn ticket and receive an
exact copy of the same.
(Prior Code, § 9.23)
§ 113.14 INSPECTION OF RECORDS; RETENTION.
   Transaction records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by
the Police Department. Data entries shall be retained for at least three years
from the date of transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be
retained a minimum of 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 9.24)
§ 113.15 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Effective no later than 60 days after the Police Department provides
licensees with the current version of the automated pawn system interchange
file specification, licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the
Police Department daily in the following manner. Licensees must provide to the
Police Department all reportable transaction information by transferring it
from their computer to the automated pawn system via modem using the current
version of the automated pawn system interchange file specification. All
required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close
of business each day in accordance with standards and procedures established by
the issuing authority. Any transaction that does not meet the automated pawn
system interchange file specification must be corrected and resubmitted the
next business day. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a
conspicuous place in the premises, which informs patrons that all transactions
are reported to the Police Department daily.
   (B)   Licensees will be charged an amount as set forth by City Council from
time to time for each billable transaction reported to the Police Department.
      (1)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required
reports by modem, the licensee must provide the Police Department, upon
request, printed copies of all reportable transactions along with the video
tape(s) for that date, by noon the next business day.
      (2)   If the problem is determined to be in the licensee’s system and is
not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the
licensee must continue to provide the required reports as detailed herein, and
shall be charged an amount as set forth by City Council from time to time for
reporting failure penalty, daily, until the error is corrected.
      (3)   If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee’s system,
the licensee must continue to provide the required reports herein, and resubmit
all transactions via modem when the error is corrected.
      (4)   If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize, or transmit the
photographs required under state statutes, the licensee must immediately take
all required photographs with a still camera, cross-reference the photographs
to the correct transaction, and make the pictures available to the Police
Department upon request.
      (5)   Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that
prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon
correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable
transaction from every business day the problem had existed.
      (6)   Notwithstanding other provisions herein, the Police Department may,
upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation of the
daily reporting penalty.
(Prior Code, § 9.25)
§ 113.16 EFFECT OF NON-REDEMPTION.
   (A)   A pledger shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or make any
payment on a pawn transaction. Pledged goods not redeemed within at least 60
days of the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension shall
automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker, and qualified right, title, and
interest in and to the goods shall automatically vest in the pawnbroker.
   (B)   The pawnbroker’s right, title, and interest in the pledged goods is
qualified only by the pledger’s right, while the pledged goods remain in
possession of the pawnbroker and not sold to a third party, to redeem the goods
by paying the loan plus fees and/or interest accrued up to the date of
redemption.
(Prior Code, § 9.26)
§ 113.17 HOLDING PERIOD.
   (A)   Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold
or otherwise transferred for 21 days from the date of the transaction. An
individual may redeem an item 72 hours after the item was received on deposit,
excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
   (B)   Any person pledging, pawning, or depositing an item for security must
have a minimum of 60 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item
before it may be forfeited and sold. During the 60-day period, items may not be
removed from the licensed location except as provided under state statutes.
Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the
person to whom the receipt was issued, or to any person identified in a written
and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt,
or to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledger or with approval of the police license
inspector. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than
original pledger must be maintained along with original transaction record in
accordance with §
113.14 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.27) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.18 PERMITTED CHARGES.
   The pawnbroker is entitled to contract for such charges as is permitted by
M.S. § 325J.07, as it may be amended from time to time, and is subject to the
terms and requirements therein contained as well as future amendments to same.
(Prior Code, § 9.28)
§ 113.19 POLICE CHIEF’S ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
   (A)   Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any
agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing
by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days
from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is
canceled, or until an order to hold or confiscate is issued, pursuant to state
statutes, whichever comes first.
   (B)   Order to hold. Whenever the Police Chief, or the Police Chief’s
designee, notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the
Police Chief or the Police Chief’s designee. The order to hold shall expire 90
days from the date it is placed unless the Police Chief or the Police Chief’s
designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in
writing.
   (C)   Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in
a criminal case, the Police Department or Police Chief’s designee may:
      (1)   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a
written order from the Police Department or the Police Chief’s designee; or
      (2)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided under state
statutes, and leave it in the shop.
   (D)   Information to be provided when confiscating property. When an item is
confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of
the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name and phone number of the
confiscating agency and investigator, and the case number related to the
confiscation.
   (E)   Notification when hold/confiscation ends. When an order to hold/
confiscate is no longer necessary, the Police Chief or Police Chief’s designee
shall so notify the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 9.29)
§ 113.20 LABELS REQUIRED.
   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable transaction.
Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies
the transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the name of the
item, and the description or the model and serial number of the item as
reported to the Police Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the
item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be re-used.
(Prior Code, § 9.30)
§ 113.21 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No pawnbroker shall keep the pawnbroker business open for the transaction of
business on any day of the week before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. and shall
not be open for the transaction of business on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Fourth
of July Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
(Prior Code, § 9.31) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.22 MINORS.
   The pawnbroker will not purchase or receive personal property of any nature
on deposit or pledge from a person under the age of 18 years.
(Prior Code, § 9.32) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.23 INSPECTION OF ITEMS.
   The pawnbroker shall, at all times during the term of the license, allow the
city’s Police Department and other law enforcement authorities associated with
the city’s Police Department to enter the premises where the pawnbroker
business is located during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for
the purpose of inspecting the premises and inspecting the items, wares, and
merchandise and records therein for the purpose of locating items suspected or
alleged to have been stolen or otherwise improperly disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 9.33)
§ 113.24 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   (A)   A license issued under this section must be posted in a conspicuous
place in the premises for which it is used.
   (B)   Also, the licensee must display a sign, in a conspicuous place in the
premises and of a sufficient size, which informs all patrons that all
transactions are reported to the city’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 9.34)
§ 113.25 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   A pawnbroker and the agents and employees of the pawnbroker shall not:
      (1)   Make any false entry in the records of pawn transactions or use any
pawn ticket not meeting the requirements of this section;
      (2)   Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business
the records, books, or accounts relating to the licensee’s pawn transactions;
      (3)   Refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency, the
Attorney General, or any other duly authorized state or federal law enforcement
officer to inspect the pawn records or any pawn goods in the person’s
possession during the ordinary hours of business or other times acceptable to
both parties;
      (4)   Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for three years;
      (5)   Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the age of
18;
      (6)   Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledger or
seller, or waiving any provisions of this section, or providing for a maturity
date less than one month after the date of pawn;
      (7)   Fail to return pledged goods to a pledger or seller, or provide
compensation as set forth under state statutes, upon payment of the full amount
due the pawnbroker unless either the date of redemption is more than 60 days
past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension and the pawnbroker
has legally sold the pledged goods or the pledged goods have been taken into
custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or agency;
      (8)   Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or purchased
goods back to the pledger or seller in the same, or a related, transaction;
      (9)   Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a pawn
transaction;
      (10)   Sell pledged goods before the time to redeem has expired;
      (11)   Fail to maintain order in the business;
      (12)   Keep, possess, or operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or
operation, on the licensed premises of dice, slot machines, roulette wheels,
punch boards, blackjack tables, or pinball machines which return coins or
slugs, chips, or tokens of any kind, which are redeemable in merchandise or
cash;
      (13)   Accept any item of property which contains an altered or
obliterated serial number or “operation identification number” or any item of
property whose serial number has been removed; or
      (14)   Accept items of property without the seller or pledger providing a
proper form of identification.
   (B)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any
article of property not his or her own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge,
sell, consign, leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with
permission or without; nor shall any person pawn pledge, sell, consign, leave,
or deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest,
with any licensee.
   (C)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit
any article of property with any licensee; shall give a false or fictitious
name nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out of date address of
residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered identification,
or the identification of another to any licensee.
(Prior Code, § 9.35) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.26 REDEMPTION RISK OF LOSS.
   (A)   The date by which a pawned item of property must be redeemed by the
pledger, without risk that the item will be sold, must be a day in which the
pawnbroker is open for regular business.
   (B)   Any person to whom the receipt for pledged goods was issued, or any
person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the
pledged goods identified in the receipt, or any person identified in writing by
the pledger at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger,
shall be entitled to redeem or repurchase the pledged goods described on the
ticket. In the event the goods are lost or damaged while in possession of the
pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the pledger, in cash or replacement
goods acceptable to the pledger, for the fair market value of the lost or
damaged goods. Proof of compensation shall be a defense to any prosecution or
civil action.
(Prior Code, § 9.36)
§ 113.27 PAWNSHOP LOCATION.
   (A)   No pawnshop shall be located within ten driving miles of any gambling
casino. No pawnshop lawfully operating as of April 2, 1996, shall be required
to relocated or close as a result of this section.
   (B)   A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its
business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license.
However, upon written request, the Police Department or the Police Chief’s
designee may approve an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The
licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance with state
statutes. All provisions of this chapter regarding record keeping and reporting
apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be stored in compliance
with all provisions of the city code. The licensee must either own the building
in which the business is conducted, or have a lease on the business premise
that extends for more than six months.
(Prior Code, § 9.37) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.28 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this
chapter upon finding a violation of:
      (1)   Any of the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Any state statute regulating pawnbrokers;
      (3)   Any state or local law relating to moral character and repute; or
      (4)   A conviction of the pawnbroker for theft or receiving stolen
property.
   (B)   Whenever it appears to the City Council that adequate grounds exist
for the suspension or revocation of a specific pawnbroker’s license, the City
Council shall by resolution specify the nature of the alleged grounds and order
that a hearing on the matter be held as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   A revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by
written notice to the licensee and a public bearing. The written notice shall
be mailed to the address listed on the application at least ten days prior to
the hearing and shall designate the time and place of hearing and shall state
the nature of the charges against the pawnbroker.
   (D)   Upon a finding that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of
this chapter or any state statutes designated in this section, the Council may
suspend the license for up to the 60 days or revoke the license.
(Prior Code, § 9.38)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
(Prior Code, § 9.39)
CHAPTER 114: ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Purpose
   
114.03   Application
   
114.04   Location
   
114.05   Hours of operation
   
114.06   Operation
   
114.07   Consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages
   
114.08   Licenses
   
114.09   Investigation and issuance
   
114.10   License fees
   
114.11   Inspection
   
114.12   Expiration and renewal
   
114.13   Suspension
   
114.14   Revocation
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOK AND/OR MEDIA STORE. An establishment which has a substantial
portion (25% of utilized floor area) of its stock in trade or stock on display
books, magazines, films, videotapes, or other media which are characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET. An establishment which provides dancing or other live
entertainment, if the dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the performance, depiction, or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. Any business which offers its patrons services,
entertainment, or the sale of merchandise characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Specifically included in the
term, but without limitation, are adult book and media stores, adult cabarets,
adult hotels or motels, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult modeling
studios, adult motion picture arcades, adult motion picture theaters, adult
novelty businesses, and other adult establishments.
   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel wherein material is presented which
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.
      (1)   A theater in an enclosed building, with a capacity for less than 50
persons used for presenting motion pictures, including, but not limited to,
film and videotape, having as a dominant theme material extinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   Any business which presents motion pictures, including films and
videotapes, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, for viewing on the premises,
including, but not limited to, private booths, viewing by means of coin-
operated or other mechanical devices, and the viewing of excerpt of motion
pictures offered for sale or rent.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place wherein coin or token operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motor picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A theater in an enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting live
entertainment or motion pictures, including, but not limited to, film and
videotapes having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business which sells, offers to sell, or displays
devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual
stimulation.
   ADULT USE. Any of the adult activities and businesses described above
constitute “adult-oriented businesses” which are subject to the regulation of
this chapter.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS (ADULT USE). Include any less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair, buttocks, and
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human
male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES (ADULT USE). Any of the following conditions:
      (1)   An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being and an
animal;
      (2)   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on the
part of one so clothed;
      (3)   Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any
explicit, close-up presentation of a human genital organ clothed or unclothed;
and
      (4)   Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or
unclothed pubic area or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts of a
female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between
humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 114.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to:
      (1)   Prevent additional criminal activity within the city;
      (2)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse
effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
      (3)   To locate adult-oriented businesses away from residential areas,
schools, churches, and parks and playgrounds; or
      (4)   Prevent concentration of adult-oriented businesses within certain
areas of the city.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation of restriction on the content of any communicative
material, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent
nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-
oriented materials protect by the First Amendment, or to deny access by
distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended
market.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 114.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no structure shall be
erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or altered, and no structure or
land shall be used, for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in
conformity with this chapter.
   (B)   No adult-oriented business shall engage in any activity or conduct or
permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the
establishment which is prohibited by an ordinance of the city, the laws of the
state, or the United States of America. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as authorizing or permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated
by other statutes or ordinances, including, but not limited to, statutes or
ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale, or distribution of obscene
material generally, or the exhibition, sale, or distribution of specified
materials to minors.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.04 LOCATION.
   During the term of this chapter, no adult-oriented businesses shall be
located less than 500 feet from any residential zoning district boundary or
site used for residential purposes, nor less than 500 feet from any church
site, from any school site, from any day care facility, or from any park which
is adjacent to property zoned residential. In addition, no adult-oriented
business may be located within 300 feet of another adult-oriented business. For
purposes of this chapter, this distance shall be a horizontal measurement from
the nearest existing residential district boundary or site used for residential
purposes, church site, school site, day care site, park site, or another adult-
oriented business site to the nearest boundary of the proposed adult-oriented
business site.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.05 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No adult-oriented business site shall be open to the public from the hours
of 11:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.06 OPERATION.
   (A)   Off-site viewing. An establishment operating as an adult-oriented
business shall prevent off-site viewing of its merchandise which, if viewed by
a minor, would be in violation of M.S. Ch. 617, as it may be amended from time
to time, or other applicable federal or state statutes or local ordinances.
   (B)   Entrances. All entrances to the business, with the exception of
emergency fire exits which are not useable by patrons to enter the business,
shall be visible from a public right-of-way.
   (C)   Layout. The layout of the display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the
store can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise offered
for sale or viewing, including, but not limited to, books, magazines,
photographs, video tapes, or any other material.
   (D)   Illumination. Illumination of the premises’ exterior shall be adequate
to observe the location and activities of all people on the exterior premises.
   (E)   Signs. Signs for adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the city
code sign restrictions addressed in §§
150.01 to 150.03 and, in addition, signs for adult-oriented businesses shall
not contain representational depiction of an adult nature of graphic
descriptions of the adult theme of the operation.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 114.07 CONSUMPTION OR SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   Adult-oriented business shall not be located on the same parcel as, on a
parcel adjacent to, or within 500 feet of an establishment that serves
alcoholic beverages. Sale of alcoholic beverages on a parcel containing an
adult use is prohibited. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on a parcel
containing an adult use is prohibited.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.08 LICENSES.
   (A)   Licenses required. All establishments, including any business
operating at the time this chapter becomes effective, operating or intending to
operate adult-oriented business, shall apply for and obtain a license from the
city. A person is in violation of the city code if he or she operates an adult-
oriented business without a valid license issued by the city.
   (B)   Applications. An application for a license must be made on a form
provided by the city.
      (1)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing
the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches.
      (2)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
section and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
the appropriate state, county, and local law and codes by the health official,
fire marshal, and building official.
      (3)   Application for license shall contain the address and legal
description of the property to be used; the names, addresses, phone numbers,
dates of birth of the owners, lessee, if any, the operator, or manager, and all
employees; the name, address, and phone number of two persons, who shall be
residents of the state, and who may be called upon to attest to the
applicant’s, manger’s, or operator’s character; whether the applicant, manager,
or operator has ever been convicted of a crime or offense other than a traffic
offense and, if so, complete and accurate information detailing the disposition
thereof; the names and addresses of all creditors of the applicant, owner,
lessee, or manager regarding credit which has been extended for the purposes of
constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, furnishing, or acquiring the
premises, personal effects, equipment, or anything incident to the
establishment, maintenance, and operation of the business.
      (4)   If the application is made on behalf of the corporation, joint
business venture, partnership, or any legally constituted business association,
it shall submit along with its application, accurate and complete business
records showing the names, addresses, and dates of birth of all individuals
having an interest in the business, including partners, officers, owners, and
creditors furnishing credit for the establishment, acquisition, maintenance,
and furnishings of the business; in the case of a corporation, the names,
addresses, and dates of birth off all officers, general managers, members of
the board of directors, as well as any creditors who have extended credit for
the acquisition, maintenance, operation, or furnishing of the establishment,
including the purchase or acquisition of any items of personal property for use
in the operation.
      (5)   All applicants shall furnish to the city, along with their
applications, complete and accurate documentation establishing the interest of
the applicant and any other person having an interest in the premises upon
which the building is proposed to be located or the furnishings thereof,
personal property thereof, or the operation or maintenance thereof.
Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for deed,
mortgage deed, mortgage credit arrangement, loan agreements, security
agreements, and any other documents establishing the interest of the applicant
or any other person in the operation, acquisition, or maintenance of the
enterprise.
   (C)   Application/applicant disqualification. An application can be
disqualified for the following:
      (1)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; or
      (2)   An applicant has been convicted of a crime involving any of the
following offenses:
         (a)   Any sex crimes as defined by M.S. §§ 609.293 through 609.352, as
they may be amended from time to time, inclusive, or as defined by any
ordinance or statute in conformity therewith;
         (b)   Any obscenity crime as defined by M.S. §§ 617.23 through 617.299
inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, or as defined by any
ordinance or statute in conformity therewith, for which:
            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-hour
period.
         (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed from shall have no
effect on disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse.
   (D)   Requalification. An applicant who has been convicted of an offense
listed in (C)(2) above, may qualify for an adult-oriented business license only
when the time period required by (C)(2) above has lapsed.
   (E)   Posting. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the adult-oriented business. The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult-oriented business so
that is may be easily read at any time.
   (F)   Council action. The City Council shall act to approve or disapprove
the license application within 120 days from the date the application was
submitted, provided that the application contains all of the information
required by this chapter. If the application is deficient, the Council shall
act on the application within 120 days from the date that the deficiency has
been corrected. The City Clerk- Treasurer shall notify the applicant of the
deficiencies in the application.
   (G)   Appeals. Within 90 days after the decision by the Council, the
applicant may appeal to the District Court by serving a notice upon the Mayor
or City Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.09 INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE.
   The City Council shall direct the Police Department or County Sheriff to
investigate all facts set forth in the application. An advance fee of an amount
as set forth by City Council from time to time shall be submitted with the
application to defray the city’s costs and expenses with the background
investigation. After the background investigation has been completed and all
information required by the application has been submitted to the city, the
City Council shall determine whether to grant or deny the license application.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 114.10 LICENSE FEES.
   Fees shall be established by City Council resolution on the fee structure.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 114.11 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, County Sheriff’s office, Fire
Department, Zoning Administrator, and Building Inspection Division, to inspect
the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law and city code, at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
   (B)   Refusal to permit inspections. A person who operates an adult-oriented
business or his or her agent or employee commits an offense if he or she
refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, County Sheriff’s Department, Fire
Department, Zoning Administrator, or Building Inspection Division at any time
it is occupied or open for business. Refusal to permit inspections may result
in the suspension of the license as provided in §
114.13.
   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for uses as a
permanent or temporary habitation.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.12 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Expiration. Each license shall expire at the end of the calendar year
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in §
114.08(B). Application for renewal must be made at least 60 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 60 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will be unaffected.
   (B)   Denial of renewal. When the city denies renewal of a license, the
applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the
renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 114.13 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Causes of suspension. The city may suspend a license for a period not
to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee
has:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
chapter;
      (2)   Engaged in the use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult-
oriented business premises;
      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult-oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult-oriented
business premises; or
      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or mange an adult-oriented
business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Notice. A suspension by the city shall be preceded by written notice
to the licensee and before a hearing. The notice shall give at least ten days’
notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the
charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally, or by leaving the same at the licensee’s business premises with the
person in charge thereof.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013)
§ 114.14 REVOCATION.
   (A)   Suspended licenses. The city may revoke a license if a cause of
suspension in §
114.13 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
   (B)   Causes of revocation. The city shall revoke a license if it determines
that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the city during the application process;
      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult-oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
114.08(C)(2), for which the time period required in §
114.08(C)(2), has not elapsed;
      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or
persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a
crime listed in §
114.08(C)(2), for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or
person were employees of the adult-oriented business at the time the offenses
were committed;
      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation to occur in or on the
licensed premises; or
      (8)   A licensee has allowed the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic
beverages at the adult- oriented business for which a license has been issued
herein.
   (C)   Appeals. The fact that conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.
   (D)   Granting a license after revocation. When the city revokes a license,
the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued
an adult-oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation
became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis
for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective. If the license was revoked under division (B)(5) above, an applicant
may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years
required under division (B)(5) of this section have elapsed.
   (E)   Notice. A revocation by the city shall be proceeded by written notice
to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least ten days’
notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the
charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed premised with the person in
charge thereof.
   (F)   Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer this license to
another, nor shall a licensee operate an adult-oriented business under the
authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
(Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013)
CHAPTER 115: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Section
   
115.01   Purpose, scope, and objectives
   
115.02   Definitions
   
115.03   Annual license required
   
115.04   License application requirements
   
115.05   General requirements
   
115.06   Enforcement
   
115.07   Appeals
§ 115.01 PURPOSE, SCOPE, AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate
short-term rentals within the city, and to continue the allowed use of short-
term rental units, but also mitigate possible adverse impacts to the health,
safety, welfare, and quality of life of surrounding properties, as well as
water and environmental quality, through the establishment of a licensing
program for the review and approval of short-term rental unit operations.
   (B)   Scope. Pursuant to M.S. § 412.191, subd. 4 and Minn. Rules Chs. 7080-
7083 in their entirety, except as referenced under §
52.49 of this code, are hereby adopted by the city by reference.
   (C)   Objectives.
      (1)   To provide and enforce standards for the maintenance of short-term
rentals.
      (2)   To provide local governance to promote health, safety, and wellness
to citizens and patrons of short-term rentals.
   (D)   Enforcement. Any violations of this chapter may result in enforcement
as noted under §
115.06.
(Ord. 2023-2, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEDROOM. An area that is:
      (1)   A room designed or used for sleeping; or
      (2)   A room or area of a dwelling that has a minimum floor area of 70
square feet with access gained from the living area or living area hallway.
Architectural features that affect the use as a bedroom under this item may be
considered in making the bedroom determination.
   OWNER. The property owner of record of the real estate located in the city.
   OWNER’S AUTHORIZED AGENT. A person who has written designation to act on
behalf of the owner.
   PARCEL. A unit of real property that has been given a parcel identification
number maintained by the county.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT. Any home, cabin, condominium, or similar building
that is advertised as, or held out to be, a place where sleeping quarters are
furnished to the public on a nightly, weekly, or for less than a 30 day period
and is not a bed and breakfast, resort, hotel, or motel.
   SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM (SSTS). Either an individual subsurface
sewage treatment system as defined in Minn. Rules 7080.1100, subd. 41, or a
mid-sized subsurface sewage treatment as defined in Minn. Rules 7081.0020,
subd. 4, and Article 37 of the Crow Wing County Land Use ordinance, as
applicable.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A recreational vehicle built on a single chassis with a
rigid walled shelter, mounted on wheels and has a gross trailer area not
exceeding 400 square feet. For the purposes of this chapter, the term travel
trailer is synonymous with the term “recreational vehicle.”
(Ord. 2023-2, passed 2-27-2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-8-2024)
§ 115.03 ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No short-term rental may be operated without a valid short-term rental
license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   All new short-term rental operations as of the enactment date of this
chapter shall obtain a license from the county prior to commencing operations.
   (C)   All short-term rental licenses are an annual license and must be
renewed each year. License renewal applications for rental operations in the
following year must be submitted prior to any rental activity. Licenses are
valid from January 1 to December 31 each year.
   (D)   The owner or owner’s authorized agent shall permit access to the
property and all permitted units at any reasonable time for the purpose of
inspection upon request of the county.
(Ord. 2023-2, passed 2-27-2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-8-2024)
§ 115.04 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following information shall be provided to the county on the
short-term rental license application:
      (1)   The full name (first, middle, last), date of birth, mailing
address, email address, and telephone number of the owner of the short-term
rental home for which the license is to be issued. If the property is owned by
a business or corporation, the CEO or designee is responsible for obtaining the
license in their name.
      (2)   Physical address and parcel identification number.
      (3)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
owner’s authorized agent for the short-term rental who is available 24 hours a
day.
      (4)   All other information that is requested on the short-term rental
license application.
      (5)   No application for initial or renewal license will be accepted if
there are past-due property taxes on the property described in the license
application.
      (6)   No license will be issued if there are pending permits and/or open
enforcements related to the property.
      (7)   No license will be issued if the property has three substantiated
violations within the prior calendar year prior to application for a license.
   (B)   Application process. Applications for short-term rental operation
licenses may be filled out online at www.crowwing.us. Once the application is
received along with the supplemental information and payment of the fee, the
county will issue or deny the license in accordance with the timelines
established under M.S. § 15.99 (60 days), during which time the county may
contact the owner or owner’s authorized agent for additional information. If
the license is denied, a letter will accompany the denial explaining the
reasons for the denial, and the owner or owner’s authorized agent may reapply
once the conditions surrounding the application denial are corrected.
(Ord. 2023-2, passed 2-27-2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-8-2024)
§ 115.05 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Septic/solid waste.
      (1)   The short-term rental must be connected to an approved SSTS or
served by central sanitary sewer system.
      (2)   A valid certificate of compliance, which is a certificate that was
issued on a new septic system installed within the past five years, or a copy
of a compliance inspection form which was performed within the past three
years.
      (3)   Holding tanks may be allowed for rental units provided that the
following requirements are met:
         (a)   A state licensed SSTS designer has determined that there is no
suitable location on the parcel for a drainfield;
         (b)   The holding tanks are sized for the number of bedrooms according
to County Land Use Ordinance Article 37 and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080;
         (c)   An electronic alarm with light and buzzer shall be installed
notifying occupants that the holding tanks are at capacity. Alarms shall have
the capacity to send a notification to the owner/owner’s authorized agent when
an alarm is triggered. Information shall be posted in the rental unit regarding
who to contact should the alarm be triggered;
         (d)   Existing manual bobber alarms must all remain as a redundant
alarm;
         (e)   A water meter must be installed prior to a license being issued.
Water meter readings shall be recorded monthly and from the previous year may
be required to be submitted as part of the application for license renvewal.
Water meter readings shall not be required for the initial application; and
         (f)   A contract with a state licensed septic maintainer to pump out
the holding tanks must be submitted each year for a license renewal including
pumping records from the previous year. Pumping records shall not be required
for the initial license application.
      (4)   At least once every three years thereafter, the owner or owner’s
authorized agent shall provide an updated certificate of septic testing showing
that the system is compliant for the number of bedrooms indicated in the
application.
      (5)   Disposal of solid waste must comply with
Ch. 50 of this code.
      (6)   Garbage, refuse, or recycling shall be stored completely enclosed
within designated refuse containers. The owner or operator of the rental unit
shall provide sufficient trash storage containers and service to accommodate
the demand of the occupants.
   (B)   Occupancy.
      (1)   The overnight occupancy of a short-term rental shall be limited to
no more than three people per bedroom plus one additional person per unit.
      (2)   Use of travel trailers, tents, yurts, fish houses or other
temporary structures is prohibited to be used as a short-term rental unit.
      (3)   Licensee shall not advertise the property as containing any more
than the number of bedrooms identified on the license.
      (4)   Licensee shall not advertise the property as available to more
guests than the occupancy limit identified on the license.
      (5)   No more than two short-term rental units will be allowed per
parcel.
   (C)   Noise. Quiet hours are between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Sunday through Thursday, and 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday. The
owner of the short-term rental is expected to enforce this rule. Failure to do
so may result in enforcement action as provided in §
115.06.
   (D)   Parking. Parking cannot restrict access by emergency vehicles or the
traveling public and shall not impede any ingress or egress of property owner.
In addition, parking cannot encroach neighboring properties.
   (E)   Property contact information. The owner or the owner’s authorized
agent shall keep on file with the county, and shall notify each renter, in
writing, the contact information for the owner or owner’s authorized agent, who
shall be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, whenever the property is
being rented for short-term rental purposes. The owner or the owner’s
authorized agent shall respond to any issue or complaint raised within one hour
of any such point of contact being notified of the issue or complaint. Property
contact information shall be accessible to the public 24 hours a day, seven
days a week on the county website.
   (F)   License fees. License fees will be established by the county Board of
Commissioners and published in the county fee schedule.
   (G)   License transfer. The short-term rental license shall not be
transferrable upon any change in ownership of the licensed property, or
otherwise.
(Ord. 2023-2, passed 2-27-2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-8-2024)
§ 115.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement. The county will investigate all complaints and alleged
violations of this chapter. The county will follow up with all owners or
owner’s authorized agents and complainants within a reasonable period of time.
The owner or owner’s authorized agent shall address any substantiated
complaints/violations as directed by the county. All substantiated complaints/
violations not resolved as directed will result in enforcement action as
provided in this section.
   (B)   If three substantiated complaints/violations have occurred at a short-
term rental unit within one year, then the license may be subject to revocation
as determined by the county.
   (C)   The intentional false reporting of a violation of this chapter shall
be considered a violation of this section. The penalty for intentional false
reporting of a violation will be $100 for a first offense, $150 for a second
offense, and $1,000 for a third or subsequent offense.
   (D)   Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who fails to comply with a
directive of the county as provided in this section, or who violate, disobey,
omit, neglect, refuse to comply with, or who resist enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter may be subject to misdemeanor prosecution,
forfeiture of their license, or both.
   (E)   Any license revoked under this section will not be reissued for a
period of one year from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 2023-2, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 115.07 APPEALS.
   (A)   Administrative appeal. Appeals from any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the county shall be first made to the County
Administrator.
   (B)   Appeals of the decision of the County Administrator shall be brought
in the district court of the county.
(Ord. 2023-2, passed 2-27-2023)
CHAPTER 116: CANNABIS BUSINESS
Section
   
116.01   Administration
   
116.02   Registration of cannabis businesses
   
116.03   Requirements for cannabis businesses
   
116.04   Temporary cannabis events
   
116.05   Use in public places
§ 116.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The City Council makes the following legislative
findings:
      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 342, which authorizes the City Council to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the City of Crosby's residents by regulating cannabis
businesses within the legal boundaries of the city.
      (2)   The City Council finds and concludes that the proposed provisions
are appropriate and lawful land use regulations for the city, that the proposed
amendments will promote the community's interest in reasonable stability in
zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions are in the
public interest and for the public good.
   (B)   Authority and jurisdiction.
      (1)   The City Council has authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to:
         (a)   M.S. § 342.13(c), regarding the authority of a local unit of
government to adopt reasonable restrictions of the time, place, and manner of
the operation of a cannabis business provided that such restrictions do not
prohibit the establishment or operation of cannabis businesses.
         (b)   M.S. § 342.22, regarding the local registration and enforcement
requirements of state-licensed cannabis retail businesses and lower-potency
hemp edible retail businesses.
         (c)   M.S. § 152.0263, Subd. 5, regarding the use of cannabis in
public places.
         (d)   M.S. § 462.357, regarding the authority of a local authority to
adopt zoning ordinances.
      (2)   This chapter shall be applicable to the legal boundaries of the
city.
   (C)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
   (D)   Enforcement. The City Council, City Administrator or designee is
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any
violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law.
Violations of this chapter can occur regardless of whether a permit is required
for a regulated activity listed in this chapter.
   (E)   Definitions. Unless otherwise noted in this section, words and phrases
contained in M.S. § 342.01 and the rules promulgated pursuant to any of these
acts, shall have the same meanings in this chapter.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis
plants within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to
mature plant, harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label
immature plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis
businesses, transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the
same premises, and perform other actions approved by the office.
      CANNABIS MANUFACTURER. A business licensed to conduct the activities to
turn raw, dried cannabis and cannabis parts into other types of cannabis
products, including but not limited to edibles, topicals, vaporizers, etc.
      CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES.  A licensed person or entity that purchases
or otherwise obtains usable cannabis from cannabis cultivators, processors, or
manufacturers, and sells these from a retail store, but excludes the sale of
cannabis for exclusively medical purposes or medical marijuana enactments and
regulations and lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
      CANNABIS RETAILER.  Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
      CANNABIS WHOLESALE.  The operation to purchase from a business growing or
manufacturing cannabis or cannabis products and sell to a cannabis business
engaged in retail.
      DAYCARE.  A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human
Services to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child's own
home for gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
      LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE.  As defined under M.S. § 342.01, Subd. 50.
      OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as OCM in this chapter.
      PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION.  A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
      PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL.  OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business
license for applicants who qualify under M.S. § 342.17.
      PUBLIC PLACE.  A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
      RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY.  As defined under M.S. § 245.462, Subd.
23.
      RETAIL REGISTRATION.  An approved registration issued by the city to a
state-licensed cannabis retail business.
      SCHOOL.  A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05 or a nonpublic
school that must meet the reporting requirements under M.S. § 120A.24.
      STATE LICENSE.  An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota's
Office of Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 116.02 REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Consent to registering of cannabis businesses.
      (1)   No individual or entity may operate a state-licensed cannabis
retail business within the city without first registering with the city.
      (2)   Any state-licensed cannabis retail business that sells to a
customer or patient without valid retail registration shall incur a civil
penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state shall not issue
a license to any cannabis business to operate in Indian country, as defined in
United States Code, Title 18, § 1151, of a Minnesota Tribal government without
the consent of the Tribal government.
   (B)   Compliance checks prior to retail registration.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of a cannabis retail business registration, the
city shall conduct a preliminary compliance check to ensure compliance with
local ordinances. This includes verifying that the applicant is current on all
property taxes and assessments at the location where the retail establishment
is located.
      (2)   Pursuant to M.S. Ch. 342, within 30 days of receiving a copy of a
state license application from OCM, the city shall certify on a form provided
by OCM whether a proposed cannabis retail business complies with local zoning
ordinances and, if applicable, whether the proposed business complies with the
state fire code and building code.
   (C)   Registration and application procedure.
      (1)   Fees.
         (a)   The City of Crosby shall not charge an application fee.
         (b)   A registration fee, as established in the city's fee schedule,
shall be charged to applicants depending on the type of retail business license
applied for.
         (c)   An initial retail registration fee shall not exceed $500 or half
the amount of an initial state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever is
less. The initial registration fee shall include the initial retail
registration fee and the first annual renewal fee.
         (d)   Any renewal retail registration fee imposed by the city shall be
charged at the time of the second renewal and each subsequent renewal
thereafter.
         (e)   A renewal retail registration fee shall not exceed $1,000 or
half the amount of a renewal state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever
is less.
         (f)   A medical combination business operating an adult-use retail
location may only be charged a single registration fee, not to exceed the
lesser of a single retail registration fee, defined under this section, of the
adult-use retail business.
      (2)   Application submittal.
         (a)   The city shall issue a retail registration to a state-licensed
cannabis retail business that adheres to the requirements of M.S. § 342.22.
         (b)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the city. Said form shall include, but is not
limited to:
            1.   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
            2.   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
            3.   The address and parcel ID for the property which the retail
registration is sought;
            4.   Certification that the applicant complies with the
requirements of local ordinances established pursuant to M.S. § 342.13.
         (c)   The applicant shall include with the form:
            1.   The application fee as required in division (C)(1);
            2.   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM
license preapproval;
         (d)   Once an application is considered complete, the city, City
Administrator or designee shall inform the applicant as such, process the
application fees, and forward the application to the Council for approval or
denial.
         (e)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
      (3)   Application approval.
         (a)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not
be approved if the cannabis retail business would exceed the maximum number of
registered cannabis retail businesses permitted under § 116.02(F).
         (b)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not
be approved or renewed if the applicant is unable to meet the requirements of
this chapter.
         (c)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application that meets
the requirements of this chapter shall be approved.
      (4)   Annual compliance checks.
         (a)   The city shall complete at minimum one compliance check per
calendar year of every cannabis business to assess if the business meets age
verification requirements, as required under M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 4(b) and M.S.
§ 342.24 and this chapter.
         (b)   The city shall conduct at minimum one unannounced age
verification compliance check at least once per calendar year.
         (c)   Age verification compliance checks shall involve persons at
least 17 years of age but under the age of 21 who, with the prior written
consent of a parent or guardian if the person is under the age of 18, attempt
to purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-
potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products under the direct
supervision of a law enforcement officer or an employee of the local unit of
government.
         (d)   Any failures under this section must be reported to the Office
of Cannabis Management.
      (5)   Location change. A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be
required to submit a new application for registration under division (C)(2) if
it seeks to move to a new location still within the legal boundaries of the
city.
   (D)   (1)   Renewal of registration.
         (a)   State-licensed retail. The city shall renew an annual
registration of a state-licensed cannabis retail business at the same time OCM
renews the cannabis retail business' license. A state-licensed cannabis retail
business shall apply to renew registration on a form established by the City of
Crosby.
         (b)   No transfer. A cannabis retail registration issued under this
chapter shall not be transferred.
         (c)   Renewal fees. The city may charge a renewal fee for the
registration starting at the second renewal, as established in division (C)(1)
of this section.
      (2)   Renewal application. The application for renewal of a retail
registration shall include, but is not limited to items required under division
(C)(2) of this section.
   (E)   Suspension of registration.
      (1)   When suspension is warranted. The city may suspend a cannabis
retail business's registration if it violates the ordinance of the city or
poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public. The city shall
immediately notify the cannabis retail business in writing the grounds for the
suspension.
      (2)   Notification to OCM. The city shall immediately notify the OCM in
writing the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide the city and cannabis
business retailer a response to the complaint within seven calendar days and
perform any necessary inspections within 30 calendar days. This expedited
complaint process does not prohibit the city from enforcing a local ordinance.
      (3)   Length of suspension. The suspension of a cannabis retail business
registration may be for up to 30 calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license
for a longer period. The business may not make sales to customers if their
registration is suspended.
         (a)   The City of Crosby may reinstate a registration if it determines
that the violations have been resolved.
         (b)   The City of Crosby shall reinstate a registration if OCM
determines that the violation(s) have been resolved.
      (4)   Civil penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 5(e) the city may
impose a civil penalty, as specified in the city’s fee schedule, for
registration violations, not to exceed $2,000.
   (F)   Limiting of registrations. The city shall limit the number of cannabis
retail businesses to a total of three within the city limits.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 116.03 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Minimum buffer requirements.
      (1)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business within
1,000 feet of a school.
      (2)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business within
350 feet of a day care.
      (3)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business within
350 feet of a residential treatment facility.
      (4)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business within
350 feet of an attraction within a public park that is regularly used by
minors, including a playground or athletic field.
      (5)   Operation of a cannabis business along Main Street between the west
side of 3rd Ave SW and the east side of 2nd Ave SE and between the alleys
immediately north and south of Main Street shall be exempt from the buffer
requirements listed in this chapter.
      (6)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 1e, nothing in division (A) shall
prohibit an active cannabis business or a cannabis business seeking
registration from continuing operation at the same site if a school, daycare,
residential treatment facility, or attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors moves within the minimum buffer zone.
   (B)   Zoning and land use.
      (1)   Cultivation.
         (a)   Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cultivation are
permitted as an interim use in the following zoning districts:
            1.   Industrial District (I).
      (2)   Cannabis manufacturer.
         (a)   Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cannabis
manufacturer are permitted as an interim use in the following zoning districts:
            1.   Industrial District (I).
      (3)   Cannabis retail.
         (a)   Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cannabis retail are
permitted as an allowed use in the following zoning districts:
            1.   Central Business District (B-1).
      (4)   Cannabis wholesale.
         (a)   Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for wholesale are
permitted as an interim use in the following zoning districts:
            1.   Industrial District (I).
   (C)   Hours of operation. Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sale of
cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or
hemp-derived consumer products between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (D)   Advertising. Cannabis businesses are permitted to erect up to two
fixed signs on the exterior of the building or property of the business, unless
otherwise limited by the city's sign ordinances as regulated by §§ 
154.275 through
154.284 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 116.04 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   License or permit required for temporary events.
      (1)   License required. A special event permit subject to the provisions
of
Chapter 94 of the City of Crosby Code of Ordinances is required to be issued
and approved by the City of Crosby prior to holding a temporary cannabis event
on public property.
      (2)   Registration and application procedure. A registration fee, as
established in the City of Crosby's fee schedule, shall be charged to
applicants for temporary cannabis events.
      (3)   Application submittal and review.
         (a)   The City of Crosby shall require an application for temporary
cannabis events.
            1.   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the City of Crosby. Said form shall include,
but is not limited to:
               a.   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
               b.   Address, email address, and telephone number of the
applicant;
            2.   The applicant shall include with the form:
               d.   The application fee as required in § 
116.02(C)(1) of this chapter;
               e.   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application,
submitted pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, Subd. 2.
         (b)   The application shall be submitted to the City Administrator, or
other designee for review. If the designee determines that a submitted
application is incomplete, they shall return the application to the applicant
with the notice of deficiencies.
         (c)   Once an application is considered complete, the designee shall
inform the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the City Council for approval or denial.
         (d)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
         (e)   The application for a license for a temporary cannabis event
shall meet the following standards:
            1.   A request for a temporary cannabis event that meets the
requirements of this section shall be approved.
            2.   A request for a temporary cannabis event that does not meet
the requirements of this section shall be denied. The City of Crosby shall
notify the applicant of the standards not met and basis for denial.
         (f)   Temporary cannabis events shall only be held on private
property.
         (g)   Temporary cannabis events shall only be held between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 116.05 USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation unless the premises is an establishment or an event
licensed to permit on-site consumption of adult-use.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-23-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Curfew for minors
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor.
The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city
time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor.
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor.
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor's
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor's presence at work.
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor's
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor.
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew.
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's presence.
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian,
or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section applies.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
152.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
153.   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
      
154.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Fire zones
   
150.02   Building Code
   
150.03   House numbering
Construction on Public Property
   
150.15   Definitions
   
150.16   In general; utilities
   
150.17   Purposes
   
150.18   Permit required
   
150.19   Bond or other security
   
150.20   Insurance
   
150.21   Application
   
150.22   Permit issuance
   
150.23   Conditions
   
150.24   Trenchless excavation
   
150.25   Liability
   
150.26   Fees
   
150.27   Projects not covered
   
150.28   Prohibited work
   
150.29   Compliance with other regulations
   
150.30   Inspection
   
150.31   Work done without a permit
   
150.32   Supplementary notification
   
150.33   Revocation of permits
   
150.34   Mapping data
   
150.35   Interference with public property
   
150.36   Interference with right-of-way
   
150.37   Compliance with other laws
   
150.38   Supplementary applications
   
150.39   Denial of permit
   
150.40   Permit fees
   
150.41   Location of facilities
   
150.42   Damage to other facilities
   
150.43   Indemnification and liability
   
150.44   Abandoned facilities
   
150.45   Appeal
   
150.46   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 FIRE ZONES.
   (A)   Fire zone one consists of the following area: blocks 4 to 9 of the
city and blocks 6 and 7 of Lake Park Addition to the city.
   (B)   Fire zone two consists of the following area: lots 13 to 20 of block
16 of Keatings Addition to the city; the north halves of blocks 13, 14, and 15
of Keatings Addition to the city; lots 17 to 20 of block 20 and lots 1 to 8 of
block 29; all of Keatings Addition to the city; and blocks 21 to 28 of Keatings
Addition to the city.
   (C)   Fire zone three consists of all lands, lots, parcels of land, or
tracts of land not listed as being in fire zone one or two which are within the
limits of the city.
   (D)   Whenever reference is made in the State Building Code to any fire
zone, it means the fire zone of the same number as delineated by this section.
(Prior Code, § 8.1)
§ 150.02 BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   State Building Code adopted. The State Building Code, two copies of
which are on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, is adopted as the
Building Code of the city and incorporated in this section by reference as
completely as if set out in full.
   (B)   Additional publications adopted by reference.
      (1)   The State Building Code adopts by reference the following six
publications:
         (a)   Design and Evaluation Criteria for Energy Conservation in New
Buildings, Additions, and Remodeled Elements of Buildings;
         (b)   The State Plumbing Code;
         (c)   National Electrical Code, latest edition;
         (d)   Uniform Building Code, latest edition;
         (e)   Floodproofing regulations; and
         (f)   American National Standard Safety Code for Elevators,
Dumbwaiters, Escalators, and Moving Walks (ANSI A17.1).
      (2)   The abovementioned codes must all be complied with as part of the
State Building Code. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall retain and keep adequate
copies of each available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (C)   Additional provisions. The following appendixes and supplementary
material to the State Building Code are adopted as part of the Building Code of
the city:
      (1)   Appendix D - Organization and Enforcement; and
      (2)   Appendix E - Permits and Inspections.
   (D)   Department and administrative authority. The Building Inspector is the
Building Department, and the City Council or its designate is the
administrative authority wherever those terms are used in the State Building
Code and the appendixes adopted by reference in this section.
   (E)   Fees.
      (1)   The fee for a building permit is set forth in the schedule which is
on file and available in the city offices, according to the value of the
construction work, as defined in Appendix E of the State Building Code.
      (2)   In addition to the fee required in division (E)(1) above, the
applicant shall pay a state surcharge in the amount fixed by law. The amount
required by law shall be remitted quarterly to the state’s Department of
Administration, as per M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 8.2) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.03 HOUSE NUMBERING.
   (A)   Owners to number. Each and every property owner in the city is
required to number his or her building with the proper sized number, the
material of the numbers to be either glass or metal in accordance with the
Philadelphia system of numbering houses.
   (B)   Philadelphia system. The plan for numbering for the city is designated
as the Philadelphia system of 100 for each block, with a number determined for
each and every platted lot upon the street or avenue upon which it fronts,
regardless of size or shape.
   (C)   Base lines. Cross Avenue shall be and constitute the base for all the
avenues running north and south, and Main Street shall be and constitute the
base for all the streets running east and west.
   (D)   Numbering. The buildings or lots on every side of every street, alley,
and avenue in the city shall be numbered alternately, front and back; the odd
numbers being assigned to the buildings or lots abutting the west side of the
avenues and the north side of the streets; and all even numbers shall be
assigned to the buildings or lots abutting upon the east side of the avenues
and the south side of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 8.3)
CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 150.15 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions included in M.S. § 237.162, as it may be amended from
time to time, Minn. Rules Part 7819.0100, Subp. 1 through 23, and Minn. Rules
Part 7560.0100, Subp. 1 through 12 are hereby adopted by reference and are
incorporated into this section as if set out in full.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of public property caused by
excavation in or disturbance of public property, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such public property earlier than would be required if the
excavation or disturbance did not occur.
      DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
public property excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as
established by permit.
      EMERGENCY. A condition that:
         (a)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or
         (b)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order
to restore service to a customer.
      EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of public property.
      OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in or on public property so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any existing public systems, including storm water,
sewer, water, street, sidewalk, boulevard, park, beach, open space, wetlands,
shorelands, and other related public works or park systems and public right-of-
way.
      RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of the state’s
Public Utilities Commission rules.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.16 IN GENERAL; UTILITIES.
   (A)   General prohibition. No telephone, telegraph, or electric lines, cable
television wires, or poles for any utility purpose shall be constructed or
erected in the streets, alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and other public
places of the city without the submission beforehand of a plan of such
construction, accompanied by a map or plat of such proposed construction, to
the City Engineer or other officer designated by the City Council.
   (B)   Permit. If the plan of construction, together with the map or plat of
such proposed construction, conforms to the public health, safety, and fire
regulations of the city, a permit may be issued for such construction.
   (C)   Street repair. Except in the case of emergency, any person doing
repair, change, or alteration to any utility which will disturb the surface of
any street or alley in the city shall first notify the City Clerk-Treasurer of
his or her intention to make such repair to the streets to the original
condition of the streets.
   (D)   Repair charges. Any person holding a permit from the city for
construction under this subchapter shall, at his or her expense, repair all
streets and alleys that may be cut up or otherwise interfered with because of
such construction; and if such repair is not made by the permit holder and it
becomes necessary for the city to make necessary repairs after any such
construction, the permit holder shall be liable to the city for the cost of any
and all repairs made by the city because of such construction.
(Prior Code, § 4.1) (Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.17 PURPOSES.
   In order to operate and maintain the management and coordination of public
systems, including storm water, sewer, water, street, sidewalk, boulevard,
park, beach, open space, wetlands, shorelands, and other related public works
systems, the Council determines that the city shall control any and all work
done in the public rights-of-way and other property owned by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.1)
§ 150.18 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall directly or indirectly disturb, excavate, add to, or
otherwise alter any public property without first obtaining a permit and/or all
other required permits from the city and other appropriate entities.
   (B)   The city is a member of the Serpent Lake Sanitary Sewer District
(hereinafter the “District”) and potential permittees are advised that the
District has an ordinance requiring a permit for certain work performed within
the District and that the city requires potential permittees to obtain a permit
from the city first.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate
that part of any public property described in such permit and to hinder free
and open passage over the specified portion of the public property by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
herein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the public property by
placing equipment described therein on said public property, to the extent and
for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a
person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
      (3)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the public
property beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such person
makes a supplementary application for another permit before the expiration of
the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
      (4)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules Part 7819.1000, Subp.
3, and notwithstanding this section, the city shall establish and impose a
delay penalty for unreasonable delays in public property excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by City Council resolution.
      (5)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.2) (Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.19 BOND OR OTHER SECURITY.
   (A)   Any permittee, except a public utility corporation or a bonded
plumber, shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer a corporate surety bond, cash
deposit, or certified check in the minimum amount as set forth by City Council
from time to time, conditioned that the permittee will:
      (1)   Perform work in connection with the excavation in accordance with
applicable ordinances and regulations;
      (2)   Indemnify the city and hold it harmless from all damage caused in
the execution of such work; and
      (3)   Pay all costs and damages suffered by the city by reason of the
failure of the permittee to observe the terms of applicable ordinances and
regulations or because of negligence in the execution of the work.
   (B)   The bond shall be approved as to form and legality by the City
Attorney.
   (C)   The amount of the bond, cash deposit, or certified check shall be
determined by the City Maintenance Supervisor or the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.3)
§ 150.20 INSURANCE.
   Any permittee except a public utility corporation shall furnish proof that
the permittee has in existence an insurance policy protecting the permittee
from liability to the public, including the city, to an amount not less than an
amount as set forth by City Council from time to time for any and all claims
arising out of the permitted work.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.4)
§ 150.21 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise regulated in this subchapter, any person shall fill
out an application provided by the city for a permit to do any of the following
in or on any public property under the jurisdiction of the city:
      (1)   Excavate, remove, or disturb existing soil;
      (2)   Add any material (soil, rocks, gravel, asphalt, cement, brush,
grass clippings, or other materials, and the like);
      (3)   Remove or plant trees, shrubs, or other foliage;
      (4)   Erect fences or other barriers;
      (5)   Install culverts;
      (6)   Pave driveways, sidewalks, parking areas, and the like;
      (7)   Place retaining walls, lawn ornaments, or other decorative
landscaping projects;
      (8)   Change the path of any existing ditch, flowage, or storm water
management system; and
      (9)   Engage in other activities deemed by the city to be contrary to the
public interest.
   (B)   The application shall be reviewed by the city, and, if deemed in the
public interest, a permit may be issued.
   (C)   An application for a permit will be considered by the City Council and
shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the
requirements of the following provisions:
      (1)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:
         (a)   Each permittee’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
         (b)   The name, address, and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information
regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be
provided at the time of application; and
         (c)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
            1.   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
permittee by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
            2.   Verifying that the permittee is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the public property by the permittee, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of
facilities and equipment on the public property by the permittee, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities, and collapse of property;
            3.   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all coverages;
            4.   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
            5.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, and workers’ compensation and umbrella coverage established
by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to
carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter; and
            6.   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
      (2)   Payment of money to the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management
costs;
         (b)   Prior obstruction or excavations;
         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavation or obstructions of public property or
any emergency actions taken by the city; and
         (d)   Franchise fees or other charges, as may be permitted in Title XI
of this code.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.5) (Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.22 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this subchapter, the city
may issue a permit, as directed to city staff.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.23 CONDITIONS.
   The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit
and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety,
and welfare or, when necessary, to protect the public property and its current
use. In addition, the permittee shall comply with all requirements of local,
state, and federal laws; including, but not limited to, M.S. Ch. 216D, as it
may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560, if applicable.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.24 TRENCHLESS EXCAVATION.
   As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing trenchless
excavation methods including, but not limited to, horizontal directional
drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may
be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560 and shall require
potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before
excavating, as determined by the city.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.25 LIABILITY.
   Any project approved must be constructed and managed so as to not impede the
removal of snow or other normal city maintenance efforts. The issuance of a
permit under this subchapter does not obligate the city to repair or replace
any privately installed object on public property, including, without
limitation, mailboxes not installed according to current U.S. Postal Service
regulations, landscaping features, or sod.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.5)
§ 150.26 FEES.
   The fee for an application under this subchapter shall be set from time to
time by the Council, except that no fee shall be required for projects
performed pursuant to a permit for sewer and water construction. For minor
projects, the fee may be waived by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.7)
§ 150.27 PROJECTS NOT COVERED.
   A permit is not required for the normal care and maintenance of the
boulevard by the property owner immediately adjacent to such property.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.8)
§ 150.28 PROHIBITED WORK.
   Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no public
property obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or
when conditions are unreasonable for such work. Additionally, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall not issue any excavation permits for street openings from
November 1 through April 1, unless an emergency exists as determined by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.9) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.29 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration and all other work
performed in or on public property shall be done in conformance with Minn.
Rules Part 7819.1100 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as they
are not inconsistent with M.S. § 237.163, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.30 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
with Minn. Rules Part 7819.1300.
   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to city
personnel and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the excavation of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of city.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the city may order the immediate
cessation of any work which, poses a serious threat to the life, health,
safety, or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The city may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does
not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation(s) will be cause for revocation of the permit.
      (3)   Within ten days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall
present proof to the city that the violation has been corrected. If such proof
has not been presented within the required time, the city may revoke the permit
pursuant to §
150.33.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.31 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each person with facilities in or on public property shall
immediately notify the city of any event regarding its facilities that it
considers to be an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take
whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business
days after the occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of
the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this subchapter
for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the
city will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility owner
affected or potentially affected by the emergency. In any events, the city may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates
public property must subsequently obtain a permit and as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all other fees required by this
chapter, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to
public property, and comply with all of the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.32 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the public property obstruction or excavation begins later or ends sooner
than the dates given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city of the
accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.33 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any permit issued for work described herein, without fee refund, if
there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition(s) of the permit. A
substantial breach by the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon
the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
150.30.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the city shall
make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand
shall state that continued violation(s) might be cause for revocation of the
permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its
discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate
and remedy the breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, which will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure to
contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney’s fees in
connection with such revocation.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.34 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each permittee shall provide mapping information
required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules Parts 7819.4000 and
7819.4100.
   (B)   Service laterals.
      (1)   All permits issued for the installation or repair of service
laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules Part 7560.0150,
Subp. 2, shall require the permittee’s use of appropriate means of establishing
the horizontal locations of the service laterals that the permittee installed
or repaired and the vertical locations of the service laterals that the
permittee installed or repaired. Permittees or their subcontractors shall
submit to the city evidence of the installed or repaired service lateral
locations. Compliance with this division (B) and with applicable Gopher State
One-Call Law and state rules governing service laterals install after December
31, 2005, shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for:
         (a)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project
including those under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time; and
         (b)   City approval of performance under development agreements or
other subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (2)   The city shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of
providing such information. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information
on the service laterals installed or repaired may result in the revocation of
the permit issued for the work or for future permits to the offending permittee
and its subcontractors.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.35 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   A permittee shall not so obstruct public property that the natural free and
clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in or on public property
may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance
with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done
solely within the defined permit area, unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.36 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and
clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may
not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance
with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done
solely within the defined permit area, unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.10) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.37 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve the permittee of his or her
duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay
all fees required by the city or other applicable rule, law, or regulation. A
permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state, and federal laws,
including M.S. Ch. 216D (“One-Call Excavation Notice System”), as it may be
amended from time to time. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance
with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is
responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to his or her
permit, regardless of who does the work.
(Prior Code, § 4.2.11)
§ 150.38 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A permit is valid only for the area of the public
property specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area
specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which
determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be
obstructed or excavated must, before working in that greater area, make
application for permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby
and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A permit is valid only for the dates specified in
the permit No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or,
except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If the
permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a
new permit for the additional time it needs and receive the new permit or an
extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous
permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end
date.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.39 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the public property and its current use.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.40 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   General fees. The city shall establish the following fees.
      (1)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
         (a)   The city management costs; and
         (b)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
      (2)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish an obstruction
permit fee that shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.
      (3)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation or obstruction permit shall
be issued without payment of the excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow an applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
      (4)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the
city has revoked for breach as stated in herein are not refundable.
      (5)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise agreement, management costs may be charged separately from and in
addition to the franchise fees imposed on a franchise right-of-way user as
permitted in Title XI of this code.
      (6)   State regulations. All permit fees shall be established consistent
with the provisions of Minn. Rules Part 7819.1000.
   (B)   Permit fee exception; expiration.
      (1)   Exception. Permit fees are based on valuation using the fee
schedule found in the city’s fee schedule located in the Clerk’s Office.
      (2)   Expiration.
         (a)   Every permit issued by the Building Official shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such
permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any
time after the work is commenced for 180 days. Before such work can be
recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee
therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work,
excluding plan review fee, provided no changes have been made or will be made
in the original plans and specifications for such work.
         (b)   The Building Official may grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall
be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
      (3)   Expiration of plan review. Applications for which no permit is
issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by
limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be
returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. In order to
renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit
plans and pay a new plan review fee. In the event of a hardship, and at the
discretion of the Building Official, a new plan review fee may be waived.
   (C)   Building permit fees. Building permit fees shall be found in the
city’s fee schedule.
(Res. 2010-10-11.3, passed 10-11-2010; Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.41 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Compliance. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must
comply with this chapter, with other applicable law and with Minn. Rules Parts
7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit
authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within public
property or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary for each type of
facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
some day be located within public property. All excavation, obstruction, or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
   (C)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the public property and its current use, the city shall
have the power to prohibit or the city shall strive, to the extent possible, to
accommodate all existing and potential users of the public property, but shall
be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public’s
needs for the particular utility service, the conditions of the public
property, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection
of existing facilities in the public property, and future city plans for public
improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the
public interest.
   (D)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
installed pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter that have not been
mapped with the city as required by §
150.34 shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or
rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the
nuisance or taking possession of the facilities and restoring the public
property to a useable condition.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.42 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work to public property and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the
local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated
therewith will be billed to that facility owner and must be paid within 30 days
from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost
of repairing any facilities located in public property which it or its
facilities damages. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another caused during the city’s
response to an emergency occasioned by that owner’s facilities.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.43 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minn. Rules Part 7819.1250.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.44 ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   Any person who has abandoned facilities located in or on any public property
shall remove them from that public property if required in conjunction with
other public property repair, excavation, or construction, unless the city
waives this requirement.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.45 APPEAL.
   (A)   A public property user that has been denied registration, has been
denied a permit, has had a permit revoked, or believes that the fees imposed
are invalid may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon
written request by the City Council.
   (B)   The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the
denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing reasonableness of the decision.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.46 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Sketch plan
   
151.02   Preliminary plats
   
151.03   Final plat
   
151.04   Design layout minimum standards
   
151.05   Survey standards
   
151.06   Street improvement standards
   
151.07   Sanitary provision standards
   
151.08   Water supply standards
   
151.09   Drainage/grading standards
   
151.10   Dedication to the public standards
Improvements
   
151.25   Bond required
   
151.26   Compliance with standards
   
151.27   Requests for the city to construct infrastructure
   
151.28   Allocation of costs
   
151.29   Record drawings
Conservation Subdivision and Planned Unit Developments
   
151.41   General
   
151.42   Suitability
   
151.43   Design criteria for new conservation subdivisions and PUDs
   
151.44   Design criteria for existing PUDs
   
151.45   Computing PUD buildable area
   
151.46   Planned unit developments
Administration
   
151.60   Pre-application meeting
   
151.61   Sketch plan review meeting with Planning Commission
   
151.62   Financial security
   
151.63   Metes and bounds subdivision approval, subdivisions ten acres or
greater in size and 500 feet or greater in width
   
151.64   Metes and bounds subdivision approval, subdivisions less than ten
acres in size or less than 500 feet in width
   
151.65   Boundary line adjustment
   
151.66   Preliminary plat or preliminary condominium plat approval
   
151.67   Final plat or final condominium plat approval
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 SKETCH PLAN.
   A sketch plan shall contain the following data.
   (A)   Existing conditions. Existing conditions including:
      (1)   Approximate exterior boundary drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals one hundred feet with the scale and northerly direction shown
thereon;
      (2)   Indication of floodplains, wetlands, slopes over 12%, bluffs, tree
cover, and ordinary high water mark;
      (3)   Use of adjoining properties, including street locations, structure
locations, and property lines;
      (4)   Significant historical sites;
      (5)   Approximate locations of existing structures;
      (6)   Approximate locations of existing wells and sewage treatment
systems;
      (7)   Location by section, town, and range with small scale sketch
showing location within the city; and
      (8)   The existing zoning classification and the zoning classification of
adjacent parcels.
   (B)   Proposed design. Proposed design including:
      (1)   Proposed roads and walkways;
      (2)   Proposed lots with building setbacks and bluff impact zones;
      (3)   Proposed green space; and
      (4)   Proposed city sewer and water system connections or sewage
treatment systems and well locations.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.02 PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   A preliminary plat, preliminary common interest community plat, preliminary
condominium plat, or metes and bounds subdivision resulting in at least one
parcel less than ten acres shall contain the following data, except as waived
in advance by the Planning Commission; along with other reasonable information
required by the Commission needed to make a proper evaluation of the proposal:
   (A)   Existing conditions. Existing conditions including:
      (1)   Boundary lines with lengths and bearings drawn to exact scale of no
less than one inch equals 100 feet taken from a boundary survey by a licensed
land surveyor with the legal description of the property, total acreage, name
of the fee owner, developer, and surveyor, north arrow, and scale;
      (2)   Topography consisting of two-foot contour intervals, or, at the
discretion of the Planning Commission during the sketch plan review, ten-foot
contour intervals taken from USGS mapping with additional field determined spot
elevations added to define drainage ways, 100-year floodplains, wetlands,
slopes, and the ordinary high water mark. Near shore aquatic conditions,
including depths, types of bottom, sediments, and aquatic vegetation;
      (3)   Tree cover limits, specimen tree locations;
      (4)   Soils as determined by hand borings on a random basis, to determine
depth to ground water at lower elevations and suitability for sewage treatment
systems. At least one boring for each unit unless waived by the Planning
Commission;
      (5)   Location of adjoining streets, wetlands, structures, and property
lines within 200 feet of subject parcel, including acreage of any property
owned by the developer not included in the preliminary plat;
      (6)   Significant historical sites;
      (7)   Significant wildlife habitat areas;
      (8)   Endangered, threatened, rare, or critical species, both flora and
fauna;
      (9)   Date of boundary survey, topography, and proposed plat;
      (10)   Layout of existing streets, walkways, driveways, blocks, lots, and
structures drawn to the same scale;
      (11)   Locations of existing wells and sewage treatment systems;
      (12)   Location by section, town, and range with small scale sketch
showing location within the city; and
      (13)   The existing zoning classification and the zoning classification
of adjacent parcels.
   (B)   Proposed design. Proposed design including:
      (1)   Layout of proposed streets, walkways, driveways, blocks, lots, and
buildings, if known, drawn to same scale as existing data;
      (2)   Dimensions scaled to nearest five feet of all lot lines, street
widths, easement widths, and lakeshore lengths;
      (3)   Buildable areas of proposed lots;
      (4)   Structure setback lines from streets, lot lines, and ordinary high
water mark and a designation of the buildable area on the parcel;
      (5)   Proposed green space with area shown;
      (6)   Proposed public dedication areas other than streets or walkways
with the area shown;
      (7)   Proposed city sewer or water system connections and extensions
existing and proposed with grades shown;
      (8)   Potential locations and estimated depth to water table for all
proposed on-site sewage disposal systems, two per lot;
      (9)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply;
      (10)   Proposed storm drainage system and erosion control, both during
and after construction activities;
      (11)   Proposed street standards and profiles;
      (12)   Potential principal structure and accessory structure locations
and elevations;
      (13)   Extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations;
      (14)   Proposed covenants;
      (15)   Name of subdivision and proposed street names, which shall not
duplicate or be alike another plat previously recorded; and
      (16)   Stages of development proposed.
   (C)   Authority to subdivide. Evidence of authority to subdivide the parcel
consisting of fee ownership or written concurrence of fee owners.
   (D)   Cost/benefit analysis. An analysis of the ongoing cost to the city to
provide services and maintenance to the development shall be prepared using a
form provided by the city. This cost shall be compared on the same form to the
estimated increased valuation of the property and the corresponding tax
revenue. The development shall not be approved if public subsidy is required
for ongoing services and maintenance.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.03 FINAL PLAT.
   A final plat, final common interest community plat, or final condominium
plat shall contain all elements required by this chapter and M.S. Ch. 505,
515A, or 515B respectively, as they may be amended from time to time, and the
state’s Plat Manual including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Conformance with approved preliminary plat or agreed upon portion
thereof;
   (B)   Design standards in conformance with this chapter and
Chapter 154;
   (C)   Preparation by a licensed land surveyor. Signatures of Mayor, Clerk-
Treasurer, County Auditor, County Treasurer, and all parties with legal
interest in the fee ownership of the land;
   (D)   Dedication to the public of easements, rights-of-way, walkways, and
land to become public;
   (E)   Drainage and utility easements over natural drainage ways and
significant wetlands;
   (F)   Reservation of private streets in outlots;
   (G)   Covenants shall be filed concurrently with the plat and shall be
required to create an association of homeowners if a privately maintained
cluster sewer or water system is proposed for subdivision.
      (1)   The association shall consist of all benefited lot owners.
      (2)   The association shall be responsible for all costs of maintenance
and replacement.
      (3)   The costs shall be uniformly divided by lots served.
      (4)   The costs shall be lienable against the lots by the association if
payment is not forthcoming.
      (5)   The status of the facility shall be clearly stated as subject to
perpetual private maintenance.
      (6)   Provisions shall be made for emergency access or emergency
maintenance by the city with subsequent reimbursement by the association.
   (H)   Concurrent documents include:
      (1)   Title opinion, less than 60 days old, acceptable to the City
Attorney and showing conformance with those parties represented by signature on
the plat as holding interest in the property being divided;
      (2)   Financial security acceptable to the City Attorney in the amount of
125% of the cost estimated by the City Engineer for the uncompleted required
improvements; and
      (3)   Development contract acceptable to the City Attorney, if required.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.04 DESIGN LAYOUT MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The following design standards shall be considered minimum acceptable
requirements in the review of the proposed subdivision by the Zoning
Administrator, City Attorney, City Engineer, Planning Commission, and Council,
except as waived by variance approved by the Board of Adjustment.
   (A)   The land shall be properly zoned and suitable in its natural state for
the intended purpose with minimal alteration required. Land subject to
flooding, land below the ordinary high water mark, wetlands, areas with high
water table, bluffs, lands with slopes exceeding 25%, or land containing other
significant constraint(s) upon future intended usage, shall not be considered
in the minimum size of a lot. The suitability analysis for each lot shall also
consider soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development,
severe erosion potential, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment
capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based
recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant
historic sights, or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful
to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed
subdivision or of the community.
   (B)   All non-conforming structures and uses shall be brought into
conformity during the subdivision process, except as specifically waived by
motion of the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Each lot shall be adjacent to public sewer or shall have a minimum
contiguous lawn area that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the
construction of two standard soil treatment sewage systems.
   (D)   Provisions for water based recreation where near shore aquatic
conditions are unsuitable for direct access.
   (E)   Lot areas and dimensions shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 154, without variance.
   (F)   Lot layouts shall be compatible with the existing layout of adjoining
properties and/or shall not constrain the future development of adjacent
properties if those properties were to be developed as per this chapter and
Chapter 154.
   (G)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight road
lines or radial to curved road lines, radial to lake or stream shores, and
shall not contain bends or jogs unless topographic conditions necessitate a
different arrangement. Existing structures shall not be construed to be a
topographic condition.
   (H)   Each lot shall have a minimum of 33 feet of frontage on a designated
right-of-way. Commonly owned property or green space used for access in a
planned unit development shall have a minimum of 33 feet of frontage on a
public right-of-way.
   (I)   Proposed streets shall conform to the adopted road plan of the city,
county, and state highway plans and existing boundary conditions.
      (1)   Streets shall be related to the topography so as to produce useable
lots and reasonable gradients not in excess of 10% for collector roads and 12%
for minor roads.
      (2)   Public access shall be given to adjacent properties unless the
topography clearly indicated future connection is not feasible.
      (3)   When parcels abutting arterial or collector roads are subdivided,
no new access points shall be created unless an equal number of access points
are removed, unless access points are created not less than 500 feet apart, in
which case there shall be no limit on the number of accesses allowed.
      (4)   Half streets or connections of half streets to partial streets
without providing for the full required right-of-way will not be permitted.
      (5)   Streets will be designed as collectors or local streets in
accordance with the city road plan.
      (6)   The number of streets that terminate without a through connection
shall be minimized and the street connected to a cul-de-sac (turnaround) shall
not exceed 1,200 feet in length.
      (7)   Access shall be given to all adjacent properties when required by
the Planning Commission. All streets intended to be extended to adjoining
property shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac with the sides on a
temporary easement, which will revert to the adjoining lot owner when released
by the city. Landlocked areas shall not be created.
      (8)   Right-of-way shall be dedicated to the public.
 
Arterials               100’ or as determined by the county
Collectors              66’
Cul-de-sac (turnaround) 68’ radius
Local streets           66’
Additional right-of-way may be required to promote public safety and
convenience if special conditions require, such as intersections, sight lines
on corners, or excessive cut or fill sections.
 
      (9)   Intersections.
         (a)   Street centerlines shall intersect at not less than 75 degrees.
         (b)   Street jogs shall be no less than 200 feet from centerline to
centerline.
         (c)   Gradients at intersections and for 50 feet approaching on each
side of an intersection shall not exceed 2%. The approach shall contain no
grades greater than 7% for 200 feet on each side of the intersection.
      (10)   Roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks
and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones.
      (11)   Street names shall conform to the pattern of the city and continue
an existing name on the same alignment, where determined applicable by the
Planning Commission. Street names shall be coordinated with the County
Surveyor’s office.
   (J)   Easements shall be provided for public utilities or drainage where
required by the Planning Commission and shall be following widths, minimum.
 
Drainage way                               10 feet
Electrical, telephone, or cable television 10 feet
Sanitary sewer                             40 feet
Storm sewer                                20 feet
Water main                                 20 feet
 
   (K)   Lots requiring variances to allow their use for the intended purposes
or requiring holding tanks for sewage shall not be allowed.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.05 SURVEY STANDARDS.
   Survey standards shall be those required by M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be
amended from time to time, including the placement of all monuments, including
block corners, lot corners, curve points, and lake survey line points on lot
lines. All U.S., state, county, and other official benchmarks, monuments, or
triangulation points in or adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall be
preserved in position unless relocation is approved by the controlling agency.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.06 STREET IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   All streets within the subdivision shall be constructed by the subdivider or
otherwise provided for by agreement in a development contract between the
subdivider and the City Council with all expenses borne by the subdivider.
Local streets and collector streets shall be constructed according to the
established minimum standards and shall be approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.07 SANITARY PROVISION STANDARDS.
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided for building purposes unless two adequate
sites are available on the newly created lot for a conforming on-site sewage
treatment system, or the subdivider constructs a cluster system serving the
lots to be owned and maintained by a property owner’s association or the lot is
provided with sanitary service by a municipal sewer system at the expense of
the subdivider.
   (B)   A municipal sewer system shall be extended to the lot at the
subdivider’s expense by agreement in a development contract between the
subdivider and the City Council if the existing system is adjacent to the
parcel being subdivided or reasonably close in the opinion of the engineer and
Planning Commission, or if the density of the proposed development necessitates
a municipal sewer connection. The sewer shall also be extended to the exterior
boundary of the subdivision at locations designated by the engineer.
   (C)   On-site systems or cluster on-site systems shall conform to the
state’s Pollution Control Agency Standards, individual sewage treatment systems
standard, (Chapter 7080 of the state’s Administrative Rules), and provide for
two treatment sites for drainfields.
   (D)   Municipal sewage facilities shall be designed by a registered
engineer, approved by the City Engineer, approved by the state’s Pollution
Control Agency, and installed according to “standard utilities specifications”,
City Engineer’s Association of the state.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.08 WATER SUPPLY STANDARDS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall be responsible to provide the proposed
subdivision with adequate spacing between building sites, on-site sewage
disposal sites, and potential well locations to allow the well installations in
conformance with the city zoning ordinance requirements or the subdivider shall
provide the lot with a cluster water supply system to be owned and operated by
a property owner’s association or the subdivider shall provide municipal water
service to the lot.
   (B)   A municipal water system shall be extended to the lot at the expense
of the subdivider by agreement in the development contract between the
subdivider and the Council if the existing municipal system is adjacent to the
parcel being subdivided or reasonably close in the opinion of the engineer and
Planning Commission, or if the density of the proposed development necessitates
a municipal water connection. The water main shall also be extended to the
exterior boundary at locations designated by the engineer.
   (C)   On-site wells or cluster water systems shall conform to the state’s
Department of Health Rules and Regulations MHD 210-230 “Water Well Construction
Code”, and the cluster system shall receive the approval of the City Engineer.
   (D)   Municipal water facilities shall be designed by a registered engineer,
approved by the City Engineer, approved by the state’s Department of Health,
and installed according to “Standard Utilities Specifications” City Engineer’s
Association of the state.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.09 DRAINAGE/GRADING STANDARDS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall consider the retention of natural storm water/
snow melt drainage patterns in the design of his or her proposed subdivision.
The subdivider shall be responsible to provide adequate drainage facilities for
his or her development and upstream properties.
   (B)   All subdivisions shall demonstrate provisions for adequate surface or
subsurface runoff of storm water and snow melt directed to natural drainage
ways.
   (C)   All natural drainage ways draining properties upstream from the
subject property shall be identified and preserved, and no structures shall be
less than one foot above the water level in the drainage way created by a storm
of a 100-year, 24-hour rain event. No filling of areas inundated by the 100-
year, 24-hour rain event shall be allowed.
   (D)   Additional runoff for a 100-year, 24-hour rain event from all streets
and building sites at build-out shall be accounted for and maintained within
the development.
   (E)   Natural or human-made storage areas shall be utilized where needed and
shall be designated by drainage and utility easement by the subdivider. All
storage areas shall be vegetated and designed to lower naturally after a storm.
   (F)   All drainage structures or improvements provided shall be sufficient
in size to pass a 100-year, 24-hour storm event through the natural drainage
way.
   (G)   All areas disturbed by grading, street construction, or structure
installation shall be covered with a minimum of three-inches natural topsoil
and seeded. Drainage ways over 2% in gradient shall, at a minimum, be sodded.
   (H)   All parking areas, heavy use areas, storage areas, and impervious area
shall be diverted to a basin designed to allow entrapment of silts and
nutrients prior to discharge to a natural drainage way.
   (I)   There shall be no discharge of untreated storm water to a water body.
   (J)   Erosion control measures shall be provided as needed to prevent and/or
contain erosion.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.10 DEDICATION TO THE PUBLIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 462.358, as it may be
amended from time to time, or amendments thereto, the subdivider shall
dedicate, to the public, lands for highway rights-of-way, street rights-of-way,
utility easements, wetland easements, and similar lands required for perpetual
and public improvements.
   (B)   The city finds it in the public interest and necessary to provide
future parks, trails, and other public open and recreational spaces for the
citizens of the city. As such, for every new subdivision of land involving
three or more lots which are to be developed for residential purposes, the City
Council, with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall require a
payment or dedication to the city of any one of the following, to be reviewed
on an annual basis at the beginning of each calendar year:
      (1)   A reasonable portion of a land dedication for conservation purposes
or for public use as parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails,
wetlands, or open space, up to 0.016 acres per resident expected in the
proposed development, using the most recent average household size as
determined by the State Demographer’s office and the U.S. Census Bureau;
      (2)   A payment of up to $416 per expected resident in the proposed
subdivision, using the most recent average household size as determined by the
State Demographer’s office and the U.S. Census Bureau; or
      (3)   A combination of land dedication and cash payment to the city for
parks and open space purposes that reflects the values contained herein and in
the city’s comprehensive land use plan.
   (C)   The amount of land and/or payment shall be set by the City Council,
from the recommendation of the Planning Commission, after taking into
consideration the open space, park, recreational, or common area facilities
which the applicant proposes to reserve for public use within the subdivision.
The city shall grant preference to payment in lieu of land dedication unless an
area within the land to be platted has been identified by the city for park
acquisition. The following factors shall be taken into consideration when
reviewing potential lands for park dedication:
      (1)   The suitability of the land for its intended purpose;
      (2)   The future needs of the community regarding parks, trails, and open
spaces;
      (3)   The amount of any fees imposed, consistent with the requirements
and limitations contained in this section;
      (4)   Whether the land is adjacent to or near other public recreation
lands;
      (5)   Whether there is an opportunity to extend an existing or proposed
trail or to enlarge an existing or proposed park or recreational facility;
      (6)   Whether the land dedication would protect environmentally or
historically significant or sensitive sites; and
      (7)   Whether the land dedication provides a unique public benefit or
contains unique natural features.
   (D)   Where private open space for park or recreation purposes is provided
in a conventional subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and
maintained by the future residents of the subdivision or owners of the
development, the Planning Commission may consider granting a credit for park
dedication. A credit of up to 2.5% of the buildable area of the proposed open
space may be given, provided that the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The land area designated as open space and used in the calculation
of the 2.5% credit shall not include any area that is otherwise considered
unbuildable, including, but not limited to, wetlands, steep slopes exceeding
12%, and the area within setbacks from property lines, required buffer zones,
bluffs, and the ordinary high water mark, among others;
      (2)   The land area designated as open space within the development is
not occupied by non-recreational buildings, such as maintenance or care taking
buildings, and is available for use to all residents of the proposed
subdivision;
      (3)   The use of the private open space is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of
the future owners of the property within the development and which cannot be
defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city; and
      (4)   The area required to obtain increased densities shall not be
included in the computation of such private open space.
   (E)   For conservation subdivisions where the conservation parcel is
publicly dedicated, there shall be no further dedication required. For
conservation subdivisions where the conservation parcel is not publicly
dedicated, the fee calculated in this section shall be reduced by 50% due to
the permanent preservation of open space.
   (F)   Funds received by the city, in lieu of land dedication, shall be
placed in a special fund in accordance with M.S. § 462.358, Subd. 2b, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   (G)   All land dedication pursuant to this chapter shall be conveyed to the
city through a warranty deed drafted by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 151.25 BOND REQUIRED.
   Prior to the submission of a final plat application and prior to approval of
a metes and bounds subdivision, the subdivider shall provide for the
construction of the required improvements at his or her expense and shall have
the work completed or shall enter a development contract and give bond or other
financial assurance satisfactory to the Council in an amount equal to 125% of
the estimated cost of the uncompleted improvements except as provided in §
151.27. The bond shall be released by the City Council upon the recommendation
of the City Engineer indicating the improvements are satisfactorily complete.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.26 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS.
   The required improvements shall conform to the standards of this chapter and
shall include street cross section, signs, and lighting in conformance with
adopted city standards.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.27 REQUESTS FOR THE CITY TO CONSTRUCT INFRASTRUCTURE.
   The subdivider may request the city to construct municipal sewage
facilities, municipal water facilities, or bituminous street surfacing with all
costs to be assessed against the benefited properties. If the City Council
agrees, the subdivider shall enter a development contract and give a bond or
other financial assurance satisfactory to the Council in an amount equal to 50%
of the estimated costs. The assessments shall be paid in full upon sale of the
property.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.28 ALLOCATION OF COSTS.
   All costs of the City Engineer, City Attorney, bond attorney, financial
experts, and other professional costs borne by the city in writing and/or
executing development contracts, estimates of cost, inspectors, financial
arrangements, assessments, and pursuing legal remedies in event of default by
the subdivider, shall be borne by the subdivider or his or her successors.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.29 RECORD DRAWINGS.
   Before final release of the bond, record drawings shall be provided by the
applicant documenting final locations of improvements.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 151.41 GENERAL.
   (A)   Conservation subdivision and planned unit development (PUD) requires
the assistance of professional planning and usually involves the approval of
multiple agencies or other governmental bodies. Where circumstances are
favorable, conservation subdivision and PUDs provide more latitude in land use
than normal development to allow for planning, clustering facilities,
consolidating green spaces, and internal recreation amenities.
   (B)   Mixed use PUD, where appropriate, may be allowed provided the use not
normally allowed in the zoning district does not exceed 35% of the building
floor area.
   (C)   Provisions of each zoning district shall govern within that district
except where specifically addressed in this section.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.42 SUITABILITY.
   The city must consider the following criteria in the examination of a parcel
for suitability as a PUD:
   (A)   Existing recreational use of the surface waters and likely increases
in use associated with planned unit developments;
   (B)   Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density;
   (C)   Suitability of lands for the planned unit development approach;
   (D)   Level of current development in the area;
   (E)   Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped lands; and
   (F)   Size of the parcel and amount, if any, of shoreline.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.43 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR NEW CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS AND PUDS.
   (A)   Minimum size. All developments must contain at least three contiguous
acres of buildable area with a lot width of 400 feet.
   (B)   Buffer.
      (1)   A 50-foot vegetative buffer will be maintained or established along
the boundary of the PUD. There shall be no units or impervious coverage within
this buffer with the exception of access roads or utilities. The buffer will
serve to screen the adjacent parcels and the lake, where applicable, from the
units within the PUD. The screening will contain both low growing (e.g., brush)
and high growing (e.g., trees) vegetation.
      (2)   Adjacent parcels and the lake, where applicable, shall be a minimum
of 50% screened, as measured by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, from the
adjacent parcel or the lake during leaf-on conditions. An earthen berm may be
used where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the existing vegetation
cannot be enhanced to meet the 50% screening criteria. Use of a berm shall not
preclude the maintaining of a 50-foot buffer or the installation of screening
as part of the berm.
   (C)   Minimum structure setbacks.
 
Shoreland Class Ordinary High Water Level Structure Setback (Feet)
General development                                 120
Natural environment                                 200
Recreational development                            150
 
   (D)   Common open space. At least 50% of the total project area must be
permanently preserved as common open space. Common open space must include
areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural
state, and areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries,
and at least 75% of the common open space must be upland area. At least 33% of
the common open space shall be retained in a contiguous area.
      (1)   The land area of all dwelling units/sites and accessory structures,
the space between buildings in a cluster, an area of 25 feet around each
structure, all road rights-of-way, and all land covered by impervious surfaces,
road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, shall not be included in the
computation of common open space.
      (2)   Common open space may include any outdoor recreational facilities
for use by owners of the dwelling units or sites, or the public.
      (3)   Common open space may include areas used for storm water retention
or management and areas used for sanitary sewer collection or disposal. Where
common space includes sanitary sewage treatment systems, the use of the space
shall be restricted where necessary to avoid adverse impacts on the systems.
      (4)   All of the shore impact zones must be included as common open
space.
      (5)   Common open space must not include commercial facilities or uses,
but may contain water-oriented facilities.
      (6)   The appearance and use of common space areas, including topography,
vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of restrictive deed
covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other
equally effective and permanent means acceptable to the city.
   (E)   Sanitary sewer and water supply standards.
      (1)   Planned unit developments shall be connected to publicly owned
water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and sewage
treatment systems must be centralized and designed and installed to meet or
exceed applicable standards or rules of the state’s Department of Health and
the state’s Pollution Control Agency. On-site sewage treatment systems must be
located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient area free
of limiting factors must be provided for a replacement standard soil treatment
system for each sewage system.
      (2)   Conservation subdivisions shall be connected to publicly owned
water supply and sewer systems, if available. Where publicly owned water supply
and sewer systems are not available, conservation subdivisions shall either
establish dedicated areas for individual sewage treatment systems or establish
centralized water supply and sewage treatment systems to serve the entire
subdivision.
   (F)   Erosion control and storm water management. Erosion control and storm
water management for developments must meet the standards in the City of Crosby
Stormwater Ordinance 2016-06. For planned unit developments, the impervious
surface coverage shall not exceed 15% in either the total project area or the
first tier. For conservation subdivisions, the impervious surface coverage for
lots must meet the standards in §
154.034. Erosion control and storm water management shall be designed by
certified personnel in erosion and sediment control using the best management
practices found in the latest Pollution Control Agency’s Storm Water Best
Management Practices Manual, approved by the local government, and effectively
implemented.
      (1)   For post construction storm water management, when possible,
existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces must be
used to convey, store, filter, and retain storm water runoff before discharge
to public waters. When development density, topographic features, and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm water
runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed
facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetated filter strips, bioretention areas, rainwater
gardens, enhanced swales, offline retention areas, and natural depressions for
infiltration rather than buried pipes and human-made materials and facilities.
      (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential,
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Erosion prevention and sediment control
practices must be used to retain sediment on site. Disturbed soil areas must be
stabilized and protected as soon as possible. The maximum time the soil in a
project area can remain exposed when the area is not actively being worked is
three days. Temporary or permanent cover for the exposed areas is required at
that time but should be installed sooner if possible. All deltas and sediment
deposited in surface waters, including drainage ways, catch basins, and other
drainage systems must be removed within 14 days unless precluded by legal,
regulatory, or physical access restraints. The areas where sediment removal
results in exposed soil must be stabilized within seven days after completing
the removal.
      (3)   To the maximum extent possible, land-disturbing activities must not
occur within the shore impact zone.
      (4)   Impervious surface coverage.
 
Development or Use Class or District    Coverage (Percent of Applicable Area
                                        Applicable Area)
                   General development
                   and recreational     15                   Riparian lots
                   development
Conservation       Natural environment,
subdivision        special protection,  12                   Riparian lots
                   sensitive area and
                   all river classes
                   All classes and      35                   Nonriparian lots
                   districts
Planned unit       All classes and      15                   Total project area
developments       districts                                 and first tier
 
   (G)   Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be directed downward.
Lighting shall not illuminate parcels adjacent to the development, either
directly or indirectly.
   (H)   Shore recreation facilities.
      (1)   Shore recreation facilities, including, but not limited to,
swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, must
be centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation of
suitability must include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation,
soils, depth to ground water and bedrock, or other relevant factors.
      (2)   No more than 20% of the shore impact zone shall be used for shore
recreation facilities.
      (3)   The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or
docking of watercraft shall not exceed one for each first-tier unit that would
be allowed as calculated in §
151.46(A). The number may be reduced based on the suitability of the site.
      (4)   Facilities for mooring of individual watercraft, including boat
lifts and canopies, shall be earth-tone in color and shall be positioned so as
to minimize their visibility from the lake. Canopies may be disallowed if they
would have a strong visual presence.
   (I)   Building standards. Units must be clustered in one or more groups and
located on suitable areas of the development. All structures within a PUD must
meet the minimum standards:
      (1)   New multi-family dwellings of four units or larger shall be
designed by an architect;
      (2)   New multi-family buildings shall meet the state code for fire and
sound ratings;
      (3)   Water systems must be winterized;
      (4)   Parking and driving areas must be paved; and
      (5)   All buildings shall be earth tone in color and shall be designed,
constructed, and positioned to be compatible, in color, character, and mass,
with the surrounding land use.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.44 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR EXISTING PUDS.
   (A)   All existing PUDs shall meet the design criteria for a new PUD, where
possible.
   (B)   Additional development within an existing PUD shall not bring the PUD
further out of compliance with the basic design criteria.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.45 COMPUTING PUD BUILDABLE AREA.
   Buildable area in a PUD is calculated using the following procedure.
   (A)   The project parcel is divided into tiers by locating one or more lines
approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water level
at the following intervals, proceeding landward.
 
Shoreland Tier Dimensions Feet
GD lakes - first tier     200
GD lakes - second tiers   267
NE lakes - all tiers      400
RD lakes - all tiers      267
 
   (B)   The buildable area within each tier is next calculated. This area is
then subjected to the development density evaluation steps to arrive at an
allowable number of dwelling units/sites. In areas with overlapping tiers due
to close proximity of public waters to each other, topographic divides shall be
used to determine which shoreland standard would apply, and in those areas
where the topographic divide can not be determined, the more restrictive rules
for the area shall be used.
   (C)   Beyond the second tier, all property is classified as “third tier and
beyond”.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.46 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Density. The buildable area within each tier is divided by the
shoreline residential buildable lot area contained in §
154.034. This calculation determines the maximum number of dwelling units or
sites authorized for each tier. Structures that straddle tiers shall be rated
as part of the tier closer to the ordinary high water level.
   (B)   Transferability. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier
to any other tier further from the shoreland water body or watercourse, but
must not be transferred to any other tier closer.
   (C)   Administration and maintenance requirements. Prior to final approval
of any residential planned unit developments, the city will require adequate
provisions developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open
spaced and for the continued existence and functioning of the development as a
community.
      (1)   Common open space preservation. Deed restrictions, permanent
conservation easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally
effective and permanent means must be provided to ensure perpetual preservation
and maintenance of common open space. For areas greater or equal to ten acres,
easements shall be held by the city, conservation organization, land trust, or
similar organization authorized to hold interest in real property pursuant to
M.S. § 84C.01-05, as it may be amended from time to time, as approved by the
city. The city may also hold or co-hold an easement. The instruments of the
easement must include all of the following protections:
         (a)   Commercial uses shall be prohibited for noncommercial
developments;
         (b)   Vegetation and topographic alterations other than to prevent
personal injury or property damage and for restoration efforts based on an
approved shoreland vegetation buffer plan shall be prohibited;
         (c)   Construction of additional buildings, impervious surfaces, or
storage of vehicles and other materials shall be prohibited;
         (d)   Beaching of motorized watercraft shall be prohibited; and
         (e)   Dumping, storage, processing, burning, burying, or landfill of
solid or other wastes shall be prohibited.
      (2)   Development organization and functioning. Unless an equally
effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all
residential developments shall use an owners’ association with the following
features.
         (a)   Membership shall be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site
purchaser and any successive purchasers.
         (b)   Each member must pay a pro rata share of the association’s
expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites.
         (c)   Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing
conditions.
         (d)   The association shall be responsible for insurance, taxes, and
maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities, and it must enforce
covenants, deed restrictions, and easements. The association must have a land
stewardship plan for common open space areas greater or equal to ten acres,
specifically focusing on the long-term management of these open space lands.
      (3)   Amendments or revisions to covenants or deed restrictions. Before
establishing or recording any common interest community, the developer shall
submit documents, including all covenants, conditions, restrictions, easements,
and operating rules and procedures associated with the development, for review
and approval by the city pursuant to M.S. § 515B.1-106, as it may be amended
from time to time. Under no circumstances shall covenants or deed restrictions
be modified without the city’s determination that the proposed changes fully
comply with the requirements of Chapter 15-8.2.
   (D)   Conversions. Existing commercial planned unit developments other land
uses and facilities may be converted to residential developments if all of the
following standards are met.
      (1)   Proposed conversions must be evaluated using the same procedures
and standards presented in this part for planned unit developments involving
all new construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the
development and these standards shall be identified and corrected. For
conversions to residential lots, all inconsistencies between existing features
of the development and the standards in Chapter 15-8.2 must be identified and
corrected.
      (2)   Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment,
impervious coverage, common open space, and shore recreation facilities must be
corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the conditional use
permit.
      (3)   Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be corrected as part
of the conversion. These improvements must include, where applicable, the
following:
         (a)   Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, mooring sites, boat
launching areas and ramps, or other facilities located in shore or bluff impact
zones; and
         (b)   Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve
vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from
the water to meet shoreland vegetation buffer standards in Chapter 15-8.2(3)
(B).
      (4)   Dwelling units or dwelling site densities shall meet the standards
in this part for conversion to planned unit developments and the standards in
Chapter 15-8.2(6) for conversions to residential lots.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.60 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
   At the subdivider’s option, a pre-application meeting shall be held,
including the subdivider, City Zoning Administrator, City Planner, City
Engineer, if requested by the Zoning Administrator, and the City Clerk-
Treasurer. Discussion at this meeting shall be limited to procedure, chapter
requirements, and timing.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.61 SKETCH PLAN REVIEW MEETING WITH PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   At the subdivider’s option, a review of a sketch plan will be made by
the Planning Commission prior to a public hearing. Discussion at this meeting
shall be limited to procedure, chapter requirements, and timing.
   (B)   The subdivider shall submit nine copies of the sketch plan, 14 days
prior to the normal Planning Commission meeting, and request a position on the
formal agenda.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall not take action on the proposal, but may
make suggestions to facilitate the preparation of an approvable preliminary
plat or plan.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.62 FINANCIAL SECURITY.
   The city may require that an applicant establish an escrow account or other
financial security for the purpose of reimbursing the city for direct costs
relating to professional services provided during the review, approval, and
inspection of the project. The city may charge the applicant a rate equal to
the value of the service to the city. Services provided by city staff or
contract professionals will be billed at an established rate.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.63 METES AND BOUNDS SUBDIVISION APPROVAL, SUBDIVISIONS TEN ACRES OR
GREATER IN SIZE AND 500 FEET OR GREATER IN WIDTH.
   (A)   These subdivisions shall be subject to approval by the Zoning
Administrator if both of the resulting parcels are ten acres or greater and 500
feet of width or greater.
   (B)   Such subdivisions shall be limited to no more than one split of a
parcel into two parcels in a three-year period of time.
   (C)   The proposed legal description for subdivision of land by metes and
bounds shall be prepared and certified by a licensed land surveyor.
   (D)   Approval by the city shall be indicated by the stamp of approval
affixed by the City Clerk- Treasurer to said legal description. The County
Recorder or Registrar of Deeds may accept each such Certificate for filing and
recording upon compliance with these provisions.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.64 METES AND BOUNDS SUBDIVISION APPROVAL, SUBDIVISIONS LESS THAN 10 ACRES
IN SIZE OR LESS THAN 500 FEET IN WIDTH.
   (A)   Where appropriate, under the provisions of this chapter, the
subdivider shall submit documents containing the essential information of a
proposed plat or plan and including dimensions computed to one hundredth of a
foot and bearing computed to equivalent accuracy to the Planning Commission for
approval.
   (B)   The review of the Planning Commission need not include a public
hearing.
   (C)   The subdivider shall submit nine copies of his or her proposal to the
Zoning Administrator 30 days prior to the normal Planning Commission meeting
and pay the corresponding fee.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed lot split for
compliance with
Chapter 154, including a field review at his or her discretion.
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall decide on the subdivision within the
required time based on the resulting lots complying with this chapter, the
feasibility of the resulting lots for their intended purpose, and the provision
for access to adjacent properties. Conditions may be attached to an approval
requiring appropriate improvements. No more than one split into two parcels
shall be allowed in a three year period of time. An additional parcel for
right-of-way or commonly owned driveway access may also be allowed.
   (F)   The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council.
   (G)   The resulting land descriptions shall be prepared and signed by a
licensed land surveyor and shall comply with all provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Failure of the subdivider to act after an approval of a metes and
bounds subdivision within one year shall void the approval unless extended by
the Planning Commission. A second extension shall require a new review by the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.65 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT.
   A boundary line adjustment is the moving of a boundary line between adjacent
parcels. A boundary line adjustment does not create any new lots, tracts,
parcels, or sites. A boundary line adjustment must also not create or result in
any lot, tract, parcel, or site which contains insufficient area and dimensions
to meet minimum requirements for width, lot size, and area for building as
required by this section. The newly acquired land must be combined on the same
deed for recording purposes as the remainder of the owner’s property.
   (A)   Application. An owner proposing to undertake a boundary line
adjustment must submit a complete application to the city together with the
applicable fees. The owner must submit the following additional information
with its application in order for the application to be considered complete:
      (1)   A certificate of survey showing the current boundary lines and the
proposed boundary lines after adjustment;
      (2)   The current legal descriptions of the parcels; and
      (3)   The resulting legal descriptions of the altered parcels.
   (B)   Procedure. Complete applications must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and make a
determination. If a boundary line adjustment is approved, the city will send a
letter to the County Recorder/Registrar of Titles indicating its approval. The
applicant shall be required to prepare and record such documents with the
County Recorder/Registrar of Titles as may be needed to complete the boundary
line adjustment. All boundary line adjustment approvals shall be recorded at
the County Recorder’s office within one year of approval. Any application not
recorded within that time frame shall be deemed void and require a new
application.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 7-26-2021)
§ 151.66 PRELIMINARY PLAT OR PRELIMINARY CONDOMINIUM PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   The preliminary plat or preliminary condominium plan approval
constitutes formal approval of the concept and design of the subdivision. The
Planning Commission review shall include a public hearing and may include a
field review at its discretion. All reports of city staff, DNR, and road
authorities shall be reviewed and included in the hearing record. Related
variance requests, rezoning requests, and conditional use requests shall be
heard concurrently with a subdivision request.
   (B)    The subdivider shall submit nine copies of the proposed plat or
condominium plat to the Zoning Administrator 30 days prior to the normal
Planning Commission meeting, pay the required fees, and request a public
hearing.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify all property owners within 350
feet, by regular mail and shall advertise the hearing once in the legal section
of the official newspaper at least ten days ahead of the public hearing,
including sufficient legal property description in the advertisement. The
Zoning Administrator shall distribute one copy to each Planning Commission
member, if the proposal is adjacent to a county highway, one copy to the County
Engineer, and if the plat is in shorelands, one copy to the DNR postmarked at
least ten days before the public hearing for review and comment.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed plat or plan as to
content standards, necessary variances from this chapter, necessary rezoning or
necessary conditional use permits, and advise the subdivider and the Planning
Commission of his or her findings.
   (E)   The subdivider shall make additional application for the necessary
permits at least 30 days prior to the normal Planning Commission or Board of
Adjustment meeting as applicable, if subdivider desires to have a concurrent
public hearing for variance, conditional use, or rezoning.
   (F)   The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing and may continue
the hearing as it deems necessary to allow all factual input it deems necessary
to allow a decision. Lack of submission of comments by outside agencies shall
be construed to mean the agency has no objections.
   (G)   The Planning Commission shall recommend the approval, where
applicable, of the preliminary plat or preliminary condominium plat to the
Council within the required time frame, and the findings shall be sent to the
subdivider. The Planning Commission shall consider the following in its
decision:
      (1)   Is the property properly zoned?
      (2)   Does the proposal conform to the requirements of this chapter?
      (3)   Does the proposal conform to the requirements of the subdivision
chapter?
      (4)   Have the concerns of the affected agencies been addressed?
   (H)   The City Council shall review the findings and recommendations of the
Planning Commission at its next regular meeting and make the final
determination.
   (I)   The City Council will hear any appeal within 30 days of the Planning
Commission action and will re-notify anyone noticed for the public hearing.
Said appeals will be filed with the City Clerk- Treasurer within 15 days of the
decision.
   (J)   Failure of the subdivider to act after an approval of preliminary plat
or preliminary condominium plat within one year shall void the approval unless
extended by the Planning Commission. A second extension shall require a new
public hearing.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
§ 151.67 FINAL PLAT OR FINAL CONDOMINIUM PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Upon approval by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall cause
the final plat or final condominium plat documents and concurrent documents to
be prepared and submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation to the
City Council. All coincident variance requests, conditional use permit
requests, and/or rezoning requests shall either have been decided or be pending
approval simultaneously with the final plat.
   (B)   The subdivider shall submit nine paper copies of the final plat or
final condominium plat and concurrent documents to the Zoning Administrator 30
days prior to the Planning Commission meeting.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall distribute the information received to
the City Attorney and the City Engineer, who shall review the submission for
conformance with the standards and comment thereupon to the Planning
Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall compare the final plat to the
preliminary plat and comment thereupon. The Attorney shall ascertain that all
parties with an interest in the parcel to be divided are indicated as signers
of the documents. The engineer shall determine that the improvements required
have been completed or have been included in a development contract and that
the required security has been posted with the City Council. An independent
licensed land surveyor, as designated by the city, shall compare the approved
preliminary plat with the final plat, provide a plat check of the final plat,
and verify that the final plat meets the survey standards required by state
statutes.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall review the reports of the attorney,
engineer, Zoning Administrator, and independent licensed land surveyor and make
recommendation to the City Council within the required time frame. The Planning
Commission shall consider the following:
      (1)   Has the applicant complied with all conditions and requirements
upon which the preliminary approval is expressly conditioned whether through
performance or execution of appropriate agreements assuring performance?
      (2)   Does the final plat or final condominium plat agree with the
preliminary plat or preliminary condominium plat?
      (3)   Does the City Attorney agree that all parties with an interest in
the property are shown as signers of the document?
      (4)   Does the City Engineer agree that all improvements required are
satisfactorily completed or are guaranteed by contract with adequate financial
security?
      (5)   Does an independent professional land surveyor agree that the final
document meets the statutory requirements?
      (6)   Has financial security been posted in the appropriate amount?
   (E)   Following approval by the City Council, the subdivider shall submit to
the Zoning Administrator four Mylar prints of the final plat or final
condominium plat for signature by the Mayor and Clerk-Treasurer.
   (F)   Upon signature, the subdivider shall file all pertinent documents with
the County Recorder. Failure to file a final plat or plan, within two years,
shall void the approval unless extended by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed - -)
CHAPTER 152: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
152.01   Title
   
152.02   Scope
   
152.03   Intent
   
152.04   Application
   
152.05   Definitions
   
152.06   Terms, words, and meanings
   
152.07   Code official for property maintenance inspections
   
152.08   Duties and powers of the code official
   
152.09   General requirement
   
152.10   Unsafe structures and equipment
   
152.11   Emergency measures
   
152.12   Demolition
   
152.13   Exterior structure
   
152.14   Exterior property areas
   
152.15   Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs
   
152.16   Nuisances, junk, and blight
   
152.17   Rubbish and garbage
   
152.18   Extermination
   
152.19   Notices and orders
   
152.20   Means of appeal
   
152.21   Abatement
 
   
152.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   General regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 91
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 92
§ 152.01 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code,
hereinafter referred to as “this chapter”, and the City of Crosby, Minnesota,
hereinafter referred to as “city”.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.02 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises, structures, equipment, and
facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from
the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and
sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators, and occupants;
the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration,
enforcement, and penalties.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.03 INTENT.
   This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to
ensure public health, safety, and welfare in so far as they are affected by the
continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing
structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be
altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required
herein.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in §§
152.01 to
152.03. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this chapter specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
   (B)   Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards required by
this chapter or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered, or repaired shall be maintained in good
working order. No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service,
facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except
for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are
in progress. The requirements of this chapter are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures, and premises.
   (C)   Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the State Building Code, State Mechanical, Fuel
Gas, and Plumbing Code, and the National Electrical Code. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provision of the
land use regulations (zoning) as provided in
Chapter 154 of this code.
   (D)   Existing remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be
constructed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary.
   (E)   Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations, or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter
shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
   (F)   Historic buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings
when such buildings or structures are judged by the Code Official to be safe
and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare.
   (G)   Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this chapter shall be those that are listed in §
150.02 and considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the
prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this chapter and the reference standards, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
   (H)   Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure, or
equipment, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this chapter, shall be determined by the Code Official.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Code Official.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
   BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures, including a bathtub or
shower.
   BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes
in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter or any duly authorized representative.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   EASEMENT. The portion of land or property reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The
EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on, or above a said lot or
lots.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and an adjoining property
under the control or owners or operators of such premises.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats, or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serves as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination method.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or
near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility
of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
   HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure used for living, sleeping, eating, or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACES.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating
which does not contain within such a unit a toilet, lavatory, and bathtub or
shower.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INFESTATION. The presence within or contiguous to a structure or premises of
insects, rats, vermin, or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public
streets for reason, including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own
power.
   LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal, symbol, or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency, or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items, and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
   LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide, or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises, or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement, or license, or pursuant to
an unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
   OPENABLE AREA. The part of a window, skylight, or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, or any other group acting
as a unit.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot, or parcel of land, easement, or public way, including
any structures thereon.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded or otherwise
permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living but not for cooking
purposes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other
combustible materials; paper, rages, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
   SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include
permanent provisions for living, eating, and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a
dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership, or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
   TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
   VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner (e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work).
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.06 TERMS, WORDS, AND MEANINGS.
   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
   (B)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
   (C)   Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the International Fire Code, International Zoning
Code, State Building Code, State Mechanical, Fuel Gas, and Plumbing Code, or
the National Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them as stated in these codes.
   (D)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
   (E)   Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit”, “dwelling”, “premises”,
“building”, “rooming house”, “rooming unit”, “housekeeping unit”, or “story”
are stated in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words “or any part thereof”.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.07 CODE OFFICIAL FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   General. The executive official in charge of property maintenance
inspection shall be known as the Code Official.
   (B)   Appointment. The Code Official shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (C)   Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the city and
with the concurrence of the City Council, the Code Official shall have the
authority to appoint Deputy Code Officials; other related technical officers,
inspectors, and other employees as needed.
   (D)   Liability. The Code Official, officer, or employees charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the city, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally, and are hereby relieved from all personal liability
for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required
or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against
any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee
in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter
shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the
final termination of the proceedings. The Code Official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter; and any officer,
acting in good faith and without malice with regards to the enforcement of this
chapter, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official
duties in connection therewith.
   (E)   Fees. The fees for activities and services performed in carrying out
the responsibilities under this chapter shall be as indicated in the fee
schedule adopted by the City Council and updated from time to time.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.08 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   General. The Code Official shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Implementation authority. The Code Official shall have authority as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare to
interpret and implement the provisions of this chapter; to secure the intent
thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or
other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or
fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this chapter, or of
violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety.
   (C)   Inspections. The Code Official shall make all of the required
inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing. The Code
Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to
report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the
City Administrator.
   (D)   Right of entry. The Code Official is authorized to enter the structure
or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the Code Official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by
law.
   (E)   Identification. The Code Official shall carry proper identification
when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of the Official’s
duties under this chapter.
   (F)   Notices and orders. The Code Official shall issue all necessary
notices or orders pursuant to §
152.99 listed below to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (G)   Records. The Code Official shall keep records of all business and
activities specified in the provisions of this chapter. Such records shall be
retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which
such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by
other regulations.
   (H)   Alternative materials, methods, and equipment. The provisions of this
chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
chapter, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative
material or method of construction shall be approved where the Code Official
finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of
the provisions of this chapter, and that the alternate material, method, or
work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability, and safety.
   (I)   Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Code Official
shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance
at no expense to the jurisdiction.
   (J)   Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Code Official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing
procedures performed by an approved agency.
   (K)   Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Official
for the period required for retention of public records.
   (L)   Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment, and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working
condition, and approved.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.09 GENERAL REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment, and exterior property.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in this chapter. A person shall not occupy as owner-
occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit
are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition that part
of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit, or premises which they
occupy and control.
   (C)   Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blight problem or adversely
affect the public health or safety.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.10 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   General. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official
to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is
found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
      (1)   Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property, or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is possible.
      (2)   Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers, or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to
life, health, property, or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
      (3)   Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy whenever the Code Official finds that such structure is unsafe,
unlawful, or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating
facilities, or other essential equipment required by this chapter, or because
the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the
structure or to the public.
      (4)   Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or
in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this chapter, or
was erected, altered, or occupied contrary to law.
   (B)   Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for
human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse,
the Code Official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the
premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the Code Official shall cause the premises to be closed
and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement
by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
   (C)   Notice. Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with §
152.19(C). The notice shall be in the form prescribed in §
152.19(B).
   (D)   Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official shall post
on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word
“Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment, or removing the placard.
   (E)   Placard removal. The Code Official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or
removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the Code Official shall
be subject to the penalties provided by §
152.99.
   (F)   Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded
by the Code Official shall be vacated as ordered by the Code Official. Any
person who shall occupy a placarded premise or shall operate placarded
equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall
let anyone occupy a placarded premise or operate placarded equipment shall be
liable for the penalties provided by §
152.99.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.11 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   (A)   Imminent Danger. When, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and
life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual
or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any
structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of
toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous
equipment, the Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and
require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Code Official shall
cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as
follows: “THIS STRUCTURE IS UNSAFE AND ITS OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE
CODE OFFICIAL”. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same.
   (B)   Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter, whenever, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is imminent
danger due to an unsafe condition, the Code Official shall order the necessary
work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such
structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described
has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the Code
Official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
   (C)   Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the Code Official
shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having
jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways, and places adjacent to
unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
   (D)   Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Code Official
shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as
expeditiously as possible.
   (E)   Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the
jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such
costs.
   (F)   Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter have the right
to appeal such order pursuant to §§
10.025 to
10.033,
10.045 to
10.046, and
10.060 to
10.063.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.12 DEMOLITION.
   (A)   General. The Code Official shall order the owner of any premises upon
which is located any structure, which in the Code Official’s judgment is so
old, dilapidated, or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that
it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner’s
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such
structure.
   (B)   Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with §
152.99.
   (C)   Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply or
appeal under §§
10.025 to
10.033,
10.045 to
10.046, and
10.060 to
10.063 with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official
shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and
the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate.
   (D)   Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and
removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable
materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after
deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly
remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of
expense and the amounts deducted, to the person who is entitled thereto,
subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned
over, the report shall so state.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.13 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
   (A)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound, and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety, or welfare.
   (B)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks, and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
Peeling, flaking, and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted.
All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope
and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather
resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall
be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or
corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion.
Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for
stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. Upon notification
of violation, the owner has 30 days in which to comply.
   (C)   Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be
a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half
inch (12.7 mm). (See §
150.03, House numbering.)
   (D)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   (E)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. All foundation walls shall also
be kept clear of volunteer trees and brush that is overgrown near the house
that could cause damage to the foundation walls.
   (F)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials; and weather resistant and properly surface
coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   (G)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight, and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and
free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
   (H)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
   (I)   Overhang extension. All overhang extensions, including, but not
limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes,
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
   (J)   Stairways, decks, porches, and balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch, and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   (K)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   (L)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (M)   Window, skylight, and door frames. Every window, skylight, door, and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair, and weather tight.
   (N)   Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
      (1)   Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
      (2)   Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies, and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and
sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors
shall be in accordance with the appropriate code.
   (O)   Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water.
   (P)   Other hatchways. Doors, windows, or hatchways for dwelling units, room
units, or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide
security for the occupants and property within.
      (1)   Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress
is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, and shall
have a latch throw of not less than one inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall
be installed according to the manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in
good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not
be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
      (2)   Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part six feet
(1,828 mm) or higher above ground level or a walking surface below that
provides access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is
rented, leased, or let shall be equipped with a fall protection device.
      (3)   Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or
let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized
entry.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.14 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   (A)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in
a clean, safe, and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the
exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (B)   Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon. The exception is approved
retention areas and reservoirs.
   (C)   Sidewalk and driveways.
      (1)   All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces, and
similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free
from hazardous conditions. It shall be unlawful for an owner or tenant of the
abutting private property to allow ice or snow to remain upon the public
sidewalk 24 hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.
      (2)   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to
clear ice or snow from the public sidewalk after service of a notice of
violation, or appeal subject to the provisions of §§
10.025 to
10.033,
10.045 to
10.046, and
10.060 to
10.063, the owner or agent shall be subject to prosecution or penalty in
accordance with §
152.99. Upon failure to comply with or appeal the notice of violation, any duly
authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction
shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and remove such ice
and snow thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or
agent responsible for the property.
   (D)   Weeds and grass.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, or agent of any lot or
parcel of land in the city to allow any weeds or grass growing upon any such
lot or parcel of land to grow to a greater height than eight inches, or to
allow such weeds or grass to go to seed. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, other
than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated
flowers and gardens. Upon notification of violation, the owner has seven days
in which to comply.
      (2)   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to
cut and destroy weeds or grass after service of a notice of violation, or
appeal subject to the provisions of §§
10.025 to
10.033,
10.045 to
10.046, and
10.060 to
10.063, the owner or agent shall be subject to prosecution or penalty in
accordance with §
152.99. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, or appeal subject
to the provisions of §§
10.025 to
10.033,
10.045 to
10.046, and
10.060 to
10.063, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by
the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation
and cut and destroy the weeds or grass growing thereon, and the costs of such
removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
      (3)   A landowner wishing to maintain property in a natural state may be
exempted from the requirements of this section by submittal of a natural
landscape plan and by following the provisions and conditions set forth for
said plan as identified elsewhere in city code.
   (E)   Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.
   (F)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors, or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
   (G)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences, and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
   (H)   Abandoned and wrecked vehicles.
      (1)   State laws adopted. The provisions of M.S. Ch. 168B, as it may be
amended from time to time, relating to abandoned motor vehicles, is adopted and
made a part of this division (H) as if set out in full herein.
      (2)   Definitions. See §
152.05. Additionally, for the purposes of this division (H), the following
words and terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them as follows.
         (a)   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A “vehicle”, as defined below, that has
remained for a period of more than four hours on public property illegally, or
lacking vital component parts, or has remained for a period of more than four
hours on private property without consent of the person in control of such
property, or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial,
potential further use consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in
an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall include a vehicle which is in
a wrecked, junked, or partially dismantled condition. It shall also mean a
motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to the city or a vehicle
offered for sale by its owner parked on public property. It shall also include
any vehicle which is not properly and/or currently licensed within the state.
         (b)   CLASSIC OR PIONEER CAR. As defined in M.S. § 168.10, as it may
be amended from time to time, a CLASSIC OR PIONEER CAR shall not be considered
an abandoned vehicle.
         (c)   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      (3)   Nuisance declared. The City Council has determined that abandoned
(including vehicles not currently licensed), wrecked, junked, partially
dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the city create a public nuisance
tending to reduce the value of private property, invite plundering, create fire
hazards, attract vermin, and constitute a threat to the health and safety of
the public. The accumulation and outside storage of such vehicles, in the
nature of rubbish, litter, and unsightly debris is a detriment to the
environment and is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be
abated as provided herein or as provided under any other ordinance of the city
or law of the state.
      (4)   Abandonment of vehicles. No person shall park, store, or leave, or
permit the parking, storing, or leaving of, any abandoned vehicle on public or
private property within the city unless:
         (a)   Within a building;
         (b)   Such vehicle is stored or parked on private property in
connection with a duly licensed or authorized commercial enterprise operated
and conducted pursuant to law when such parking or storing of vehicles is
necessary to the operation of said commercial enterprise; or
         (c)   Such vehicle is stored or parked on private property of the
owner thereof, or a member of the owner’s family, for the purpose of making
repairs thereto; provided, that said repair period is not to exceed 30 days,
after which time said vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned.
      (5)   Impoundment of abandoned vehicles. The city may take into custody
and impound any abandoned vehicle which is in violation of the provisions of
this section. Any person, at the direction of the City Administrator, Police
Chief, or any other police officer of the city is hereby expressly authorized
to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing this section.
      (6)   Sale of abandoned vehicles.
         (a)   Vehicles over seven years old. When an abandoned vehicle is more
than seven model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not
display a license plate currently valid in the state, or any other state or
foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction
and shall not be subject to the notification and reclamation provisions of this
section.
         (b)   Vehicles seven years old and newer.
            1.   Notice to owner. When an abandoned vehicle does not fall
within the provisions of this section, the City Administrator, Police Chief, or
a police officer of the city shall give notice of the taking into custody of
the vehicle pursuant to M.S. § 168B.06, as it may be amended from time to time.
            2.   Public sale of vehicle. An abandoned vehicle taken into
custody and not reclaimed under this section shall be sold to the highest
bidder at public auction or sale, following ten days’ published notice thereof
in the official newspaper of the city.
            3.   Proceeds of sale. From the proceeds of the sale of the
abandoned vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing,
preserving, and storing of the vehicle, and all notice, publication and
administrative costs incurred pursuant to this section. Any remainder from the
proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
lienholder for 90 days and, if not claimed, shall thereafter be deposited in
the city treasury.
            4.   Reclamation of vehicle. The owner, or any lienholder of an
abandoned vehicle, or any person in lawful possession or control of the
property upon which said vehicle was abandoned, shall have a right to reclaim
said vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges
resulting from the taking of the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the
date of the notice required by this section.
      (7)   Notification. Upon notification of violation, the owner has seven
days in which to comply.
   (I)   Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate, or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any
private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving, or
graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface
to an approved state of maintenance and repair. Upon notification of violation,
the owner has seven days in which to comply.
   (J)   Household furnishings, appliances, and trade fixtures. It is unlawful
for any person to store or keep any household furnishings or appliances or
trade fixtures intended for use inside of a building on any property within the
corporate limits of the city, unless housed within a lawfully erected building
or unless such person has a valid junk dealer’s license.
   (K)   Storage of wood.
      (1)   Definition. WOOD shall include, but not be limited to, firewood and
lumber, whether rough, precut construction grade, or finished, which is stored
or kept on property in the city.
      (2)   Persons exempt. This division (K) shall not apply to:
         (a)   Persons having property on which new construction is taking
place and the wood on such property is being used for said construction, unless
the said wood has remained on the property for more than six months and is not
a permanent part of the new construction at the end of that time; and
         (b)   Persons storing or keeping wood on property when said wood is
stored or kept in neat and secure stacks in a covered structure impervious to
the elements.
      (3)   Conditions of outside storage. Wood stored or kept in the city
which is not contained within a covered enclosure impervious to the elements
shall be stored or kept in neat and secure stacks as follows: there is no
minimum width requirement for open stacks under three feet in height. Any open
stacks over three feet in height shall have a height which is no more than
twice its width with a maximum height of nine feet. Stacks shall be no less
than five feet from any side property line on corner lots, 30 feet from any
front property line or any front of a house, whichever is closer, and two feet
from any rear property line or any side property line of interior lots. Grass
height around all wood stacks shall be maintained at a maximum height of six
inches.
      (4)   Number of cords. No more than 15 cords of wood shall be stored on
any residential property.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.15 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS.
   (A)   Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
and in good repair.
   (B)   Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.16 NUISANCES, JUNK, AND BLIGHT.
   (A)   Public nuisance.
      (1)   Whoever by an act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
maintains a public nuisance may be ordered to abate the nuisance as provided in
this chapter, and may be charged with a misdemeanor offense or issued an
administrative citation.
      (2)   The following acts or omissions shall constitute a public nuisance:
         (a)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public;
         (b)   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any
public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public;
         (c)   Willfully opposes or obstructs a health officer or physician
charged with the enforcement of the health laws in performing any legal duties;
or
         (d)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law to be a
public nuisance, junk, or blight and for which no sentence is specifically
provided.
   (B)   Permitting public nuisance, junk, or blight. No person shall permit
real property under such person’s control to be used to maintain a public
nuisance, junk, or blight or let the same knowing it will be so sold.
   (C)   Permitting unhealthful waste disposal systems. No person shall permit
or maintain an offensive, nauseous, hurtful, dangerous, or unhealthful
outhouse, privy vault, sewer, or private drain upon said premises or land, or
premises or land occupied or used by or under such person’s control.
   (D)   Permitting unhealthful conditions. No person shall permit, suffer, or
maintain or fail to remove any offensive, nauseous, hurtful, dangerous, or
unhealthful condition to or for the neighborhood resulting from the failure to
properly dispose of sick or unsound flesh, meat, fish, carcass, garbage,
sewage, waste, debris, or any other offensive substance, liquid, or thing
whatsoever upon said premises or land, or premises or land occupied or used by
or under such person’s control, or drop, discharge, pass, deposit, or otherwise
deliver the same upon any ground, private or public.
   (E)   Fertilizer and burial of waste. No person shall leave, deposit, or
cause to be placed on any private ground any garbage, sewage, waste, debris,
carcass, or other substance or matter which is offensive or unhealthy by
decomposition, provided that the use of manure in the normal course for
agriculture or horticulture is permitted.
   (F)   Slaughterhouses. No person shall keep or use any slaughterhouse, nor
slay, kill, or butcher any animal, except for their own home use, nor melt or
fry out any rough tallow, nor keep or have any stale, putrid, or stinking fat,
grease, or meat. No person shall keep within said city any undressed or dry
hides, or offensive, nauseous substance or liquid at any place from whence the
stench thereof may reach the street, avenue, alley, lane, or public land, or to
any dwelling. No owner or occupant of any grocery, cellar, packing house, meat
shop, soap factory, tannery, brewery, distillery and dye house, stable, or
other place of business shall suffer or permit any litter or garbage to be
thereon, or swept therefrom upon any street, avenue, lane, or alley. Nor shall
any business owner suffer or permit any foul, unclean, nauseous, or offensive
liquid or substance to pass from any premises under the owner’s control
adjacent thereto, into, over, or upon any street, avenue, lane, or alley, or
open drain, gutter, or sewer, or over or upon any private grounds.
   (G)   Septic tanks. No person shall cause, permit, or maintain any abandoned
cesspool or septic tank without it being properly filled.
   (H)   Junk. No person, firm, or corporation of any kind shall permit the
accumulation of junk that includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following: waste material, trash, rubbish, refuse, or litter of any kind upon
any land or inside or under any building or structure which may provide
harborage or breeding places for mosquitoes, vermin, or rats. No person, firm,
or corporation of any kind shall permit on a property the accumulation of:
batteries; paper; lumber or salvaged wood; boxes or containers; bottles; cans;
discarded chemicals; bricks; stones; old or scrap copper, brass, iron, steel,
or other metals; old and/or inoperable appliances; tanks; barrels; cages;
clothing; pallets; wire/cable; dismantled, abandoned, or inoperable vehicles,
farm equipment, construction equipment, campers, recreation vehicles, boats, or
parts thereof; rope; rags; glass; rubber; construction debris; plumbing
fixtures; furniture; brush piles; cut down trees and branches; pulled stumps;
leaf piles not in a composting container; or other similar objects and
materials which may provide harborage or breeding places for mosquitoes,
vermin, or rats. Useful items such as firewood and building materials may be
stored in compliance with §
152.14, provided they are stored in a manner that will not create any danger or
threat to public health.
   (I)   Blight. No person, firm, or corporation of any kind shall maintain or
permit to be maintained any of these causes of blight or blighting factors upon
any property owned, leased, rented, or occupied by such person, firm, or
corporation:
      (1)   The building, structure, or parcel of land is in a condition which
poses a threat to the safety, health, morals, and general welfare of the
community;
      (2)   It is attracting illegal activity as documented by the Police
Department;
      (3)   It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Department;
      (4)   The existence of the following conditions: missing, damaged, or
boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls or roofs; parts of walls
that need repair; damaged or missing siding or gutters; a structurally faulty
foundation, porch, chimney, or other attached structure; a principal or
accessory buildings in need of repair, paint, or sealer; fencing in disrepair;
overgrown brush; grass or weeds in violation of §
152.14(D) listed above;
      (5)   Accumulation of junk as defined in this section;
      (6)   Sanitary matter, meaning liquid and solid waste intended to be
carried off in sewers or drains;
      (7)   A structure on the property that has been continuously vacant for
at least one year, has been condemned as unfit for human occupancy or use by
the Building Official in accordance with the State Building Code, but has
neither been demolished nor repaired by the owner as directed by the Building
Official;
      (8)   There is evidence of rat or rodent infestation or harborages caused
by conditions on the property;
      (9)   The property has an inadequate sewage, septic, plumbing, well, or
heating system;
      (10)   If the property is vacant, the owner has failed to take adequate
precautions to prevent the use of or access to the property by trespassers; or
      (11)   A potential attractive nuisance to children exists on the
property, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, basements,
excavations, or broken fences, refrigerators, and other appliances.
   (J)   Unlawful occupations or hobbies. No person shall exercise, carry on,
follow, or engage in or work at any business, hobby, trade, or calling or
occupation which shall be dangerous, hurtful, offensive, or unhealthy to the
neighborhood.
   (K)   Deposit of materials on city streets prohibited. No person shall
deposit or permit to be deposited on any public street in this city, leaves,
grass, sand, or similar materials, nor shall any person plow, shovel, or blow
or permit the plowing, shoveling, or blowing of snow onto a public street in
the city, excepting in those commercial districts where property owners have
prior permission to deposit snow from the public sidewalk onto a public street.
This provision shall not apply to any person who is in the process of
constructing or maintaining a yard or drive, provided that the materials are
immediately removed from the street. Upon notification of violation, the owner
has seven days in which to comply.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.17 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
   (A)   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
   (B)   Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner.
   (C)   Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premise shall
provide approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises
shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
   (D)   Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned, or stored on premises without first removing
the doors.
   (E)   Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
   (F)   Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of
the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit;
or an approved leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container.
   (G)   Garbage containers. The owner of every establishment which produces
garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-
proof containers for the storage of such materials until removed from the
premises for disposal. The owner of every one- and two-family dwelling units
shall comply with the city’s garbage and recycling program and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal of garbage. The owner of every
establishment with more than two dwelling units shall provide adequate
containers with close-fitting covers for the storage of garbage until removed
from the premises for disposal.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.18 EXTERMINATION.
   (A)   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-
infestation.
   (B)   Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
   (C)   Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-
tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the
premises.
   (D)   Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house, or a nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas
of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of
an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant
shall be responsible for extermination.
   (E)   Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.
   (F)   Exception. Where the infestations are caused by defects in the
structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.19 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Notice to person responsible. Whenever the Code Official determines
that there has been a violation of this chapter or has grounds to believe that
a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed below
to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this chapter.
Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with division (B) below.
   (B)   Form. Such notice prescribed in division (A) above shall be in
accordance with all of the following:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
      (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued;
      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (5)   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal; and
      (6)   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
§
152.99.
   (C)   Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified or first-class addressed to the last known
address;
      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure affected by such notice; and
      (4)   Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set
forth in §
152.99.
   (D)   Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a
notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or
otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee, or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to the Code Official a signed and
notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and
fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections
or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.20 MEANS OF APPEAL.
   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice
or order issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal pursuant to
§§
10.025 to
10.033,
10.045 to
10.046, and
10.060 to
10.063, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within ten days
after the day the decision, notice, or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or applied,
the provisions of this chapter do not fully apply, or the requirements of this
chapter are adequately satisfied by other means.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 152.21 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Declaration of policy. The City Council has determined that the
health, safety, good order, general welfare, and convenience of the public are
threatened by certain public nuisances on property within the city limits. It
is declared to be the intention of the Council to abate these nuisances, and
this section is enacted for that purpose.
   (B)   Application. This section shall apply to the abatement of all public
nuisances, junk, and blight as defined anywhere within this chapter, unless
another procedure is specifically provided.
   (C)   Periodic inspection and investigation. The Code Official, Building
Official, Police Department personnel, or any other duly authorized
representative with all due just cause, shall cause to be inspected all public
and private places in the city within plain view which might contain a public
nuisance as defined in this chapter as often as practicable to determine
whether any such conditions exist. The Code Official, Building Official, Police
Department personnel, or any duly authorized representative shall also
investigate all reports of public nuisances located within the city.
   (D)   Abatement of nuisances. Upon a determination by the Code Official,
Building Official, Police Department personnel, or any authorized
representative that a public nuisance exists within plain view on any public or
private property in the city, the Code Official, Building Official, Police
Department personnel, or any authorized representative shall order the public
nuisance to be abated in a manner consistent with city code.
   (E)   Procedure for removal of public nuisances.
      (1)   Whenever the Code Official, Building Official, Police Department
personnel, or any authorized representative finds with reasonable certainty
that a public nuisance as identified by this chapter exists within plain view
on any public or private property in the city, the duly authorized official
shall notify the affected property owner by posting notice in a conspicuous
location on the property, or by first-class mail addressed to the last known
address that the public nuisance must be abated within a reasonable period of
time, not more than 14 days from the date of service of the notice. Service by
first-class mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing. The order shall state
with specificity the nature of the violations and the requirements for
compliance. The order shall also state that the property owner may appeal the
order, within ten days of the date of the order, and request a hearing pursuant
to §§
10.025 to
10.033,
10.045 to
10.046, and
10.060 to
10.063. The order shall also state that failure to abate the public nuisance or
request a hearing within the applicable time periods will result in summary
abatement procedures, and that the cost of abatement will be assessed against
the subject property. Upon expiration of the time required by the notice, the
Code Official, Building Official, Police Department personnel, or any
authorized representative may abate the nuisance unless a request for a hearing
has been timely filed.
      (2)   Any property owner who feels aggrieved by an order of the Code
Official, Building Official, Police Department personnel, or any authorized
representative issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal the order pursuant to
§§
10.025 to
10.033,
10.045 to
10.046, and
10.060 to
10.063.
      (3)   The Code Official, Building Official, Police Department personnel,
or any authorized representative shall keep a record of the costs of abatements
done under this section and shall report periodically to the City Clerk-
Treasurer or other appropriate officer all work done for which assessments are
to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land, lots, or
parcels involved and the amount assessable to each.
      (4)   On or before October 1 of each year, the Finance Officer shall list
the total unpaid charges for each abatement made under this chapter against
each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable. The City Council
may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property
involved as a special assessment under other pertinent statutes, for
certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with current taxes. Such assessment shall be payable in no more than ten equal
annual installments, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 7-13-2015) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 153: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Statutory authorization
   
153.002   Purpose
   
153.003   Application
   
153.004   Incorporation of maps by reference
   
153.005   Conflict with prior agreements
   
153.006   Disclaimer of liability
   
153.007   Definitions
   
153.008   Annexation
Administration
   
153.020   Duties
   
153.021   Permit application requirements
   
153.022   Variances
   
153.023   Conditional uses
   
153.024   Nonconformities
Establishment of Floodplain Districts
   
153.035   Districts
   
153.036   Application
Requirements for All Floodplain Districts
   
153.050   Permit required
   
153.051   Building sites
   
153.052   Flood capacity
   
153.053   Dangerous materials
   
153.054   Critical facilities prohibited
Floodway District (FW)
   
153.065   Permitted uses
   
153.066   Standards for floodway permitted uses
   
153.067   Conditional uses
   
153.068   Standards for floodway conditional uses
Flood Fringe District (FF)
   
153.080   Permitted uses
   
153.081   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses
   
153.082   Conditional uses
   
153.083   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses
General Floodplain District (GF)
   
153.095   Permitted uses
   
153.096   Procedures for determining floodway and flood fringe boundaries and
regional flood elevations
Subdivisions, Utilities, and Manufactured Homes
   
153.110   Subdivision standards
   
153.111   Public utilities
   
153.112   Public transportation facilities
   
153.113   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems
   
153.114   Manufactured homes
   
153.115   Recreational vehicles
Amendments
   
153.130   Floodplain designation; restrictions on removal
   
153.131   Amendments require DNR approval
   
153.132   Map revisions require ordinance amendments
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in M.S. Ch. 103F and Ch. 462, as it may be
amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local government
units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the
City Council does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the
city. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which may
result in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose of
this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
minimizing these losses and disruptions.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program, codified as 44 C.F.R. Parts 59 to 78, as
amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (C)   This chapter is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics
and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and
storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect
aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide
aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.003 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter applies to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city
within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Floodplain
Districts. The boundaries of the zoning districts are determined by scaling
distances on the flood insurance rate map, or as modified in accordance with
division (C) below.
   (B)   The Floodway, Flood Fringe, and General Floodplain Districts are
overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The
standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other
requirements in this chapter, in case of a conflict, the more restrictive
standards will apply.
   (C)   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on
the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions, the flood elevations
shall be the governing factor in locating the regulatory floodplain limits.
   (D)   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commission
and to submit technical evidence.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.004 INCORPORATION OF MAPS BY REFERENCE.
   The following maps, together with all attached material, are hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of the official zoning map and this
chapter. The material includes the Flood Insurance Study for Crow Wing County,
Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas, dated August 15, 2017 and the flood
insurance rate map panels enumerated below, dated August 15, 2017, all prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file in the
City Clerk-Treasurer’s office: 27035C0338C, 27035C0451C, 27035C0339C,
27035C0452C, 27035C0350C, and 27035C0456C.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.005 CONFLICT WITH PRIOR AGREEMENTS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or other private agreements. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter prevail.
All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.006 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain Districts or
land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or its
officers or employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.007 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the “regional flood”. The term BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION is used in the flood insurance survey.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes, and upon a finding that:
      (1)   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist; and
      (2)   The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use
plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   CRITICAL FACILITIES. Facilities necessary to a community’s public health and
safety, those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic, or water-reactive
materials, and those that house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to
avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES include
hospitals, correctional facilities, schools, day care facilities, nursing
homes, fire and police stations, wastewater treatment facilities, public
electric utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities, and waste handling
and storage facilities.
   DEVELOPMENT . Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FARM FENCE. A fence as defined by M.S. § 344.02, Subd. 1(a)-(d), as it may
be amended from time to time. An open type fence of posts and wire is not
considered to be a structure under this chapter. FENCES that have the potential
to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls, are
regulated as structures under this chapter.
   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the special flood hazard area (1% annual chance
flood) located outside of the floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the
term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the flood insurance study for the county.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. An official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available
digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM).
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake, or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term “recreational vehicle”.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures, including additions and improvements, and
placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this chapter.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOODPLAIN. Lands inundated by the “regional flood” (see
definition).
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a REACH.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is synonymous with the
term TRAVEL TRAILER/TRAVEL VEHICLE.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 1% chance
or 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term
“base flood” used in a flood insurance study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE). An elevation not less than one
foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A term used for flood insurance purposes
synonymous with ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
actual START of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement that occurred before the permit’s expiration
date. The actual START is either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in §
153.115(C) and other similar items.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”. For the purpose of this chapter, HISTORIC STRUCTURE is as
defined in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.008 ANNEXATION.
   The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference into §
153.004 may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate
boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this chapter. If any of these
floodplain land areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of
this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands will be subject to the
provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of annexation.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.020 DUTIES.
   A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the city must
administer and enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.021 PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for permit. Permit applications must be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The permit
application must include the following as applicable:
      (1)   A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions, existing or proposed
buildings, structures, and significant natural features having an influence on
the permit;
      (2)   Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the stream
channel;
      (3)   Copies of any required municipal, county, state, or federal permits
or approvals; and
      (4)   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator as
necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
   (B)   Certification. The applicant is required to submit certification by a
registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Floodproofing measures must be
certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
Accessory structures designed in accordance with §
153.081(B) are exempt from certification, provided sufficient documentation is
provided.
   (C)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or nonconforming
use. No building, land, or structure may be occupied or used in any manner
until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning Administrator must
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
floodplain. The Zoning Administrator must also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures and alterations or additions to structures are
floodproofed.
   (E)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. Before authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must
notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work
in public waters pursuant to M.S. § 103G.245, as it may be amended from time to
time, this will suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must
also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
   (F)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease base
flood elevations. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by
submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.022 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variance applications. An application for a variance to the provisions
of this chapter will be processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable
state statutes and §
154.011.
   (B)   Adherence to state floodplain management standards. A variance must
not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of
flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
   (C)   Additional variance criteria. The following additional variance
criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied.
      (1)   Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances may only be issued by a community upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (D)   Flood insurance notice. The Zoning Administrator must notify the
applicant for a variance that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the base or regional flood level increases
risks to life and property. Such notification must be maintained with a record
of all variance actions.
   (E)   General considerations. The community may consider the following
factors in granting variances and imposing conditions on variances and
conditional uses in floodplains:
      (1)   The potential danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and the
ability of these systems to minimize the potential for disease, contamination,
and unsanitary conditions;
      (4)   The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (5)   The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed use
to the community;
      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
      (7)   The availability of viable alternative locations for the proposed
use that are not subject to flooding;
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive land use
plan and floodplain management program for the area;
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles; and
      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
   (F)   Submittal of hearing notices to the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed
variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days’
notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail
to the respective DNR area hydrologist
   (G)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action.
The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR
area hydrologist.
   (H)   Record-keeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must report
such variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of the
National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.023 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Administrative review. An application for a conditional use permit
under the provisions of this chapter will be processed and reviewed in
accordance with §
154.009.
   (B)   Factors used in decision-making. In passing upon conditional use
applications, the Planning Commission must consider all relevant factors
specified in other sections of this chapter, and those factors identified in §
153.022(E).
   (C)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. The Planning
Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use
permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
      (2)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation;
      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions;
      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures; and
      (5)   Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code
and this chapter. The applicant must submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures
are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area.
   (D)   Submittal of hearing notices to the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed
conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten
days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S.
Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
   (E)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such
action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the
respective DNR area hydrologist.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.024 NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   A use, structure, or occupancy of land which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions. Historic structures, as defined in §
153.007, are subject to the provisions of divisions (B) to (G) below.
   (B)   A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded,
changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood damage
potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as provided in
division (C) below. Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures, or
occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited.
   (C)   Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage potential
must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance
with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP-
1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the State Building
Code, except as further restricted in division (E) below.
   (D)   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure, is
discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the premises must
conform to this chapter.
   (E)   If any structure experiences a substantial improvement, as defined in
§
153.007, then the entire structure must meet the standards of §§
153.065 to
153.068 or §§
153.080 to
153.083 for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. If the current proposal,
including maintenance and repair during the previous 365 days, plus the costs
of any previous alterations and additions since the first flood insurance rate
map exceeds 50% of the market value of any nonconforming structure, the entire
structure must meet the standards of §§
153.065 to
153.068 or §§
153.080 to
153.083.
   (F)   If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in this
chapter, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new
structures in §§
153.065 to
153.068 or §§
153.080 to
153.083 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
   (G)   If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive loss,
as defined in §
153.007, it must not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
§ 153.035 DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Floodway District. The Floodway District includes all lakes, wetlands,
and other basins within Zone A and AE as shown on the flood insurance rate map
adopted in §
153.004, and are located at or below the ordinary high water level as defined
in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Flood Fringe District. The Floodway District includes all lakes,
wetlands, and other basins within Zone A and AE as shown on the flood insurance
rate map adopted in §
153.004, and are located below the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood elevation
but above the ordinary high water level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd.
14, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District includes
those riverine areas within Zone A as shown on the flood insurance rate map
adopted in §
153.004.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.036 APPLICATION.
   Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are not delineated
within riverine areas on the floodplain maps are considered to fall within the
General Floodplain District. Within the General Floodplain District, the
Floodway District standards in §§
153.065 to
153.068 apply unless the floodway boundary is determined, according to the
process outlined in §
153.096.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
§ 153.050 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator to verify a
development meets the standards outlined in this chapter prior to conducting
the following activities:
   (A)   The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or alteration of
any building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal maintenance and repair also
requires a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction with other planned
work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in §
153.007;
   (B)   The use or change of use of a building, structure, or land;
   (C)   The construction of a dam, on-site septic system, or fence, although a
permit is not required for a farm fence as defined in §
153.007;
   (D)   The change or extension of a nonconforming use;
   (E)   The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire,
tornado, or any other source;
   (F)   The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of
materials or equipment within the floodplain;
   (G)   Relocation or alteration of a watercourse, including new or
replacement culverts and bridges, unless a public waters work permit has been
applied for; or
   (H)   Any other type of development as defined in §
153.007.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.051 BUILDING SITES.
   If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction
and substantial improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes,
must be:
   (A)   Designed, or modified, and adequately anchored to prevent floatation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
   (B)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage;
   (C)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and
   (D)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.052 FLOOD CAPACITY.
   In no cases shall floodplain development adversely affect the efficiency or
unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries to
the main stream, drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.053 DANGEROUS MATERIALS.
   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life
is prohibited.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.054 CRITICAL FACILITIES PROHIBITED.
   Critical facilities, as defined in §
153.007, are prohibited in all Floodplain Districts.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
§ 153.065 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses, subject to the standards set forth in §
153.066, are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning
district or any applicable overlay district:
   (A)   General farming, pasture, grazing, farm fences, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting;
   (B)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport
landing strips;
   (C)   Open space uses, including, but not limited to private and public golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game
farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing areas, and
single or multiple purpose recreational trails;
   (D)   Residential yards, lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas; and
   (E)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and
pipelines, provided that the Department of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist
is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.066 STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAY PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   The use must have a low flood damage potential.
   (B)   The use must not obstruct flood flows or cause any increase in flood
elevations and must not involve structures, obstructions, or storage of
materials or equipment.
   (C)   Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public must
be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth
(in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a
product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.067 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses following the
standards and procedures set forth in §
153.023 and further subject to the standards set forth in §
153.068, if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any
applicable overlay district:
   (A)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in §
153.065(A) to (C) and the uses listed in divisions (B) and (C) below;
   (B)   Extraction, fill, and storage of soil, sand, gravel, and other
materials;
   (C)   Marinas, boat rentals, permanent docks, piers, wharves, and water
control structures;
   (D)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials;
   (E)   Construction offenses that obstruct flood flows. Farm fences, as
defined in §
153.007, are permitted uses;
   (F)   Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting the exception standards in
§
153.115(C); and
   (G)   Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a frequency
flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency flood event.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.068 STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAY CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   All uses. A conditional use must not cause any increase in the
regional flood elevations or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or
reaches affected.
   (B)   Fill; storage of materials and equipment.
      (1)   Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or stored
in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching,
riprap, or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel operations and
similar uses must be covered by a long-term site development plan.
      (2)   Temporary placement of fill, other materials, or equipment which
would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% chance or regional flood may
only be allowed if the city has approved a plan that assures removal of the
materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.
   (C)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as identified in §
153.067(A), may be permitted, provided that:
      (1)   Structures are not intended for human habitation;
      (2)   Structures will have a low flood damage potential;
      (3)   Structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a minimal
obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
      (4)   Service utilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, within
these structures must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly floodproofed;
      (5)   Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classifications
in the State Building Code. All floodproofed structures must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement and designed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
      (6)   As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally/wet
floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classifications in the State
Building Code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria:
         (a)   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure, with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
         (b)   There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure
and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door
prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
   (D)   Change to waterways. Structural works for flood control that will
change the course, current, or cross section of protected wetlands or public
waters are subject to the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (E)   Increased risk of flood. A levee, dike, or floodwall constructed in
the floodway must not cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The
technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides
of a stream.
   (F)   Hydraulic capacity. Floodway developments must not adversely affect
the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
§ 153.080 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures allowed in the
underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in §
153.081. If no pre-existing, underlying zoning districts exist, then any
residential or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land is a
permitted use, provided it does not constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.081 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD FRINGE PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures must be no
lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside
limits of the structure.
   (B)   As an alternative to the fill requirements of division (A) above,
structures accessory to the uses identified in §
153.080 may be permitted to be internally/wet floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-
4 floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code, provided that:
      (1)   The accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not
exceed 576 square feet in size, and is only used for parking and storage;
      (2)   All portions of floodproofed accessory structures below the
regulatory flood protection elevation must be:
         (a)   Adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement and designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
         (b)   Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         (c)   Must have all service utilities be watertight or elevated to
above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (3)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria:
         (a)   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure, with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
         (b)   There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure
and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door
prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
      (4)   The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel
must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically intended to
elevate a structure in accordance with division (A) above, or if allowed as a
conditional use under §
153.082;
      (5)   The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on fill
to the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (6)   All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or
watertight to prevent infiltration of flood waters;
      (7)   All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method;
      (8)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above
an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation, or must have a flood warning/emergency evacuation plan acceptable to
the city;
      (9)   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may
be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.
However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must be
designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet)
multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four
upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood; and
      (10)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the
standards of §§
153.114 and
153.115.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.082 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses and activities may be allowed as conditional uses, if
allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) or any applicable overlay
district, following the procedures in §
153.023:
   (A)   Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation; and
   (B)   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill when
the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with §
153.081(A).
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.083 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD FRINGE CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   The standards listed in §§
153.081(B)(5) to (B)(10) apply to all conditional uses.
   (B)   Residential basements, as defined by §
153.007, are not allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (C)   All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements, to be
placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be structurally dry
floodproofed, meeting the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classification in the
State Building Code, which requires making the structure watertight with the
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy.
   (D)   The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar
material on a parcel, other than for the purpose of elevating a structure to
the regulatory flood protection elevation, must comply with an approved
erosion/sedimentation control plan.
      (1)   The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the
fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional (1% chance) flood
event.
      (2)   The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the city.
      (3)   The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the
material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
   (E)   Storage of materials and equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation must comply with an approved emergency plan providing for
removal of such materials within the time available after a flood warning.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GF)
§ 153.095 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   The uses listed in §
153.065 are permitted uses.
   (B)   All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation
criteria specified in §
153.096 below. Sections
153.065 to
153.068 applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Floodway
District. Sections
153.080 to
153.083 applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Flood Fringe
District.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.096 PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINING FLOODWAY AND FLOOD FRINGE BOUNDARIES AND
REGIONAL FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within
the General Floodplain District, the Zoning Administrator must obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any regional flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state, or other source.
   (B)   If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily
available, or the application involves a project exceeding the lesser of five
acres or 50 lots, the applicant must furnish additional information, as needed,
to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed
use would fall within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District. Information must
be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards
and the standards in division (C) below.
   (C)   The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include the
following components, as applicable:
      (1)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (1% chance) flood;
      (2)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas; and
      (3)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage
increase than one-half foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both
sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway
boundaries.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information and
assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood
Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of
previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning Administrator may seek technical
assistance from a designated engineer or other expert person or agency,
including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on this assessment, the
Zoning Administrator may approve or deny the application.
   (E)   Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been
determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of §§
153.065 to
153.068 and §§
153.080 to
153.083.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
SUBDIVISIONS, UTILITIES, AND MANUFACTURED HOMES
§ 153.110 SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.
   (A)   No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for reasons of flooding
or inadequate drainage, water supply, or sewage treatment facilities.
Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are
considered subdivisions under this chapter.
   (B)   All lots within the Floodplain Districts must be able to contain a
building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
   (C)   All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and to
the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan for the safe
evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional (1% chance) flood has
been approved by the city. The plan must be prepared by a registered engineer
or other qualified individual, and must demonstrate that adequate time and
personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.
   (D)   For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required
elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
   (E)   In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the
information required in §
153.096 to determine the regional flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries, and the regulatory flood protection elevation for
the subdivision site.
   (F)   Subdivision proposals must be reviewed to assure that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage within the flood- prone area;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.111 PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   All public utilities and facilities, such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems, to be located in the floodplain must be floodproofed in
accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.112 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES.
   Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain must
comply with §§
153.050 to
153.054 and §§
153.065 to
153.068. These transportation facilities must be elevated to the regulatory
flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities
are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads
or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or
safety.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.113 ON-SITE WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.
   Where public utilities are not provided:
   (A)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are subject to the provisions
in Minn. Rules Part 4725.4350, as amended; and
   (B)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the
provisions in Minn. Rules Part 7080.2270, as amended.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.114 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks are prohibited in any Floodplain District. For existing manufactured home
parks or lots of record, the following requirements apply.
   (A)   Placement or replacement of manufactured home units is prohibited in
the Floodway District.
   (B)   Placement or replacement of manufactured home units in the Flood
Fringe District is subject to the requirements of §§
153.080 and
153.083 and the following standards.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in
compliance with §§
153.065 to
153.068 and must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system that resists flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (2)   New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home
parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in §
153.110(C).
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.115 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and expansions to
existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are prohibited in any
Floodplain District. Placement of recreational vehicles in existing
recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds in the floodplain must meet the
requirements below.
   (B)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this chapter
if they are placed in any of the following areas and meet the criteria listed
in division (C) below:
      (1)   Individual lots or parcels of record;
      (2)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds; or
      (3)   Existing condominium-type associations.
   (C)   Criteria for exempt recreational vehicles:
      (1)   The vehicle must have a current license required for highway use;
      (2)   The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks;
      (3)   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the
vehicle; and
      (4)   Accessory structures may be permitted in the Flood Fringe District,
provided that they constitute a minimal investment, do not hinder the removal
of the vehicle should flooding occur, and meet the standards outlined in §§
153.051 and
153.081(B).
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
AMENDMENTS
§ 153.130 FLOODPLAIN DESIGNATION; RESTRICTIONS ON REMOVAL.
   The floodplain designation on the official zoning map must not be removed
from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error
or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory
flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain.
Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) if the Commissioner determines that,
through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.131 AMENDMENTS REQUIRE DNR APPROVAL.
   All amendments to this chapter must be submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) prior to adoption.
The Commissioner must approve the amendment prior to community approval.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.132 MAP REVISIONS REQUIRE ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.
   The Floodplain District regulations must be amended to incorporate any
revisions by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps
adopted in §
153.004.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-24-2017)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Purpose
   
154.002   Jurisdiction
   
154.003   Application and interpretation
   
154.004   Rules
   
154.005   Definitions
   
154.006   Application time frames
   
154.007   Zoning Administrator
   
154.008   Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment
   
154.009   Conditional use permits
   
154.010   Amendments; rezoning
   
154.011   Variance; appeals
   
154.012   Environmental documents
   
154.013   Building permits; certificate of occupancy
   
154.014   Enforcement; violations
   
154.015   Hardship assessment deferrals
   
154.016   Interim use permits
Districts
   
154.030   Establishment of districts
   
154.031   Zoning district application
   
154.032   Zoning district boundaries
   
154.033   Uses not provided for within zoning districts
   
154.034   Lot standards chart
   
154.035   Land use categories chart
   
154.036   Accessory storage containers
Residential Zoning Districts
   
154.050   R-1 Single- and Two-Family Residential District
   
154.051   R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District
   
154.052   R-3 Manufactured Home Residential District
   
154.053   Special residential provisions
   
154.054   Where prohibited
Commercial/Industrial and Other Zoning Districts
   
154.065   B-1 Central Business District
   
154.066   B-2 Highway Commercial District
   
154.067   I Industrial District
   
154.068   P Public and Parks District
   
154.069   Special Commercial/Industrial provisions
   
154.070   R Recreational District
Shoreland and Floodplain Overlay District
   
154.085   Intent
   
154.086   Shoreland management classification
   
154.087   Shoreland Overlay District
   
154.088   Shoreland alterations
   
154.089   Floodplain provisions
Mineral Extractions
   
154.100   Intent
   
154.101   Mineral extraction permit
   
154.102   Standards
   
154.103   Fees and bond
Planned Unit Developments
   
154.115   Intent
   
154.116   Procedures and requirements for establishment of a planned unit
development
   
154.117   Property control
   
154.118   General development provisions
   
154.119   Review and evaluation
Bed and Breakfast Developments
   
154.130   Intent
   
154.131   Performance standards
   
154.132   Review process
Home Occupations
   
154.145   Intent
   
154.146   Performance standards
Parking and Loading Requirements
   
154.160   Intent
   
154.161   General requirements
   
154.162   Parking space requirements
   
154.163   Minimum standards
   
154.164   Loading requirements
   
154.165   Residential Districts
   
154.166   Garages
   
154.167   Limitation of door extensions
   
154.168   Business and Manufacturing Districts
Fencing, Screening, Landscaping, and Storage
   
154.180   General regulations
Unplatted Property
   
154.195   Property regulated
Dwelling Unit Restrictions
   
154.210   Specified
Performance Standards
   
154.225   Sewer facilities
   
154.226   Lighting
   
154.227   Smoke
   
154.228   Dust and other particulate matter
   
154.229   Odors
   
154.230   Noise
Height and Yard Exceptions
   
154.245   General provisions
Nonshoreland Grading and Excavation
   
154.260   Regulations
Signs
   
154.275   Intent
   
154.276   Prohibited signs
   
154.277   District provisions
   
154.278   On-site general provisions
   
154.279   Size/dimension standards
   
154.280   Number of signs
   
154.281   Nonconforming signs
   
154.282   Political signs
   
154.283   Window signs
   
154.284   Off-premises signs
Nonconforming Uses
   
154.295   Nonconforming uses and structures
   
154.296   Nonconforming lots
Manufactured Homes Land Use Classifications and Definitions
   
154.315   Purpose
   
154.316   Special land use provisions
   
154.317   Authorized placement
   
154.318   Building width
   
154.319   Placement in residential zones
Mobile Homes
   
154.330   In general
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority conferred by the state in M.S. § 462.357, as
it may be amended from time to time, and for the purpose of:
      (1)   Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the incorporated area of the city;
      (2)   Protecting and conserving the character, social, and economic
stability of residential, commercial, industrial, natural resources, and other
uses within the city;
      (3)   Securing the most appropriate use of land;
      (4)   Preventing the overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population;
      (5)   Providing adequate light, air, and reasonable access;
      (6)   Facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation,
water supply, and sewage disposal;
      (7)   Planning for location of schools, recreation facilities, and other
public requirements; and
      (8)   Ensuring adequate public participation in land use decisions made
by the city.
   (B)   This chapter, the purpose of which is to set minimum and maximum
standards for the height and size of buildings, the size of yards and other
open spaces, the density of population, the location and use of buildings and
land for trade, commerce, industry, residence, natural resources, and other
purposes; create districts for such purposes and establish boundaries of such
districts; provide for changes in regulations, restrictions, and boundaries of
such districts; define certain terms used; provide for enforcement and
administration; and impose penalties for the violation of this chapter, is
enacted.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.002 JURISDICTION.
   The jurisdiction of this chapter shall apply to all of the area within the
corporate limits of the city. This chapter shall also apply to the
unincorporated area within two miles of its limits, provided that the governing
bodies or body of any unincorporated area adjacent to the city has not adopted
ordinances for the zoning of land uses. Should any adjoining governing body
have zoning ordinances, this chapter shall only apply after a joint resolution
has been adopted by the city and the affected governing body which confers the
zoning authority to the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.02)
§ 154.003 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their application and interpretation, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are
either more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any law,
ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
shall prevail.
   (C)   No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
altered without first obtaining a building permit, and no structure or land
shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Except as provided in this chapter no building, structure, or premises
shall be used or occupied and no building permit shall be granted that does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.03)
§ 154.004 RULES.
   For purposes of this chapter, words used in the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural the singular; the present tense includes the past and
future tenses and the future the present; the word “shall” is mandatory, the
word “may” is permissive; all measured distances shall be to the nearest
integral foot; whenever a word or term defined in this chapter appears in the
text of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such
definition.
(Prior Code, § 13.04)
§ 154.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business,
lessor, owner, activity, use, or product available on the premises where the
sign is displayed for a continuous period of six months.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or structure on the same lot or
part of the main building, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory
use. Attached garages shall not constitute ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   ACCESSORY STORAGE CONTAINER. A container not exceeding 160 square feet
placed outdoors and used for the storage of goods, materials or merchandise
that are used in connection with a lawful principal or accessory use of the
lot. ACCESSORY STORAGE CONTAINER includes but is not limited to containers such
as roll-off storage containers, slide-off storage containers, portable moving
and storage containers but not including dumpsters. ACCESSORY STORAGE CONTAINER
does not include a garage, barn, or storage shed accessory to a dwelling,
provided the structure is not of a type of designed, equipped, or customarily
used for over-the-road transport of goods, materials, or merchandise.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to,
and auxiliary to the principal permitted use of the premises.
   AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, horticultural, viticulture, animal and poultry
husbandry, as well as any necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or
storing the products, provided that such uses shall be secondary to that of
normal agricultural activities; shall include the homestead and accessory
buildings; and shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to
swine or other animals.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any place where six or more animals over six months of age
are boarded, bred, and/or offered for sale.
   AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Any freestanding sign identifying the name of a
neighborhood, a residential subdivision, a multiple-residential complex, a
shopping center or areas, an industrial area, an office complex, or any
combinations involving three or more principal buildings.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, framework, and
painting.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Minor repair, incidental body and fender work,
painting and upholstering service, replacement of parts, and engine service to
passenger vehicles and trucks not exceeding three-quarter-ton capacity.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD or JUNKYARD. A place maintained for keeping,
storing, or piling in commercial quantities, whether temporarily, irregularly,
or continually, buying or selling at retail or wholesale any old, used, or
secondhand material of any kind, including used motor vehicles, machinery, and/
or their parts. This shall include the exterior storage of any unlicensed motor
vehicles or their remains for the purpose of dismantling, sale of parts, sale
as scrap, storage, or abandonment. This shall not prohibit the keeping of one
unlicensed motor vehicle within a garage or other structure in a Residential
District.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a floor of a building which is wholly or partially,
up to 50%, underground or below grade.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. A dwelling other than a resort or hotel where nightly
accommodations, including food services, are provided for compensation,
containing up to six separate rental rooms.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or bed and breakfast where,
for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals and lodging
are provided to three or more persons, not of the principal family, pursuant to
previous arrangements and not to anyone who may apply, but not including a
building providing these services for more than ten persons.
   BOATHOUSE. A structure used solely for the storage of boats or boating
equipment.
   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT. A businesses that provide body art procedures such
as tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, and piercing.
   BREWERY. A place that manufactures, processes, and warehouses malt liquor
for wholesale distribution in off-sale packages to retail liquor establishments
and may retail malt liquor product for on-site consumption in a taproom or for
off-site consumption as growlers. A brewer may not have an ownership interest
in a BREWERY licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, Subd. 6(d), as it may be amended
from time to time.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The part of the lot remaining after required yards and
setback areas have been provided.
   BUILDING. Any fabric or edifice designed to stand more or less permanently.
A structure erected by humans composed of stone, wood, brick, metal, or other
property substance, and enclosing a space within its walls usually, but not
necessarily, covered by a roof.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average ground
level adjoining the building to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat
roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between
eaves and ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building or structure in which the main or principal
use of the lot is situated.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The minimum horizontal distance from the street
right-of-way to any building.
   BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business
or to a commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon
the premises where such a sign is located.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION.  A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis plants
within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to mature
plant. Harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label immature
plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis businesses,
transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the same
premises, and perform other actions approved by the office.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURER.  A business licensed to conduct the activities to
turn raw, dried cannabis and cannabis parts into other types of cannabis
products, including but not limited to edibles, topicals, vaporizers, etc.
   CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESS.  A licensed person or entity that purchases or
otherwise obtains usable cannabis from cannabis cultivators, processors, or
manufacturers, and sells these from a retail store, but excludes the sale of
cannabis for exclusively medical purposes or medical marihuana enactments and
regulations and lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
   CANNABIS WHOLESALE.  The operation to purchase from a business growing or
manufacturing cannabis or cannabis products and sell to a cannabis business
engaged in retail.
   CLEAR-CUTTING. The removal of an entire stand of trees.
   CLINIC. A public or proprietary institution providing diagnostic,
therapeutic, or preventive treatment of ambulatory patients by a group of
doctors acting in concert and in the same building for these purposes.
   COMMERCIAL-LINKED HOUSING.  A residential dwelling use that is secondary and
accessory to a principal commercial use on the same parcel. Such residential
units are permitted only when located above the ground floor, behind the
primary commercial frontage, or in a manner ensuring that the commercial
character and function of the site remain predominant.
   COMMISSIONER. The State Commissioner of Natural Resources.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use which, because of unique characteristics, cannot be
classified as a permitted use in any particular district. After due
consideration, in each case, of the impact of such use upon neighboring land
and of the public desirability for the particular use at the particular
location, a CONDITIONAL USE permit may be granted.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A sign placed at a construction site identifying the
project or the name of the project, engineer, contractor, developer, financier,
or other involved parties.
   DAY CARE CENTER, LICENSED. A dwelling or other structure where, under the
license of the state or the county, children are cared for during the day.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. On-site signs, not exceeding three square feet in area,
per side, intended to facilitate the movement of pedestrians and vehicles
within the site on which such signs are located.
   DISTRICT ZONING. Any section of the incorporated area of the city within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations
apply under the provisions of this chapter.
   DRAINING. The removal of surface water or ground water from land.
   DREDGING. To enlarge or clean out a water body, watercourse, or wetland.
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment which accommodates the patron’s
automobile from which the occupants may receive a service or in which products
purchased from the establishment may be consumed.
   DWELLING. A building or portion designed exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings, but
not including hotels, motels, boarding houses, and garage space.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building used or intended to be used as a
dwelling by three or more families, where each dwelling unit is divided by a
partition wall extending the full height of the building. Each unit is capable
of individual use and maintenance without trespassing upon adjoining
properties.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling occupied by only one family, and so
designed and arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations and
sanitary facilities for one family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling so designed and arranged to provide cooking
and kitchen accommodations and sanitary facilities for occupancy by two
families, living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, UPPER LEVEL. A residential unit or units located on the second
floor or higher above a commercial use.
   EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for
a specified purpose, of any designated part of his or her property.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
encroachment lines so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. This is determined
by considering the effect of encroachment on the hydraulic efficiency of the
floodplain along both sides of a stream for a significant reach.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public utilities or municipal departments of commissions, of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, communication, steam or water transmissions, or
distribution systems, including poles, wire mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants, towers, and other connected similar equipment and accessories (but
not including buildings) reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions for
the public health, safety, or general welfare.
   FAMILY. Any number of persons living together in rooms comprising a single
housekeeping unit and related by blood, marriage, adoption, or any unrelated
person who resides there as though a member of the family, including domestic
employees. Any group of persons not so related but inhabiting a single house
shall be considered to constitute one FAMILY for each five persons, exclusive
of domestic employees, contained in each such group.
   FLOOD. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation
of the areas adjacent to the channel.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
   FLOODPLAIN. Those areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or may be
covered by the regional flood.
   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional
flood.
   FLOOR AREA, GROUND. The area within the exterior walls of the main building
or structure as measured from the outside walls at the ground level, not
including garages or enclosed or unenclosed porches and not including attached
utility or accessory rooms having three or more exterior sides.
   FOOD SERVICE. An accessory use to a bed and breakfast, whereby meals are
provided to registered guests only.
   FRONTAGE. The width of a lot or building site measured on the line
separating it from the public street right-of-way. The frontage of corner lots
shall be considered to be the shortest street line.
   GARAGE, COMMUNITY. Any space or structure or series of structures for the
storage of motor vehicles for the use of two or more occupants of property in
the vicinity and having no public shop or service.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of
not more than three automobiles, trucks, or buses, owned and used by the
occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A building or structure designed or used for the
retail sale or supply of fuels, lubricants, air, water, and other operating
commodities for motor vehicles, and including the customary space and
facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles, but
not including special facilities for the painting, major repair, or similar
servicing.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by
the city, county, state, or federal government for traffic direction or for
designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public
service, street, property, facility, or recreation trail.
   HISTORIC SITE. A structure or area of land or water of historic,
archaeological, paleontological, or architectural value which has been
designated as an historic site in the Federal Register of Historical Landmarks,
the state’s Historical Society, or by a local unit of government.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful occupation engaged in by the occupants of a
dwelling at or from the dwelling when carried on within the dwelling unit and
not in an accessory building.
   HOME OCCUPATION SIGN. A sign designating a home business operated from
residential property.
   HOSTEL. An overnight lodging facility for transient guests that provides
sleeping rooms and common areas for cooking.
   HOTEL. Any building or portion of a building occupied as a more or less
temporary abiding place of individuals and containing six or more guest rooms,
used, designated, or intended to be used, let, or hired out to be occupied, or
which are occupied by six or more individuals for compensation, whether the
compensation is paid directly or indirectly.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light
source.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. The horizontal area of buildings, patios, walks, roads,
driveways, accessory structures, and other surfaces generally impervious to the
penetration of storm water, including gravel drives and parking areas.
   INFORMATIONAL SIGN. An on-site sign not exceeding one square foot in area,
intended to provide information or instructions to pedestrians or automobiles
on the site that such sign is located.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as “no
parking”, “entrance”, “loading only”, “telephone”, and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the
zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered INCIDENTAL.
   INTERIM USE.  A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the
occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit
it.
   LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY. A facility, such as a nursing home, where medical
care is administered to residents for periods of time typically greater than
one month.
   LOT. A parcel, piece, or portion of land designated by metes and bounds,
registered land survey, auditor’s plat, as a lot within a recorded plat, or by
other means and separated from other parcels or portions by the description for
the purpose of sale, lease, or separation.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of two or more intersecting
streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street,
the interior angle of which is 135 degrees or less.
   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percentage of the lot occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory buildings or structures.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front line and the rear
lot line.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The portion or dimension of a lot abutting the sides of a
public street, measured along the street right-of-way line.
   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-
of-way.
   LOT OF RECORD. A platted lot or metes and bounds parcel which has been
recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior to June of 1998.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured
parallel to the front line of the lot and the building setback line.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING. A factory-built dwelling eight feet or more in width,
containing more than 320 square feet and designed intrinsically as a trailer
requiring only minor modifications prior to occupancy and/or not meeting the
requirements of the Uniform Building Code, but complying with the Manufactured
Home Building Code or Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development
standards.
   MEDICAL FACILITY. A structure where the primary use is providing short-term
medical care in either an out-patient or in-patient facility. A nursing home or
long-term care facility shall not be considered a MEDICAL FACILITY.
   MODULAR HOME. A non-mobile housing unit that is basically fabricated at a
central factory and transported to a building site where final installations
are made, permanently affixing the module to the site.
   MOTEL or MOTOR COURT. A business of attached, semi-detached, or detached
rental units with or without eating facilities for the overnight accommodation
of transient guests.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE. A building, structure, or use
which does not conform with the zoning district regulations in which it is
situated.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. An off-premises sign which advertises a product, service,
business, or event which is not available or does not take place on the same
premises as the sign, including billboards.
   OFF-STREET PARKING. A designated space or area of land with a gravel, paved,
or all-weather surface not within a public street or right-of-way and used for
the parking of vehicles.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. A mark delineating the highest water level which
has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape. The ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK is commonly that point where the
natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial.
   PARKING SPACE. An area, enclosed in the main building, in an accessory
building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, which has
adequate access to a public street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress
and egress of an automobile.
   PERMITTED USE. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district, provided it conforms with all requirements and performance standards,
if any, of such district.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, or other group acting as a unit. It also includes any executor,
administrator, trustee, receiver, or other representative appointed by law.
Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section prescribing a penalty or fine,
it shall include the partners or members of any corporation who are responsible
for the violation.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development characterized by a unified
site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel,
whether for sale, rent, or lease, and also usually involving clustering of
these units or sites to provide areas of common open space, density increases,
and a mix of structure types and land uses.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign advertising election issues or the
candidacy of a person running for office.
   PORTABLE/TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign that is not permanently fixed to a building,
other unmovable structure, or the ground.
   PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES. As used in connection with the granting of a
variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by an official control; the plight of the
landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the
landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute PRACTICAL
DIFFICULTIES.
   PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters of the state which serve a beneficial public
purpose, as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 15, as it may be amended from
time to time. However, no lake, pond, or flowage of less than ten acres in size
and no river or stream having a total drainage area less than two square miles
are regulated for the purposes of this chapter. A body of water created by a
private user where there was no previous shoreland for a designated private use
authorized by the Commissioner of Natural Resources shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter. The official determination of the size and physical
limits of drainage areas of rivers and streams shall be made by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources. The official size of lakes, ponds, or
flowages shall be the areas listed in the Division of Waters Bulletin 25, “An
Inventory of Minnesota Lakes”; or if lakes, ponds, or flowages are not listed,
official determination of size and physical limits shall be made by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources in cooperation with the city.
   REACH. Is a hydraulic engineering term used to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a REACH.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of
advertising to the public the sale or lease of the property.
   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. An individual piece or group of non-motorized
equipment, tools, or non-motorized vehicles customarily used for outdoor
activities. RECREATIONAL RENTAL EQUIPMENT shall include, but not be limited to,
the following type of non-motorized equipment: paddle boards, kayaks, canoes,
bicycles, fishing gear, and any other ancillary equipment associated with those
specific types of equipment.
   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT RENTAL BUSINESS. A business that rents for a fee,
outdoor recreational equipment for use on-premise and/or off-premise.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. A point not less than one foot above
the water surface profile associated with the regional flood plus any increases
in flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the
ELEVATION to which uses regulated by this chapter are required to be elevated
or floodproofed.
   RESORT. A commercial business with a central management to provide necessary
services and having dwelling units and/or campsites for rent or owned by time
interval and may provide related facilities such as restaurants, bars, golf
courses, or other recreational amenities. A RESORT shall be considered only
through a planned unit development process.
   RESTAURANT. A commercial business whose primary function is to provide meals
to the general public. A RESTAURANT shall not be restricted to providing meals
for registered guests of a bed and breakfast or resort.
   RIPARIAN LOT. Any lot which is bounded on one or more sides by public waters
frontage.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling occupied in any such manner that certain rooms
in excess of those used by members of the immediate family and occupied as a
home or family unit, are leased or rented to persons outside of the family,
without any attempt to provide cooking or kitchen accommodations, providing the
accommodations are not provided for more than ten persons.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a building and street or
lot line.
   SETBACK, WATERFRONT. The closest horizontal distance between the ordinary
high water mark and the foundation wall or edge of the structure, excluding up
to three feet of roof overhang, stoops not exceeding 32 square feet in area,
and steps from stoop to ground not exceeding four feet in overall width.
   SERVICE-BASED BUSINESS. A business that provides a skilled service in lieu
of a physical product. This type of business serves limited numbers of
customers at a time including but not limited to hair stylists/barbers, legal
offices, tax preparation, dog grooming, and the like.
   SHORELAND. The land located within 1,000 feet from the normal high water
mark of a lake, pond, or flowage or 300 feet from a river or stream, or the
landward extent of a floodplain designated by this chapter on such a river or
stream, whichever is greater. The practical limits of SHORELANDS may be less
than the statutory limits wherever the waters involved are bounded by natural
topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration, or device
which is fixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly, upon a
building or other outdoor surface or piece of land and which directs attention
to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or
business.
   SIGN AREA. The area within the single continuous line enclosing the extreme
limits of such sign. It does not include any structural or framing elements
lying outside the limits of such sign surface and not fronting an integral part
of the display. All sides of a sign that bear media elements shall be used in
computing total gross area. In computing the number and square footage of
signs, all signs other than directional, informational, window, political, and
government signs shall be included.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or the space between such floor and
the ceiling next above it.
   STRUCTURE. Anything which is built, constructed, or erected; an edifice or
building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
   TAPROOM. A room that is ancillary to the production of malt liquor at a
brewery where the public can purchase and/or consume only the malt liquor
produced on site. A TAPROOM may also sell malt liquor for off-sale consumption
in growler containers.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign which is not permanently installed, such as an
advertising display.
   TOURING BUSINESS. A business primarily engaged in providing tours off-
premise whereby the tour guide and tour patrons travel on non-motorized
recreational equipment or under their own power.
   TOWNHOUSE. Single-family attached units in structures housing three or more
dwelling units contiguous to each other, only by the share of one common wall
and each dwelling unit having separate and individual front and rear entrances.
   USE. The purpose for which land or buildings on the land are designed,
arranged, or intended to be occupied or used, or for which they are occupied or
maintained.
   “V” SIGN. A commercial sign consisting of two essentially equal faces,
positioned at an angle extending less than 90 degrees which are essentially
connected (maximum eight-foot separation at closest point).
   VACATION RENTALS (COMMERCIAL). The upper level of a building that is rented
out to transient guests and provides five or less sleeping rooms on a nightly
basis for a period not to exceed more than 30 consecutive days.
   VARIANCE. The waiving of specific literal provisions of this chapter in
instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of
circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration. VARIANCES
are to be granted only when it is demonstrated that a waiving of the provision
will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter. Furthermore,
hardship must be demonstrated on a noneconomic basis.
   WALL SIGN. A commercial sign painted on the outside of a building, or
attached to and erected parallel to the face of a building and supported
throughout its length by such building.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign painted, stenciled, or affixed on a window or door,
which is visible from a right-of-way.
   WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a wetland by and regulated
through the state’s Wetland Conservation Act, M.S. §§ 103F.612 et seq., as it
may be amended from time to time.
   YARD. An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest elevation to the sky. A YARD extends along a lot line at right angles to
such lot lines to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the
zoning district in which such lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of the lot between the side
lot lines and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of
the building.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of
the building and extending from the front yard of the lot to the rear yard.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person authorized by the City Council to
administer and enforce this chapter.
   ZONING DISTRICTS. The areas of the city designated for specific uses with
specific requirements for use or development.
   ZONING MAP. The map incorporated into this chapter as a part of this chapter
designating the zoning districts.
(Prior Code, § 13.05) (Ord. 2014-02, passed - -; Ord. 2016-02, passed - -; Ord.
2018-01, passed - -; Ord. 2018-02, passed - -; Ord. 2018-04, passed - -2018;
Ord. 2019-05, passed 10-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-27-2020; Ord. 2023-04,
passed 9-25-2023; Ord. 2024-04, passed - - ; Ord. 2025-01, passed 5-12-2025;
Ord. 2025-4, passed - - 2025)
§ 154.006 APPLICATION TIME FRAMES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any statute or law to the contrary, the city’s
Planning Commission and City Council shall, in the case of recommendations for
conditional use permits, zoning ordinance amendments, preliminary plats,
preliminary CIC plats, or any other action required by the Planning Commission
or City Council, approve or deny an application within 60 days of the receipt
of a completed application. For purposes of this section, a complete
application shall include all necessary documentation as required by ordinance,
a completed application form, and the payment of the appropriate fees.
   (B)   The time frame may be extended if:
      (1)   A state or federal law or court order requires a process to occur
prior to the city review of the application or if the federal or state law or
court order make it impossible to act within 60 days;
      (2)   The city provides written notice within 60 days to the applicant
that states the reasons for the extension and the anticipated length of the
extension, not to exceed an additional 60 days; or
      (3)   The applicant consents in writing to a longer period of time.
   (C)   Failure to act on the completed application within the prescribed time
frame shall constitute approval of the request.
   (D)   The applicant may grant an extension beyond the allowed time frame.
(Prior Code, § 13.06)
§ 154.007 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (B)   The duties of the Zoning Administrator include:
      (1)   To determine if applications are complete and comply with the terms
of this chapter;
      (2)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter including,
but not limited to, maps, amendments, zoning or use permits, conditional use
permits, variances, appeals and applications, certificate of compliance for on-
site sewage treatment systems, and a separate file for future conditions or
expirations of permits;
      (3)   Review, file, and forward applications for appeals, variances,
conditional/interim uses, and zoning amendments;
      (4)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter by reviewing complaints and
by pursuing contacts with any violator in accordance with standard procedures
as adopted and modified from time to time; and instituting with the City
Attorney in the name of the city any appropriate actions or proceedings against
any violator;
      (5)   To attend meetings and provide research and findings to the Board
of Adjustment/Planning Commission;
      (6)   To issue conditional/interim use permits when directed by the
Planning Commission;
      (7)   To issue notices of a zoning change when directed by the City
Council;
      (8)   To mail a copy of the findings to the applicant;
      (9)   To file copies of fully approved conditional/interim use permits,
and variances with the County Recorder within 15 days of approval;
      (10)   To communicate with the DNR where required by this chapter,
including notice and findings of all conditional use permits, variances, zoning
changes, and plats within shorelands; and
      (11)   To administer the local duties of the Environmental Review
Program.
(Ord. 2016-01, passed - - )
§ 154.008 PLANNING COMMISSION/BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment shall be the Board
appointed by the City Council as provided in M.S. § 462.354, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   Duties of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment under this
chapter including the following.
      (1)   Hearings. To hold hearings after proper public notices in the
official newspaper and individual notice by regular mail or for any purpose for
which a conditional use permit, subdivision, variance, or rezoning is required
by this chapter.
      (2)   Decisions making. To decide within the allowable time the
following:
         (a)   Recommendation to the City Council regarding requested zoning
district boundary changes or amendments to this chapter. Such recommendations
shall be made within 60 days of the initial application;
         (b)   To decide within a reasonable time requests for variance, with
findings to explain the basis for the decision;
         (c)   To decide within a reasonable time appeals from the action of
the Zoning Administrator and/or Building Official wherein the Board will take
the authority of the Administrator and/or Building Official;
         (d)   To review and approve or deny proposed preliminary plats or
proposed preliminary condominium plats and to provide recommendations on final
plats and final condominium plats to the City Council;
         (e)   To review and approve or deny all metes and bounds property
divisions within the city;
         (f)   To review and approve or deny requests for conditional/interim
use permits, and explain the basis for the decision in findings;
         (g)   To periodically review the zoning map and ordinances and
determine their role in shaping the growth of the community and to recommend
changes to the City Council of these documents to guide growth and current land
use toward the goals of the comprehensive plan; and
         (h)   To review the comprehensive plan, when appropriate.
      (3)   Membership.
         (a)   The Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment shall consist of
five voting members and one alternate member, for a total of six members. The
alternate member is to be compensated for and expected to regularly attend
Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment meetings. The alternate member may only
vote where a regular member is absent or is abstaining from voting.
         (b)   At least five members of the Planning Commission/Board of
Adjustment shall be residents and eligible voters of the city. Up to one member
of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment may be a non-resident owner of
businesses and/or real property located in the city.
         (c)   Members of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment shall not
be members of the City Council.
      (4)   Appointments/terms.
         (a)   Appointment of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment
members shall be made by the City Council and such appointment shall become
effective at the first meeting of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment
in February.
         (b)   Each member of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment shall
be appointed for a term of two years.
         (c)   Up to three members shall be subject to appointment each year.
         (d)   Vacancies shall be filled through appointment by the City
Council for only the duration of the unexpired term.
         (e)   It shall be the duty of each individual member to be present at
all meetings of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment. More than three
absences in any one-year period shall be grounds for replacement by the City
Council.
      (5)   Officers/duties.
         (a)   Officers of the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment shall be
a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and other officers as needed.
         (b)   Officers shall be elected by the Planning Commission/Board of
Adjustment at the first regular meeting held in February.
         (c)   In the event of a resignation of an officer, the Planning
Commission/Board of Adjustment shall fill the vacancy.
         (d)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings.
         (e)   The Vice-Chairperson shall assume the responsibilities of the
Chairperson when he or she is unable to serve.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed - -; Ord. 2019-02, passed 3-11-2019; Ord. 2022-01, passed
4-11-2022; Ord. 2022-04, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 154.009 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide the city with a
reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of certain
designated uses upon the general welfare and public safety.
   (B)   Application. Applications for conditional use permits shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator, together with required fees. The application shall be
accompanied by a site plan showing such information as is necessary to show
compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Description of site (legal description);
      (2)   Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and building dimensions;
      (3)   Location of all buildings and their square footage;
      (4)   Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street
loading areas, and sidewalks;
      (5)   Landscaping and screening plans;
      (6)   Drainage plan;
      (7)   Sanitary sewer and water plan with estimated use per day;
      (8)   Soil types; and
      (9)   Any additional written or graphic data reasonably required by the
Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application forms and
attachments for compliance with this subchapter and shall determine whether or
not a complete application has been submitted. Once all of the necessary
information has been received, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public
hearing for the application at the next available Planning Commission meeting.
      (2)   Notice of such hearing shall be published in accordance with state
law and notice shall be published at least once in the official paper of the
city and mailed to individual properties within 350 feet of the parcel included
in the request not less than ten days nor more than 30 days prior to the date
of the hearing. Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall not
invalidate any such proceedings.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall consider possible adverse effects of
the proposed conditional use and what additional requirements may be necessary
to reduce any adverse effects and shall make a recommendation to the City
Council within the prescribed time frame.
      (4)   Upon receiving the report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall review the application and the findings of
fact made by the Planning Commission and shall make a determination on the
application within the prescribed time frame. Approval of a conditional use
shall require passage by a four-fifths vote of the full City Council.
      (5)   The city may impose conditions of approval that exceed the minimum
requirements of this chapter in order to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the community.
   (D)   Standards; criteria. No conditional use permit shall be approved by
the Planning Commission unless the Commission shall find that:
      (1)   The use, with conditions, will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted;
      (2)   The establishment of the conditional use, with conditions, will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant
property for predominant uses in the area;
      (3)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
      (4)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide sufficient
off-street parking and loading space to serve the proposed use;
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control
offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise, and vibration so that none of these will
constitute a nuisance, and to control lighted signs and other lights in such a
manner that no disturbance to neighboring properties will result;
      (6)   Proper facilities are provided which would eliminate any traffic
congestion or traffic hazard which may result from the proposed use; and
      (7)   The proposed use is in compliance with the comprehensive plan
adopted by the city.
   (E)   Recording. A certified copy of any conditional use permit shall be
filed with the County Recorder. The conditional use permit shall include the
legal description of the property involved.
   (F)   Fees. To defray administrative costs of processing requests for
conditional use permits, a fee as set by resolution of the City Council shall
be paid by the applicant at the time the application is requested. The city
shall also be reimbursed for any additional costs associated with review of a
proposal as set by the City Council.
   (G)   Compliance. Any use permitted under the terms of any conditional use
permit shall be established and conducted in conformity with the terms of such
permits and of any conditions designated in connection.
   (H)   Lapse of conditional use permit by nonuse. Whenever within one year
after granting the conditional use the work permitted has not been started,
such permit shall become null and void unless a petition for an extension has
been approved by the City Council. If the permit becomes null and void, a new
conditional use permit application review will be required.
(Prior Code, § 13.07)
§ 154.010 AMENDMENTS; REZONING.
   (A)   Initiation. The City Council or Planning Commission may, upon their
own motion, initiate a request to amend the text or the district boundaries of
this chapter. Any person or his or her expressed agent owning real estate
within the city may initiate a request to amend the text or district boundaries
of this chapter so as to affect the real estate.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   A request plus copies of detailed written and graphic materials
fully explaining the proposal for an amendment to this chapter shall be filed
with the City Council and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council. This fee shall be nonrefundable.
      (2)   The City Administrator or Zoning Administrator shall schedule a
public hearing for the requested zoning amendment for the next available
Planning Commission meeting.
      (3)   If the request for amendment to this chapter, including rezoning of
private property, is requested by a resident, property owner, or persons with a
legal interest in a parcel of land, the city shall complete the review and take
action on the application within the prescribed time frames outlined in state
statutes and this chapter. If the City Council or Planning Commission initiates
the request, the time frames may be extended.
      (4)   Notice of such hearing shall be published in conformance with the
state law of individual notices. If it is a district change request, it shall
be mailed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing to
all owners of property, according to the assessment records, within 350 feet of
the parcel included in the request. Such notice shall also be published in the
official paper of the city within these time periods. Failure of a property
owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set
forth within this chapter.
      (5)   The Council shall, upon receiving no report from the Planning
Commission, place such request on the agenda of its next regular meeting and
decide the issue within the prescribed time frame, or upon receiving the
reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall
place the amendment request on the agenda of the next regular meeting and
decide the issue within 30 days. These reports and recommendations shall be
entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council
meeting.
      (6)   The City Council shall have the option to set and hold a public
hearing if deemed necessary for reaching a decision.
      (7)   Amendment of this chapter shall be by a four-fifths vote of the
full City Council.
      (8)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the originator of the
amendment request of the Council’s decision in writing.
(Prior Code, § 13.08)
§ 154.011 VARIANCE; APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals. The City Council shall be the Planning Commission and shall
act upon any and all of the following items.
      (1)   The City Council shall act as an appeal authority on all questions
as they may arise in the administration of this chapter, including the
interpretation of zoning maps, and shall hear and make recommendation on
appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by an administrative official charged with enforcing this chapter. Such appeal
may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department board, or
commission of the city. The recommendations on appeals are forwarded to the
City Council for approval or denial at their next available Council meeting.
      (2)   The City Council shall conduct hearings on a request for a variance
to the strict application of any of the requirements of this chapter in the
case of exceptionally irregular, narrow, or shallow lots, or other exceptional
physical conditions, whereby such strict application would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of the
reasonable use of the land or building involved, but in no other uses except as
specifically described. The Council shall have the authority to grant or deny
any such variance request by a majority vote of the Council.
      (3)   The City Council’s decisions shall be final except on appeal to the
District Court.
   (B)   Variances.
      (1)   Applications. Application for variances shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator who shall forward to the Planning Commission/Board of
Adjustment:
         (a)   A copy of the application and additional information determined
by the Zoning Administrator to be pertinent to the application; and
         (b)   A certificate of survey shall be required showing:
            1.   Property boundary with dimensions shown including square
footage of parcel;
            2.   Buildable area;
            3.   Location, size and height dimensions of all existing and
proposed structures/additions;
            4.   Location of all wells (existing and proposed) and septic
systems;
            5.   Location and size of all existing and proposed driveways,
roads and easements;
            6.   Nonconforming structure setbacks including all pertinent
dimensions;
            7.   Two foot contours;
            8.   Existing and proposed impervious surface calculations;
            9.   Bluff or steep slopes;
            10.   Ordinary high water elevation;
            11.   Delineated wetlands;
            12.   Stormwater management plan according to §
154.119 of this chapter; and
            13.   No-maintenance shoreline buffer according to §§
154.069 and
154.119 of this chapter.
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the discretion to determine
whether an application may be forwarded to the Board of Adjustment without an
accompanying certificate of survey. A determination by the Zoning Administrator
that a certificate of survey is not necessary shall be made in writing by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Public hearing. Acting in its capacity as the Board of Adjustment,
the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment shall hold at least one public
hearing on an application for a variance pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time. and its adopted rules of business. The
Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment may hold additional public hearings
when it determines that such hearings will be in the public interest.
      (3)   Delayed action. In considering the application for a variance, the
Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment may adjourn the hearing to a future
time and defer action or consideration until further information desired from
the applicant is submitted. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the
information needed or reason for tabling the item. The provisions for action on
an application shall be in compliance with M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      (4)   Variance criteria. Variances may only be granted in accordance with
M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6(2), as it may be amended from time to time. No variance
shall be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the land use
district in which the subject property is located. In considering a variance
request, the Board of Adjustment must consider whether a practical difficulty
exists by considering the following factors:
         (a)   Is the variance request in harmony with the purposes and intent
of the land use ordinance?
         (b)   Is the variance consistent with the comprehensive plan?
         (c)   Is the property owner proposing to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by the land use ordinance?
         (d)   Is the need for a variance due to circumstances unique to the
property and not created by the property owner?
         (e)   Will the issuance of a variance maintain the essential character
of the locality?
         (f)   Does the need for a variance involve more than economic
considerations?
      (5)   Conditions may apply.
         (a)   If the variance criteria in subsection (4) above have been met,
the Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment, in approving any such application,
may require additional conditions and mitigating requirements to protect the
public health, safety, or the environment, as may be reasonable under all
circumstances concerned therewith, to be imposed as a condition for granting of
the permit that shall fulfill the purposes of this chapter. A condition must be
directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created
by the variance. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
            1.   Mitigation actions to off-set environmental consequences of
variance approval;
            2.   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
            3.   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the
requirement that additional vegetation be planted;
            4.   Special provisions for the location, design, size and use of
allowed structures, sewage treatment systems, and vehicle parking areas; and
            5.   Performance security.
         (b)   The department may conduct follow-up inspections as necessary to
insure that the conditions established by the Board of Adjustment are met.
         (c)   Failure to comply with variance conditions as imposed by the
Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment is a violation of this chapter.
      (6)   Variance decision. After reviewing the application, considering all
pertinent facts, and hearing testimony at the public hearing, the Planning
Commission/Board of Adjustment may approve, deny, or modify the variance
request. The Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment shall prepare written
findings of fact to support its decision. A copy of the decision and findings
of fact shall be forwarded to the applicant via U.S. mail. If the variance is
approved, the Zoning Administrator shall cause a copy of the variance to be
recorded with the land records for the subject property in the Office of the
County Recorder. A copy of the final decision granting a variance within a
shoreland area shall be sent to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources within ten days of final action.
(Prior Code, § 13.09) (Ord. 2019-05, passed 10-28-2019)
§ 154.012 ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of this section to implement the
environmental review procedures to follow the provisions of M.S. Ch. 116D, as
it may be amended from time to time, relating to the Environmental Review
Program, and any rules adopted under that chapter by the State Environmental
Quality Board. All terms used in this section shall have the same meaning as
the terms used in M.S. Ch. 116D, as it may be amended from time to time. The
provisions of the rules for the Environmental Review Program are adopted and
are on file in the Zoning Administrator’s office.
   (B)   Cost of preparation and review.
      (1)   The applicant for a permit for any action for which environmental
documents are required either by state law or rules or by the City Council
shall supply all unprivileged data or information reasonably requested by the
city that the applicant has in his or her possession or to which he or she has
reasonable access.
      (2)   The applicant for a permit for any action for which an
environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) is required, either by state law or
rules or by the City Council, shall pay all costs of preparation and review of
the EAW and, upon the request of and in the manner prescribed by the city,
shall provide all necessary data and research to prepare a draft EAW.
      (3)   The city and the applicant for a permit for any action for which an
environmental impact statement (EIS) is required shall comply with the
provisions of the rules governing assessment of cost for environmental impact
statements, one copy of which is on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator, unless the applicant and the City Council provide otherwise by a
written agreement.
      (4)   No permit for an action for which an EAW or an EIS is required
shall be issued until all costs of preparation and review which are to be paid
by the applicant are paid, and all information required is supplied, and until
the environmental review process has been completed as provided in this chapter
and the rules adopted by reference by this chapter, and pursuant to any written
agreement entered into by the applicant for the permit or permits and the City
Council.
      (5)   The applicant for a permit for any action for which an EAW or EIS
is required and the City Council may, in writing, agree as to a different
division of the costs of preparation and review of any EAW or EIS.
   (C)   Administration.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall be the person responsible for the
administration of the environmental review program, this section, and rules
adopted by reference by this section.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for determining
whether an action for which a permit is required is an action for which an EAW
is mandatory. The Zoning Administrator shall also determine those proposed
actions for which an optional EAW may be required under the provisions of this
chapter and shall notify the Planning Commission and the City Council of these
proposed actions.
      (3)   All EAWs and EISs shall be prepared under the supervision of the
Zoning Administrator, reviewed by the Planning Commission, and reviewed and
approved by the City Council.
      (4)   When reviewing an EAW or EIS, the Zoning Administrator and the
Planning Commission may suggest design alterations which would lessen the
environmental impact of the action. The City Council may require these design
alterations to be made as a condition for issuing the permit when it finds that
the design alterations are necessary to lessen the environmental impact of the
action.
      (5)   After an EAW is prepared, the Planning Commission shall review the
EAW and recommend to the City Council whether or not it should require the
preparation of an EIS. The City Council shall require an EIS when it finds
under state rules that an action is major and has potential for significant
environmental effects.
   (D)   Discretionary or optional EAW. The Planning Commission may, upon
recommendation by the Zoning Administrator, require that an optional EAW be
prepared on any proposed action if the action may be a major action and appears
to have the potential for significant environmental effects. The following
guidelines shall also be considered in determining whether an optional EAW
shall be required:
      (1)   Is the action to be in or near an area that is considered to be
environmentally sensitive or aesthetically pleasing?
      (2)   Is the action likely to have disruptive effects such as generating
traffic and noise?
      (3)   Are there public questions or controversy concerning the
environmental effects of the proposed actions?
      (4)   A four-fifths vote of the controlling authority shall be required
to order a discretionary EAW.
   (E)   Enforcement. No permit shall be issued for a project for which
environmental documents are required until the entire environmental review
procedures established by this chapter are completed. No work shall commence
and any work in progress on any project for which environmental documents are
required shall cease until the environmental review procedures established by
this chapter are fully complied with.
(Prior Code, § 13.10)
§ 154.013 BUILDING PERMITS; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Building permits required. No building or structure shall be erected
or moved or construction on an existing structure shall be started until a
lawful building permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator or the
designated representative. Fees for all building permits shall be established
by the City Council in accordance with the State Building Code as adopted by
the city.
   (B)   Certificate of occupancy. No building or structure shall be occupied
or used in whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy is issued stating
that the building or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter.
The certificate of occupancy shall be issued upon conducting a final inspection
finding the building or structure satisfactory.
(Prior Code, § 13.11)
§ 154.014 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.
   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the City Council or its
authorized representative. The Zoning Administrator may institute appropriate
action for any violations of this chapter at the direction of the City Council
and through the City Attorney as deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 13.12)
§ 154.015 HARDSHIP ASSESSMENT DEFERRALS.
   (A)   The City Council may, at its discretion, defer the payment of special
assessments for any homestead property:
      (1)   Owned by a person 65 years of age or older for whom it would be a
hardship to make the payments;
      (2)   Owned by a person who is retired by virtue of a permanent and total
disability for whom it would be a hardship to make the payments; or
      (3)   Owned by a person who is a member of the state’s National Guard or
other military reserves who is ordered into active military service, as defined
in M.S. § 190.05, Subd. 5b or 5c, as it may be amended from time to time, as
stated in the person’s military orders, for whom it would be a hardship to make
the payments.
   (B)   (1)   For purposes of this section, the determination of hardship
shall be made by the City Council upon consideration of the following:
         (a)   The total assets and liabilities of the person claiming the
hardship;
         (b)   The total income of such person whether taxable or non-taxable;
         (c)   The value of any assets transferred by the applicant within
three years of the application for deferral of the assessment; and
         (d)   The total expenses of such person.
      (2)   Determination of hardship can also be made on the basis of
exceptional and unusual circumstances not covered by the standards and
guidelines where the determination is made in a nondiscriminatory manner and
does not give the applicant an unreasonable preference or advantage over other
applicants.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person is deemed to be retired by
virtue of a permanent and total disability if such person is determined to be
permanently and totally disabled by the Social Security Administration.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, the burden of proving the existence of a
hardship shall be the responsibility of the applicant for such deferral of any
payment of a special assessment.
   (E)   The procedure to obtain a deferred assessment is as follows.
      (1)   A homeowner shall make application for deferred payment of special
assessments on forms prescribed by the City Administrator and the County
Auditor. Such application may be made at any time while payments of assessments
are due on such property.
      (2)   The application shall be considered for completeness by the Finance
Committee no later than 14 days after receipt of the application by the Clerk-
Treasurer. If the Finance Committee deems the application complete, it shall
refer the application, with its recommendation, to the City Council, to be
heard at the City Council’s next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision shall
be made on such application at such meeting unless additional information is
required by the City Council. In such event, the City Council shall make its
decision at its first regular meeting following receipt of all information it
requires to make its decision. Written notification of the decision of the City
Council shall be provided to the applicant.
      (3)   The City Council shall consider all evidence of hardship presented
to it and make its decision on any application on the basis of written findings
of fact. The City Council shall not grant any request for a deferral of any
payment of a special assessment unless it determines that the payment of such
special assessment would leave the applicant with insufficient funds to pay
applicant’s reasonable living expenses.
      (4)   If the deferred assessment is granted, the City Administrator shall
record a notice thereof with the County Recorder which shall set forth the
amount of the assessment;
      (5)   The City Council may determine by ordinance or resolution the
amount of interest, if any, on the deferred assessment and this rate shall be
recorded by the City Administrator along with and in the same manner as the
amount of the assessment.
      (6)   The applicant must reapply for the deferred assessment each
following year upon the filing of a similar application not later than October
31.
   (F)   The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall terminate
and all amounts accumulated plus applicable interest shall become due upon the
occurrence of any of the following events:
      (1)   The death of the owner, provided that the spouse (if any) is
otherwise not eligible for the benefits hereunder;
      (2)   The sale, transfer, or subdivision of the property or any part
thereof;
      (3)   If the property should for any reason lose its homestead status; or
      (4)   If for any reason the City Council shall determine that there would
be no hardship to require immediate or partial payment.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 5-28-2013)
§ 154.016 INTERIM USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Procedure. Uses defined as interim uses in § 
154.035 are allowed by the city pursuant to governing law contained in M.S.
§ 462.3597 after appropriate review and approval in accordance with the
criteria, standards and procedures for a conditional use permit contained in § 
154.009 and the below requirements contained in this section. An interim use
will be reviewed in the same manner as a conditional use permit except as
otherwise provided in this section. All submittal requirements in § 
154.009 shall be required for interim use permits.
   (B)   Additional standards. In addition to the foregoing, interim uses shall
comply with all of the following standards:
      (1)   The use is allowed in and conforms to the applicable zoning
regulations for the respective zoning district, including applicable
performance standards;
      (2)   The date or event that will terminate the use is identified with
certainty and is included in writing within the approved interim use permit;
      (3)   The use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is
necessary for the public to fully or partially take the property in the future;
      (4)   There is adequate assurance that the property will be left in
suitable condition after the interim use is terminated. The City Council may
require a condition that the owner will provide an appropriate financial surety
to cover the cost of removing the interim use and interim structures upon the
expiration of the interim use permit; and
      (5)   The user agrees to any conditions deemed appropriate by the City
Council for the permission of the interim use. Such conditions shall be
included in writing in the issued interim use permit or alternatively in a
written agreement with the user attached to the approved interim use permit.
   (C)   Termination. An interim use permit shall terminate on the happening of
any of the following events, whichever occurs first:
      (1)   The occurrence of the date stated in the interim use permit, or;
      (2)   The occurrence of the event stated in the interim use permit, or;
      (3)   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued, or;
      (4)   Upon transfer of the property to new ownership, or;
      (5)   Upon change in the city's zoning regulations which renders the use
nonconforming.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 5-12-2025)
DISTRICTS
§ 154.030 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   The following district classifications are established within the city:
   (A)   R-1 Single- and Two-Family Residential District;
   (B)   R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District;
   (C)   R-3 Manufactured Home Residential District;
   (D)   B-1 Central Business District;
   (E)   B-2 Highway Commercial District;
   (F)   I Industrial District;
   (G)   P Public/Parks; and
   (H)   Shoreland and Floodplain Overlay District.
(Prior Code, § 13.13) (Ord. 2015-01, passed - -)
§ 154.031 ZONING DISTRICT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The boundaries of the districts enumerated in this division are
established and adopted as shown upon the map on file in the office of the
Zoning Administrator, designated the “Official Zoning Map of the City of
Crosby, Minnesota,” and as subsequently amended and bearing the signatures of
the Mayor and City Clerk-Treasurer, which map with all notations, references,
data, and other information shown on the map is made part of this chapter as if
fully set forth in this section.
   (B)   All land which may hereafter become a part of the city through
annexation shall be automatically classified in the R-1 Single- and Two-Family
Residential District until otherwise changed by amendment procedure as
prescribed by §§
154.006 and
154.009 to
154.014.
(Prior Code, § 13.14)
§ 154.032 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of districts are the centerlines of streets, the centerlines
of alleys, the rear lot lines where there are no alleys, the side lines of
recorded lots, or designated distances where land is unplatted.
(Prior Code, § 13.15)
§ 154.033 USES NOT PROVIDED FOR WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Whenever in any zoning district a use is neither specifically permitted nor
denied, the use shall be considered prohibited. In such case, the City Council,
the Planning Commission, or a property owner may request a study by the city to
determine if the use is acceptable and if so what zoning district would be most
appropriate and the determination as to conditions and standards relating to
development of the use. The City Council and/or Planning Commission upon
receipt of the staff study may, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to this
chapter to provide for the particular use under consideration or may find that
the use is not compatible for development within the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.16)
§ 154.034 LOT STANDARDS CHART.
   The following chart shows lot size and dimension standards.
Lot Size and Dimension Standards
 R R-1 R-2 R-3 Shoreland Overlay B-1 CBD B-2 Highway I Public
Lot Size and Dimension Standards
                                      Shoreland         B-
           R    R-1    R-2    R-3     Overlay   B-1 CBD 2       I       Public
                                                        Highway
Lot Size
Single-         5,000  5,000  5,000             N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
family          s.f.   s.f.   s.f.
Duplex          10,000 7,500
                s.f.   s.f.
Triplex                7,500
                       s.f.
Quad                   10,000
                       s.f.
Each                   1/
additional             2,500
                       s.f.
Unsewered                             20,000
                                      s.f.
Sewered                               15,000
(riparian)                            s.f.
Sewered                               10,000
(non-                                 s.f.
riparian)
Lot Width                                       N/A     100     100     N/A
                                                        feet    feet
Single-         50
family          feet
Duplex          100
                feet
Triplex         100
                feet
Quad            125
                feet
Unsewered                             100 feet
Sewered                               75 feet
(riparian)
Sewered
(non-                                 75 feet
riparian)
Structure Setbacks
Front      25   20     20     25 feet           0 feet  25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
           feet feet   feet
Side       25   5 feet 5 feet 10 feet           0 feet  10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
           feet
Rear       25   10     10     10 feet           0 feet  20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
           feet feet   feet
Accessory  15   15     15
building   feet feet   feet   15 feet 25 feet   25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet
height
Accessory  See §                               Standard setbacks as outlined
building   154.165                              above
setbacks
Building   35   35     45     20 feet 35 feet   45 feet 35 feet 35 feet 25 feet
height     feet feet   feet
Impervious
coverage   25   40     45     40      20        100     25      25      30
(percent)
Lakeshore  75
sewered    feet                       50 feet
(riparian)
Lakeshore  75                         75 feet
unsewered  feet
           one
Maximum    unit
density    per
           acre
 
(Prior Code, § 13.17) (Ord. 2014-06a, passed - -; Ord. 2015-01, passed - -;
Ord. 2016-07, passed 6-22-2016; Ord. 2017-05, passed - -; Ord. 2020-04, passed
8-24-2020; Ord. - -, passed 1- -2021; Ord. 2022-07, passed 12-12-2022; Ord.
2022-08, passed 12-27-2022, Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 154.035 LAND USE CATEGORIES CHART.
Land Use Classification Chart
Use District
    R R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 CBD B-2 High I P
Land Use Classification Chart
Use                                        District
                                           R R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 CBD B-2 High I   P
Accessory storage container                P P   P   P   P       P        P   P
Accessory structures                       P P   P   P   P       P        P   P
Adult use                                                                 C
Agriculture (other than keeping of                               C        C   C
animals)
Automobile repair (major)                                C       C        P
Automobile sales                                         C       C        C
Automobile salvage yard                                                   C
Bed and breakfast                            C   C   C   C       C
Body art establishment                                   P       P
Brewery with taproom                                     C       C
Campgrounds                                C             C       C            C
Cannabis cultivation (commercial)                                         IUP
Cannabis manufacturer                                                     IUP
Cannabis retail                                          P
Cannabis wholesale                                                        IUP
Cemetery                                                                      C
Church                                       C   C   C           C            C
Clear cutting                                            P       C        C
Commercial-linked housing                                C
Commercial use, other (not classified)                   C       C
Community recreation center                C C           C       C            C
Contractor shop (i.e., plumber/                          P       P        P
electrician)
Controlled access lots                       C   C   C                        C
Cutting, select                            P P   P   P   P       P        P   P
Day care centers                             C   C   C   P       P
Dirt moving >50 cu. yds. (nonshoreland )   P P   P   P   P       P        P   P
Dirt moving >50 cu. yds. (shore impact     C C   C   C   C       C        C   C
zone)
Dirt moving >50 cu. yds. (shoreland        P P   P   P   P       P        P   P
nonimpact zone)
Dirt moving between 10 cu. yds. and 50 cu. P P   P   P   P       P        P   P
yds. (shore impact zone)
Drive-in restaurant                                      C       C
Drive-through windows                                            C
Dwelling, duplex                             P   P   C   P       P
Dwelling, manufactured housing               C   C   P           C
Dwelling, multi-family                           C   C           C
Dwelling, single-family                      P   P   C           P        C
Dwelling, triplex or quad                        P   C
Dwelling, upper level                                    P
Extractive use (mining)                                                   C   C
Gas stations (with minor repairs)                        C       C        P
Golf course (including accessory uses)     C C   C   C                        C
Government buildings                       P             C       C            P
Historical sites/buildings                 P P   P   P   P       P            P
Home occupation                              C   C   C   C       C
Hostel                                                   P       P
Hotel/motel                                              P       P
Impervious coverage >30% in shoreland                    C       C
Laundromat                                               P       P
Liquor, off-sale                                         P       P
Liquor, on-sale                                          P       P
Long-term care facility                              C   C       C        C
Lumberyard warehouse/sales                                                P
Manufactured home park                               C
Manufacturing, limited                                                    P
Marinas
Medical facilities                           C   C   C   C       C
Nursing home/care center                         C   C           P
Outside storage/display of goods (>2                     P       P
months)
Packaging/warehouse                                                       P
Parks, active                              P                                  P
Parks, passive                             P                                  P
Professional office building                             P       P        P
PUD, commercial                            C             C       C
PUD, residential                             C   C   C
Recreational equipment rental business     C
Recycling center                                         C       C        C
Restaurants/cafes                                        P       P
Retail stores                                            P       P
Schools/educational buildings                C   C   C
Semi-public use                            P C   C   C   P       P        P   P
Service-based businesses                                 P       P
Sewage/water treatment facilities                                         P   P
Sign, area identification                    C   C   C   C       C        C
Sign, commercial identification                          P       P        P
Sign, off-site                                           C                C
Sign, residential identification             P   P   P
Small engine repair                                      P       P        P
State licensed residential facilities        C   C   C                        C
Theaters (indoor)                                        P       P        P
Touring business                           C
Vacation rental (commercial)                             P
Vehicle repair shop (with major repairs)                 C       C        P
Walk-up window                                           P       P
Water-oriented accessory structures          C   C   C
Welding shop                                             C       C        P
C - Denotes conditionally permitted use
P - Denotes permitted use
Blank - Denotes prohibited use
 
(Prior Code, § 13.18) (Ord. 2013-5, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 2014-07, passed -
-; Ord. 2015-01, passed - -; Ord. 2016-02, passed - -; Ord. 2017-01, passed -
-; Ord. 2017-05, passed - -; Ord. 2018-01, passed - -; Ord. 2018-02, passed -
-; Ord. 2018-04, passed - -; Ord. 2020-01, passed 4-27-2020; Ord. 2022-05,
passed 7-25-2022; Ord. 2023-04, passed 9-25-2023; Ord. 2024-04, passed - - ;
Ord. 2025-4, passed - -2025)
§ 154.036 ACCESSORY STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   In all zoning districts, the use of accessory storage containers, and other
similar structures or containers for storage on a lot is allowed by permit, but
in no event shall such containers be present for more than 90 days in any one-
year period. This restriction shall not apply to construction storage
containers used on-site during a construction project provided all required
permits are obtained for the project, the project remains in compliance, and
the containers are removed from the property upon completion of the project.
Accessory storage containers shall comply with the standard setback
requirements for accessory structures.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed - -)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 154.050 R-1 SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   It is the intent of the R-1 District to:
   (A)   Permit the development of single-family and two-family dwellings in
the community;
   (B)   Provide reasonable standards for such development;
   (C)   Avoid overcrowding;
   (D)   Preserve the historic residential character of the existing
residential neighborhoods; and
   (E)   Prohibit the use of land which would be incompatible with or
detrimental to the essential residential character of the district.
(Prior Code, § 13.19)
§ 154.051 R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   It is the intent of the R-2 District to provide for single-family and
multiple-family dwelling unit structures and directly related complimentary
uses.
(Prior Code, § 13.20)
§ 154.052 R-3 MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   It is the intent of the R-3 District to:
      (1)   Permit the development of manufactured home parks in the community;
      (2)   Supplement applicable state laws pertaining to manufactured homes;
      (3)   Provide reasonable standards for site development of such parks;
      (4)   Avoid overcrowding; and
      (5)   Provide setbacks and other development standards which will make
such developments more attractive, safe, and pleasant to live in, and
compatible with other land uses and developments in the community.
   (B)   All statutes of the state pertaining to the regulation of manufactured
homes and manufactured home parks are adopted by reference and are declared to
be an integral part of this chapter as if they were reproduced in their
entirety; however, where standards of this chapter are higher or more
restrictive than such statutes, this chapter shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 13.21)
§ 154.053 SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Manufactured home developments; special provisions.
      (1)   Common open space. At least 10% of the total site of a manufactured
home park shall be reserved for common, usable open space, for the exclusive
use of residents, and to be maintained by the proprietor or operator of the
manufactured home park. Such open space and its improvements shall be completed
before any manufactured home site is offered for occupancy.
      (2)   Application. An application for a manufactured home park shall be
accompanied by the same data, map, and information required for other plats of
subdivisions within the city.
      (3)   Additional data. Any additional data required by the State Board of
Health for licensing of manufactured home parks shall also be submitted to the
city’s Planning Commission prior to or concurrently with its submittal to the
State Board of Health.
      (4)   Landscaping. Landscaping is required as follows.
         (a)   Each manufactured home park shall, in addition to maintaining a
20-foot landscaped strip around the perimeter of the property, also provide a
20-foot greenbelt separating the manufactured home park from arterials listed
in the city’s comprehensive plan and from any adjoining zoning district.
         (b)   Each manufactured home site shall be provided with a tree no
less than four inches in diameter at a six-foot height, and all unpaved areas
shall be suitably sodded. The trees and sod will be provided by the developer.
      (5)   Sales or storage prohibited. Sales or storage of manufactured homes
shall be prohibited in a manufactured home park.
      (6)   Width of paved streets. Paved private streets serving the
manufactured home park shall be of sufficient width to provide for two lanes of
traffic and for parking on each side of the street.
      (7)   Anchoring. Each manufactured home site shall be provided with
tiedown or other acceptable method of anchoring the manufactured home.
      (8)   Storm shelter designation. Each manufactured home park shall
provide and designate one of its permanent buildings which is structurally
suitable to serve as a storm shelter, which shall meet the requirements of M.S.
Ch. 327, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 4625, and
shall be inspected by the City Building Inspector.
      (9)   Skirting. Each manufactured home within a manufactured home park
shall be properly and completely skirted.
      (10)   Shelters for refuse collection. Shelters for common refuse
collection shall be provided by the developer. Distance from the refuse
collection area for manufactured home park residents shall not exceed 150 feet.
      (11)   Separation between units. There shall be a minimum 20 feet of
separation between each manufactured home within a manufactured home park.
   (B)   Differences in setback requirements. If the residential setback
requirements for an underlying zoning district differ from that of the
Shoreland or Floodplain Overlay District, the greater of the distances shall
apply.
   (C)   Impervious surface coverage. Impervious coverage may be increased by
an additional 10% in Residential Districts if a storm water retention plan
created by a licensed engineer showing containment of the five-year, 24-hour
storm event on the parcel is provided, approved by the city, and implemented on
the subject property.
   (D)   Storm water management. All site plans submitted for permit
applications which increase the overall impervious surface coverage on
residential property shall include documentation that direct runoff of storm
water to adjacent properties and wetlands will be eliminated through the use of
berms, infiltration ponds, swales, rain barrels, rain gardens, filtration
strips, or other permanent means,
(Prior Code, § 13.22) (Ord. 2016-07, passed 6-22-2016)
§ 154.054 WHERE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to move into, construct, or build any
structure for any purpose except dwellings for human habitation, including a
garage, in those parts of the city, described as follows.
   (A)   All that part of said city lying east of Second Avenue East and south
of Eighth Street North; and all that part of the city lying south of Second
Street South extended easterly to the city limits and east of Cross Avenue,
except for the city well and pump house property therein; and the south half of
blocks two and three of the city; and the south half of blocks one and six and
all of blocks 13 and 18 of Lake Park Division to the city; and blocks one and
six of Hale’s Addition to the city; and blocks 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, and 20
except lots one to three, both inclusive, thereof, of Park Division to the
city; and all of Lake View Addition to the city except lots 16, 31, and 32 of
block five thereof, and except also lots 15, 16, and 17 of block nine thereof,
and except also lots 13 to 16, both inclusive, of block ten thereof; and blocks
one, two, and five except lots 11 to 20, both inclusive of said block five, and
all of block six of Central Addition to the city; and all of West Park Addition
to the city, except blocks three, four, five, the South Half of blocks six and
seven, all of block eight and the north half of blocks nine, ten, and 11
thereof; and block one, except lots 12, 13, and 14 thereof, block seven, the
south half of blocks eight, nine, and ten, and all of blocks 11 to 16, both
inclusive, and out lots three, four, and five of Smith’s Addition to the city;
and all of Central Addition No. 2 to the city except lots eight, and nine of
block 12 thereof, and except also lots one, two, and three of block 13 thereof;
and blocks six, seven, and 18 of Keating’s Addition to the city.
   (B)   In all other parts of said city not specifically covered by division
(A) above, it shall be lawful for any person to move into, construct, and build
structures for dwellings, apartments, commercial, industrial, or other lawful
purposes.
   (C)   All moving, construction, or building in the areas set forth in
divisions (A) and (B) above shall be done and performed in strict conformity
insofar as the same may be applicable, with the provisions of all other city
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 13.95) Penalty, see §
154.999
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 154.065 B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   It is the intent of the B-1 District to provide for the establishment of
commercial and service activities which draw from and serve customers from the
entire community or region. The uses and structures within this District shall
be designed for effective pedestrian movement. Efforts should be made by both
the city and developers to protect the historic character of the downtown area.
(Prior Code, § 13.23)
§ 154.066 B-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   It is the intent of the B-2 District to provide for and limit the
establishment of commercial and service activities which are oriented to
automobile traffic, particularly tourists.
(Prior Code, § 13.24)
§ 154.067 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   It is the intent of the I District to provide for the establishment of
industrial warehousing and manufacturing development.
(Prior Code, § 13.25)
§ 154.068 P PUBLIC AND PARKS DISTRICT.
   It is the intent to establish a Public and Parks Zoning District that allows
public facilities, parks, and open spaces and other locations for public or
semi-public uses. That part of the Cuyuna Range Recreation Area under public
ownership shall be designated as public space.
(Prior Code, § 13.26) (Ord. 2015-01, passed - -)
§ 154.069 SPECIAL COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Open-air display areas for the sale of manufactured products such as
garden furniture, hardware items, nursery stock, or rental of manufactured
products or equipment, including manufactured home sales lots, shall require a
conditional use permit.
   (B)   If the commercial setback requirements for an underlying zoning
district differ from that of the Shoreland or Floodplain Overlay District, the
greater of the distances shall apply. Within the B-1 Central Business District,
a zero-foot setback shall be allowed within the Shoreland or Floodplain Overlay
District.
   (C)   Impervious surface coverage in the B-2 Highway Commercial and I
Industrial Districts may be increased by an additional 25%, not to exceed 50%
of the property, through a conditional use permit if the following is provided
and approved by the city:
      (1)   A storm water retention plan created by a licensed engineer showing
containment of the 50-year, 24-hour storm event on the parcel; or
      (2)   Direct runoff of storm water to adjacent properties and wetlands
shall be eliminated through the use of berms, infiltration ponds, swales,
filtration strips, or other permanent means.
   (D)   Commercial-linked housing can be allowed with a conditional use
permit, provided the following performance standards are met.
      (1)   The residential units are situated above the ground floor, behind
the primary commercial space, or below the primary commercial space.
      (2)   The ground-floor primary street frontage is exclusively for
commercial use, except for stairways, doorways, hallways, or other access
points to residential units.
      (3)   Separate entrances are provided for residential and commercial
uses.
      (4)   (a)   Adequate off-street parking is available for residential
occupants; a minimum of one parking space per dwelling unit must be provided.
         (b)   Location. Parking and vehicle drives shall be located away from
building entrances and street corners, and not between a building entrance and
the street. Surface parking shall be oriented behind or to the side of a
building when possible.
      (5)   Proposed developments shall provide for safe and comfortable
sidewalks, paths, and resting areas for pedestrians. Sidewalks and paths shall
connect the development to adjacent land uses and provide connections through
the development to the public street right-of-way.
      (6)   Landscaping must meet the requirements of § 
154.180 General Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 13.27) (Ord. 2014-06a, passed - -; Ord. 2025-4, passed - -2025)
§ 154.070 R RECREATIONAL DISTRICT.
   It is the purpose and intent of the Recreational District to establish and
maintain a land use district for existing uses of land or for land properly
suited for recreational development that is semi-rural in character, allows
public and private recreation facilities and accessory uses, and promotes and
maintains aesthetics in areas that serve as a transitional zoning district
between residential uses and commercial uses.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed - -)
SHORELAND AND FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 154.085 INTENT.
   The uncontrolled use of shorelands in the city affects the public health,
safety, and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public
waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best
interests of the public health, safety, and welfare to provide for the wise
development of shorelands and floodplain areas. The state legislature has
delegated responsibility to the municipalities of the state to regulate the
subdivision, use, and development of the shorelands and floodplains and thus
preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, preserve the economic and
natural values of shorelands, and provide for the wise utilization of waters
and related land resources.
(Prior Code, § 13.28)
§ 154.086 SHORELAND MANAGEMENT CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   In order to guide the wise development and utilization of shorelands
of public waters for the preservation of water quality, natural
characteristics, economic values, and the general health, safety, and welfare,
all public waters in the city have been given a shoreland management
classification.
   (B)   The public waters of the city have been classified by the Commissioner
of Natural Resources as follows:
      (1)   Natural environment lakes and streams: none identified within the
city;
      (2)   Recreational development lakes and streams: none identified within
the city; and
      (3)   General development lakes and streams: Serpent Lake and Serpent
Creek.
(Prior Code, § 13.29)
§ 154.087 SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent. The shorelands of the city are designated as a Shoreland
Overlay District. The purpose of the Shoreland Overlay District is to provide
for the wide utilization of shoreland areas in order to preserve the quality
and natural character of the public waters of the city.
   (B)   Permitted uses. All permitted uses allowed and regulated by the
applicable zoning district underlying this Shoreland Overlay District as
indicated on the official zoning map of the city are permitted.
   (C)   Conditional uses. All conditional uses and applicable attached
conditions allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning district underlying
this Shoreland Overlay District as indicated on the official zoning map of the
city are conditional uses. The Department of Natural Resources must be notified
of all conditional uses, amendments, and variances ten days prior to the public
hearing so they may comment. The Department of Natural Resources must be
notified of the final action taken.
   (D)   Nonconforming septic systems. All sanitary facilities inconsistent
with this chapter shall be brought into conformity or discontinued within five
years from June of 1998.
   (E)   General provisions. The standards in this division shall apply to
shorelands of all public waters within the city. Where the requirements of the
underlying zoning district as shown on the official zoning map are more
restrictive than those set forth in this section, the more restrictive
standards shall apply.
   (F)   Impervious surface coverage. Impervious coverage may be increased by
an additional 10% in a Shoreland Overlay District if the following is provided
and approved by the city:
      (1)   A storm water retention plan created by a licensed engineer showing
containment of the five-year, 24-hour storm event on the parcel; and
      (2)   Direct runoff of storm water to water bodies, adjacent properties,
and wetlands shall be eliminated through the use of berms, infiltration ponds,
swales, filtration strips, or other permanent means.
(Prior Code, § 13.30) (Ord. 2014-06a, passed - -)
§ 154.088 SHORELAND ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   The removal of natural vegetation in shoreland areas shall be
restricted to prevent erosion into public waters, to consume nutrients in the
soil, and to preserve shoreland aesthetics. Removal of natural vegetation in
the Shoreland Overlay District shall be subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   Selective removal of natural vegetation shall be allowed, provided
that sufficient vegetative cover remains to screen cars, dwellings, and other
structures when viewed from the water.
      (2)   Clear cutting of natural vegetation shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Within a reasonable amount of time, natural vegetation shall be
restored insofar as feasible after any construction project is completed in
order to retard surface runoff and soil erosion.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to permitted uses
which normally require the removal of natural vegetation.
   (B)   Grading and filling in shoreland areas (within 1,000 feet of the OHW
of public waters) or any alterations of the natural topography where the slope
of the land is toward a public water or a watercourse leading to public water
may be allowed based on the following chart.
 
Shoreland Dirt-Moving Chart
Type and amount of dirt moving                          Review process
Movement of less than ten cubic yards within the shore  Allowed, no permit
impact zone
Movement of between ten cubic yards and 50 cubic yards  Permit required
of dirt within the shore impact zone
Movement of more than 50 cubic yards of dirt within the Conditional use permit
shore impact zone
Movement of more than 50 cubic yards of dirt in         Permit required
shorelands but outside of shore impact zone
Movement of less than 50 cubic yards of dirt in         Allowed, no permit
shorelands but outside of shore impact zone
 
   (C)   The permit may be granted subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time
as feasible;
      (2)   Within a reasonable amount of time, temporary ground cover, such as
mulch, is used and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is planted;
      (3)   Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed such as
silt fences or staked hay bales; and
      (4)   Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards.
   (D)   Excavations on shorelands where the intended purpose is connection to
public waters shall require a permit from the Zoning Administrator before
construction can begin. Such permit may be obtained only after the Commissioner
of Natural Resources has issued a permit for work in the beds of public waters.
   (E)   The following exceptions to the permitting requirements listed in this
section shall apply to the shoreland areas:
      (1)   Excavation for basements associated with permitted construction
activities, subject to review and approval of the City Building Official;
      (2)   Filling associated with driveways not within the shore impact zones
or within floodplains; and
      (3)   Placement of topsoil for yards or gardens not exceeding 12 inches
of materials.
(Prior Code, § 13.31)
§ 154.089 FLOODPLAIN PROVISIONS.
   (A)   These floodplain provisions are provided for the protection and
preservation of water channels and adjoining floodplains which are reasonably
required to carry the discharge of flood waters and are provided in accordance
with the requirements of state law. This section does not imply that areas
outside the boundaries of these provisions are not subject to flooding and
shall not create liability on the part of the city for any flood damages which
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made under this chapter.
   (B)   These floodplain provisions shall be applied to and superimposed in
conjunction with the shoreland standards and those areas indicated on the
official zoning map shall be subject to these provisions.
   (C)   The area within the floodplain is divided into floodway and flood
fringe. A floodway includes the channel and a ten-foot landward strip on both
sides of Serpent Creek. A flood fringe includes the area outside of the
floodway, but subject to inundation by the regional flood.
   (D)   (1)   Uses having a low flood damage potential and not obstructing
flood flows shall be permitted within the floodway area to the extent that they
are not prohibited by any other ordinance and are allowed within the
residential, commercial, or industrial district which jointly applies, and
provided they do not require structure, fill, or storage of materials or
equipment. In addition, no use shall adversely affect the capacity of the
channels, or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or
any other drainage facility or system. Permitted uses are limited to the
following:
         (a)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas;
         (b)   Industrial-commercial loading areas and parking areas; and
         (c)   Public and private recreational uses.
      (2)   No residential structures shall be allowed within the floodway.
   (E)   In the enforcement of these provisions, the city may request the
Department of Natural Resources to make any appropriate determinations relative
to any proposed development. The city, in its own discretion, may use these
determinations in deciding whether or not to allow a requested use within any
floodplain area.
(Prior Code, § 13.32)
MINERAL EXTRACTIONS
§ 154.100 INTENT.
   The city finds that the extraction of minerals by underground and/or surface
mining is a basic and essential activity making an important contribution to
the economic well-being of the city. The economical availability of iron ore,
sand, gravel, rock, soil, and other materials is vital to their continued
growth. The city further finds that it is not practicable to extract minerals
required by society without disturbing the surface of the earth and producing
waste materials. The danger exists that no compatible land uses could
unnecessarily deny the benefit of these materials to society in the future. It
is further found that the character of mining may create undesirable land and
water conditions which can be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare
and property rights of the citizens of the community. However, if properly
regulated and if rehabilitation of surface mined lands is required, mining can
take place within the city in such a manner that undesirable side effects of
the operation may be restricted to an acceptable level.
(Prior Code, § 13.33)
§ 154.101 MINERAL EXTRACTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any
operator to engage in the extraction of minerals without having first obtained
a conditional use permit from the city authorizing the work as regulated
further by this section.
   (B)   The permit requirements established by this section shall not apply to
emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. When emergency work is
performed under this section, the operator performing it shall report the
pertinent facts relating to the work to the Zoning Administrator prior to the
commencement of the extraction. The Zoning Administrator shall review the facts
and determine whether an emergency exists and shall by written memorandum
authorize commencement of the emergency exception. An operator commencing
emergency work shall, within ten days following the commencement of that
activity, apply for the issuance of an extraction permit and, on its issuance,
may be required to perform such work as determined to be reasonably necessary
to correct any environmental impairment occasioned by such work.
   (C)   Operators now conducting operations governed by this section and for
which this section requires a permit may continue such operations, but within
60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives
shall make application for a permit. Failure to apply for a permit shall be a
violation of this section; however, on request and for cause, the City Council
may extend the time for the initial application to 90 days.
   (D)   An application for a mineral extraction permit shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the operator and owner of the land;
      (2)   The correct legal description of the property where the extraction
is proposed to occur;
      (3)   The names of all land owners owning property within one-half mile
of the boundary of the property described previously;
      (4)   Specification of the following, using appropriate maps,
photographs, and surveys:
         (a)   The physical relationship of the proposed mining area to the
community and existing community development;
         (b)   Site topography and natural features, including location of
watercourses and water bodies within the planned mining area;
         (c)   The quality and quantity of minerals to be excavated;
         (d)   The depth of water tables throughout the planned mining area;
and
         (e)   The average thickness of overburden in the area.
      (5)   The purpose of the operation;
      (6)   The estimated time required to complete the operation;
      (7)   The plan of operation, including processing (any operation other
than direct mining and removal), nature of the processing and equipment,
location of the plant, source of water, disposal of water, and reuse of water;
      (8)   Travel routes to and from the site;
      (9)   The plans for drainage, wind and water erosion control
sedimentation, and dust control; and
      (10)   The rehabilitation plan providing for the orderly and continuing
rehabilitation of all excavated land. Such plan shall illustrate, using
appropriate photographs, maps, and surveys, the following:
         (a)   The contour of land prior to excavation, after completion of
excavation, and after completion of rehabilitation;
         (b)   Those areas of the site currently used for storage of topsoil
and overburden;
         (c)   A schedule setting forth the timetable for excavation and
rehabilitation of land lying within the excavation facility; and
         (d)   The depth of all water bodies, the slope of all slopes after
rehabilitation, and a description of the type and quantity of plantings where
revegetation is to be conducted.
   (E)   A permit shall be issued for a period of five years and shall be
renewable for three-year periods thereafter.
   (F)   The mineral extraction permit may be terminated for violation of this
section or any conditions of the permit. No permit shall be terminated until
notification of violation or other cause for termination has been served upon
the operator along with an order that the condition be remedied. The operator
shall have 30 days within which to remedy the condition. No permit may be
terminated until the City Council has held a public hearing to determine
whether the permit should be terminated, at which time the operator shall be
afforded an opportunity to contest the termination.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to conduct mineral extraction after a permit has
been terminated pursuant to this section.
   (H)   Requests for renewal of the permit shall be made 60 days prior to the
expiration date. If application for renewal is not made within the required
time, all operations shall be terminated; and the reinstatement of the permit
may be granted only upon compliance with the procedures set forth in this
section for an original application.
   (I)   (1)   An extraction permit may be approved or renewed subject to
compliance with conditions in addition to those set forth in this section when
such conditions are reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with the
requirements and purpose of this section. When such conditions are established,
they shall be set forth specifically in the permit. Conditions may, among other
matters, limit the size, kind, or character of the proposed operation; require
the construction of structures; require the staging of extraction over time;
require the alteration of the site design to ensure compliance with the
standards; and/or require the provision of a performance bond by the operator
to ensure compliance with this division.
      (2)   Neither the issuance of a permit nor compliance with its conditions
nor with the provisions of this division shall relieve any person from any
responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property, nor
shall the issuance of any permit serve to impose any liability on the city, its
officers or employees, for any injury or damage to persons or property.
      (3)   A permit issued pursuant to this division does not relieve the
permittee of the responsibility of securing and complying with any other permit
which may be required by any other law, ordinance, or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 13.34) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.102 STANDARDS.
   (A)   Size. An extraction site under this section shall consist of at least
ten acres unless contiguous to existing permitted mining operation.
   (B)   Distance. Operation shall not be conducted within:
      (1)   Fifty feet of an existing street or highway;
      (2)   Thirty feet of the right-of-way of an existing public utility;
      (3)   Fifty feet of the boundary of any zone where such operations are
not permitted; or
      (4)   Thirty feet of the boundary of an adjoining property not in mining
use.
   (C)   Fencing. During operations, any area where collections of water are
one and one-half feet in depth or more or where excavation slopes are steeper
than one foot vertical to one and one-half feet horizontal and any other areas
where an obvious danger to the public exists shall be fenced when such a
situation has existed or will exist for a period of five working days or
longer.
   (D)   Appearance and screening.
      (1)   Machinery shall be kept in good repair and painted regularly.
      (2)   Abandoned machinery and rubbish shall be removed from the site
regularly.
      (3)   All structures that have not been used for a period of one year
shall be removed from the site.
      (4)   All equipment and temporary structures shall be removed and
dismantled not later than six months after termination of mining operation or
expiration of this permit.
      (5)   Where practical, stockpiles of overburden and materials shall be
used to screen the mining site.
      (6)   Where practical, the perimeter of the mining site shall be planted
or otherwise screened.
      (7)   Existing tree and ground cover shall be preserved to the extent
feasible, maintained and supplemented by selective cutting, transplanting, and
replanting of trees, shrubs, and other ground cover along all setback areas.
   (E)   Operating standards.
      (1)   Noise. The maximum noise level at the perimeter of the site shall
be within the limits set by the State Pollution Control Agency and the
Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.
      (2)   Explosives. The use and handling of explosives shall be coordinated
with the Police Department. Blasting shall occur only at hours specified in the
permit and at no other time.
      (3)   Air quality. Dust operators shall utilize all practical means to
reduce the amount of dust caused by the operation. In no case shall the amount
of dust or other particulate matter exceed the standards established by the
State Pollution Control Agency.
      (4)   Water pollution. Operators shall comply with all applicable State
Pollution Control Agency regulations and Federal Environmental Protection
Agency regulations for the protection of water quality. No waste products or
process residue, including untreated wash water, shall be deposited in any
lake, stream, or natural drainage system, except that lakes or ponds wholly
contained within the extraction site may be so utilized.
      (5)   Top soil preservation. All topsoil shall be retained at the site
until complete rehabilitation of the site has taken place according to the
rehabilitation plan.
   (F)   Rehabilitation standards.
      (1)   Generally. Rehabilitation shall be a continuing operation occurring
as quickly as possible after the mining operation has moved sufficiently into
another part of the excavation site.
      (2)   Slopes. All banks and slopes shall be left in accordance with the
rehabilitation plan submitted with the permit application. No rehabilitation
slopes shall be steeper than four feet horizontal to one foot vertical, except
that steeper slopes may be permitted in accordance with the rehabilitation plan
when the slopes are planned for slope-related usages, for example, ski and
sliding hills.
      (3)   Cover and planting. Slopes and graded and backfilled areas shall be
surfaced with at least three inches of topsoil and planted with ground cover
sufficient to hold the soil. Such ground cover shall be tended as necessary
until it is self-sustained.
      (4)   Slopes to water bodies. No slope descending to a water body shall
exceed one foot vertical to four feet horizontal, except that steeper slopes
may be permitted in accordance with the rehabilitation plan when human or
property safety is not endangered.
      (5)   Water bodies. All water areas resulting from excavation shall be
rehabilitated as follows:
         (a)   The bottom contour must be gradually sloping from the shoreline
to the deepest portion; and
         (b)   The water depth in the deepest portions must not be less than
five feet measured from the low water mark.
      (6)   Final elevation. No part of the rehabilitated area which is planned
for utilization for uses other than open space or agriculture shall be at an
elevation lower than the minimum required for gravity connection to sanitary
and storm sewer.
(Prior Code, § 13.35)
§ 154.103 FEES AND BOND.
   (A)   Fees. A schedule of fees for the examination and approval of
applications for mineral extraction permits and the inspection of mineral
extraction operations for compliance with conditions of this division and the
permit shall be determined by resolution of the City Council, which may from
time to time change such schedule. Prior to approval and issuance or renewal of
any mineral extraction permit, such fees shall be paid to the city and be
deposited to the credit of the General Fund.
   (B)   Performance bond.
      (1)   Prior to the approval and issuance of any mineral extraction
permit, there should be executed by the operator and submitted to the city an
agreement to construct such required improvements, to dedicate such property or
easements, and to comply with such conditions as may have been agreed to. Such
agreements shall be accompanied by bond with surety or condition acceptable to
the City Council in the amount of the established costs of complying with the
agreement.
      (2)   The agreement bond shall be provided for guaranteeing completion
and compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit within the time to
be approved by the City Council.
      (3)   The adequacy, conditions, and acceptability of any bond under this
section shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator or any official of the
city as may be designated by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 13.36)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 154.115 INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the grouping of land
parcels for development as an integrated, coordinated unit as opposed to
traditional parcel by parcel, piecemeal, sporadic, and unplanned approach to
development. This subchapter is intended to introduce flexibility of site
design and architecture for the conservation of land and open space through
clustering of buildings and activities.
   (B)   It is further intended that planned unit developments are to be
characterized by central management, integrated planning and architecture,
joint or common use of parking, maintenance, or open space and other similar
facilities, and a harmonious selection and efficient distribution of uses.
These regulations are not intended as subdivision regulations and should not be
confused as such.
(Prior Code, § 13.37)
§ 154.116 PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF A PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Generally. An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed
and processed based upon procedures established by §§
154.006 to
154.014.
   (B)   Development plan. The conditional use permit application shall be
accompanied by a development plan, drawn to scale of not more than 50 feet per
inch, showing the following:
      (1)   The entire outline, overall dimensions, and area of the tract
described in the application;
      (2)   The use, zoning, and ownership of all adjacent properties within
100 feet of the tract boundaries, including the location of all structures and
the right-of-way width and traveled width of all adjacent public roadways;
      (3)   The existing and proposed topography of the tract with contour
intervals not greater than five feet;
      (4)   The location, general exterior dimensions, and approximate gross
floor areas of all proposed buildings;
      (5)   The type of each use proposed to occupy each building and the
approximate amount of building area devoted to each separate use;
      (6)   The proposed location, arrangement, and number of automobile
parking stalls;
      (7)   The proposed location, arrangement, and general dimensions of all
truck loading facilities;
      (8)   The location and dimensions of all vehicular entrances, exits, and
driveways and their relationship to all existing or proposed public streets;
      (9)   The location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exits, and
walks;
      (10)   The general drainage system;
      (11)   The location and dimensions of all walls, fences, and plantings
designed to screen the proposed district from adjacent uses;
      (12)   The types of all ground covers;
      (13)   Standards for exterior finish, exterior lighting, location and
type of exterior signs, architectural style, and any other variables which will
be controlled in the design of buildings in the development area; and
      (14)   The applicant shall submit a proposed schedule of construction. If
the construction of the proposed planned unit development is to be in stages,
the components contained in each stage must be clearly delineated. The
development schedule shall indicate the starting date and the completion date
of the complete development plan.
(Prior Code, § 13.38)
§ 154.117 PROPERTY CONTROL.
   (A)   In order that the purposes of this subchapter may be achieved, the
property shall be in single ownership or under the management and supervision
of a central authority or otherwise subject to such supervisory lease or
ownership control as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Prior to the use or occupancy or sale of the execution of contracts
for sale of an individual building unit, parcel, tract, townhouse, apartment,
or common area, a declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions or an
equivalent document shall be filed with the city to be made prior to the
filings of declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers
of the county.
   (C)   Approval of the city shall be secured as to the documents described in
§
154.118(B).
   (D)   The declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions or
equivalent document shall specify that deeds, leases, or documents of
conveyance affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses, or
apartments shall subject such properties to the terms of the declaration.
   (E)   The declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions shall
provide that an owners’ association or corporation shall be formed and that all
owners shall be members of the association or corporation, which shall maintain
all properties and common areas in good repair and which shall assess
individual property owner’s proportionate shares of joint or common costs. This
declaration shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney.
The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of the
individual owner through establishing effective private control.
   (F)   The declaration shall additionally, among other things, provide that
if the association or corporation fails to maintain properties in accordance
with the applicable rules and regulations of the city or fails to pay taxes or
assessments on properties as they become due and if the city incurs any
expenses in enforcing its rules and regulations, which expenses are not
immediately reimbursed by the association or corporation, the city shall have
the right to assess each property its pro rata share of expenses. Such
assessments, together with interest and costs of collection, shall be a lien on
each property against which each such assessment is made; and, in addition,
each such assessment, together with such interest and such costs of collection,
shall also be a personal obligation of the person who was the owner of such
property at the time the assessment became payable.
   (G)   It is the intent of this subchapter to require subdivision of property
simultaneous with application for conditional use. The subdivision and/or
platting of land as planned unit development shall be subject to the
requirements for approval and recording with the County Recorder as have been
established by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.39)
§ 154.118 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Yards.
      (1)   The front and side yard restrictions at the periphery of the
planned unit development site at a minimum shall be the same as imposed in the
respective districts.
      (2)   No building shall be located less than 25 feet from the back of the
right-of-way line along those platted roadways.
   (B)   Roadways.
      (1)   Private roadways within the project shall have an improved surface
to 20 feet or more in width and shall be so designed as to permit city fire
trucks to provide protection to each building.
      (2)   No portion of the required 20-foot road system may be used in
calculating required off-street parking space.
   (C)   Utility connection.
      (1)   Water connections. Where more than one property is served from the
same service line, a shutoff valve must be located in such a way that each
unit’s service may be shut off by the city, in addition to the normally
supplied shutoff at the street.
      (2)   Sewer connections. Where more than one unit is served by a sanitary
sewer lateral which exceeds 300 feet in length, provisions must be made for a
manhole to allow adequate cleaning and maintenance of the lateral. All
maintenance and cleaning shall be the responsibility of the property owners’
association or owner.
   (D)   Building types. In addition to the conventional type of construction
and arrangements of building, structure uses and property as allowed by this
subchapter, it shall be permissible to cluster, adjoin, and attach structures
in a row house, townhouse, patio home, or similar style of development within
the planned unit development.
   (E)   Density increases. The number of residential units or structures
within the planned unit development may be increased under provisions within
this section if the City Council finds that the project meets the criteria
established for granting conditional use permits and if the amount of permanent
open space within the project area is at least 25% of the project area. As a
consequence of all planned unit developments’ planned and integrated character,
the number of dwelling units allowed within the respective zoning district may
be increased by 25%. The building, parking, and similar requirements for these
extra units shall be observed in compliance with this chapter.
   (F)   Subdivision and ownership. It shall be permissible within a planned
unit development to subdivide properties into lesser size parcels for
individual ownership and create common open space areas in undivided
proportions under joint ownerships. Such ownership arrangements are commonly
defined as condominium and/or cooperative developments. The joint area of the
project must conform to the minimum area requirements established for the
respective district classification which jointly applies to the property.
   (G)   Minimum project size.
      (1)   Within Residential Districts, a planned unit development shall not
be applied to a parcel of land containing less than one acre.
      (2)   Within a Commercial or Industrial District, a planned unit
development shall not be applied to a parcel of land containing less than two
acres.
   (H)   Public services. The proposed project shall be served by the city
water and sewer system if within 300 feet of existing lines, and fire hydrants
shall be installed at such locations as necessary to provide fire protection.
   (I)   Shoreland areas. For planned unit developments located within
shoreland areas, the preliminary plans must be approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to the final approval by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.40)
§ 154.119 REVIEW AND EVALUATION.
   The review and evaluation of a proposed planned unit development and
supportive materials and plans shall include, but are not limited to, the
following criteria.
   (A)   Adequate property control is established and provided to protect the
individual owner’s rights and property values and to define legal
responsibilities for maintenance and upkeep.
   (B)   The interior circulation plan plus access from and onto public rights-
of-way does not create congestion or dangers and is adequate for the safety of
the project residents and general public.
   (C)   A sufficient amount of usable open space is provided. A minimum of 35%
of the project area shall be dedicated to public or private open space and
shall be preserved and maintained by protective covenants.
   (D)   The arrangement of buildings, structures, and accessory uses does not
unreasonably disturb the privacy or property values of the surrounding uses.
   (E)   The architectural design of the projects is compatible with the
surrounding area.
   (F)   The drainage and utility system plans are submitted to the city and
are subject to approval.
   (G)   The development schedule ensures a logical development of the site
which will protect the public interest and conserve land.
   (H)   Principal and accessory uses and requirements are in compliance with
the district provisions in which the development is intended.
(Prior Code, § 13.41)
BED AND BREAKFAST DEVELOPMENTS
§ 154.130 INTENT.
   Because of changes in the character of the community and tourism trends
across the region, the city recognizes the need to allow bed and breakfast
developments within the city within certain zoning districts and with
performance standards that protect the integrity of the surrounding zoning
district and health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
(Prior Code, § 13.42)
§ 154.131 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   In addition to the minimum building code requirements established by the
State Uniform Building Code, the following minimum standards shall apply to all
bed and breakfast uses within the city.
   (A)   The bed and breakfast must be operated in the principal residence on
the subject property and not in an accessory structure.
   (B)   The bed and breakfast must be owner-occupied and operated by the
owner, his or her family, and up to two additional employees.
   (C)   The bed and breakfast shall not provide more than six guest rooms to
the traveling public for compensation.
   (D)   No cooking facilities shall be provided in any guest room, and the bed
and breakfast shall only provide meals and food service to registered overnight
guests.
   (E)   Prior to opening, the structure shall be inspected by the City
Building Official for compliance with the Uniform Building Code and with any
and all conditions established by the Planning Commission in granting a
conditional use permit.
   (F)   Off-street parking shall be provided and shall include a minimum of
one off-street parking space per guest room, one for each non-family employee,
and two for the principal residence. Parking shall be effectively screened from
adjoining residences by wood fencing or plantings and shall not be located any
closer than five feet from any property line. All off-street parking areas
shall be paved or hard surfaced.
   (G)   One on-premises advertising sign per street frontage shall be allowed
not exceeding two square feet per sign. The advertising sign shall be limited
to the name, address, and phone number of the facility. The sign shall be
placed on the principal structure and shall not be lighted.
   (H)   No guest shall be allowed to rent accommodations or remain in
occupancy for a period in excess of 14 days during any consecutive 90-day
period.
   (I)   No other commercial enterprises, including any home occupation, shall
be operated in the facility during the term of the conditional use permit.
   (J)   The conditional use permit shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission upon sale or transfer of the property from the owner/operator.
(Prior Code, § 13.43)
§ 154.132 REVIEW PROCESS.
   The application for a bed and breakfast shall be processed in conformity
with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.44)
HOME OCCUPATIONS
§ 154.145 INTENT.
   Home occupations are important to the community in allowing reasonable use
of residentially zoned property while protecting the commercial tax base within
the city. The city may allow a home occupation as a conditional use as outlined
in §
154.009 with the minimum performance standards set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.45)
§ 154.146 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely from the principal
structure on the property and not in an attached or detached garage or
accessory structures.
   (B)   The home occupation shall not require any internal or external
alteration to the principal structure that would not otherwise be customary for
the residential nature of the property.
   (C)   No persons other than persons residing on the premises shall be
allowed as employees of the home occupation.
   (D)   No mechanical equipment shall be employed that is not typically found
in the home.
   (E)   No exterior signage shall be allowed in excess of two square feet of
nameplate signage. The sign shall be limited to the name, address, and phone
number of the facility. The sign shall be placed on the principal structure and
shall not be lighted.
   (F)   There shall be no exterior display of equipment, materials, or goods
associated with the home occupation.
   (G)   No more than 20% of the living space of the dwelling shall be used for
the home occupation.
   (H)   Vehicles associated with the home occupation with advertising on them
shall be limited to two cars, trucks, or vans, which shall not be parked within
a public right-of-way.
   (I)   No retail sales shall be allowed on the property.
(Prior Code, § 13.46)
PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.160 INTENT.
   In all zoning districts, with the exception of allowed uses in the B-
1 District, off-street parking facilities for the storage of motor vehicles for
the use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the buildings or structures
erected, altered, or extended after the effective date of the ordinance from
which this chapter derives, shall be provided and maintained as prescribed in
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.47)
§ 154.161 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A loading space shall not be construed as supplying off-street parking
space.
   (B)   When units or measurements used in determining the number of required
parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to
and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall
require one parking space.
   (C)   Whenever a use requiring off-street parking is increased in floor area
and such use is located in a building existing on or before the effective date
of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, additional parking space for
the additional floor area shall be provided and maintained in amounts hereafter
specified for that use.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, FLOOR AREA, in the case of offices,
merchandising, or service types of uses, shall mean the gross floor area used
or intended to be used for services to the public as customers, patrons,
clients, or patients as tenants, including areas occupied for fixtures and
equipment used for display or sale of merchandise, less 10%.
   (E)   Off-street parking facilities for dwellings shall be provided and
located on the same lot or parcel of land or within 300 feet of the property.
   (F)   The location of required off-street parking facilities for other than
dwellings shall be within 300 feet of the building they are intended to serve,
measured from the nearest point of the off-street parking facilities and the
nearest point of the building or structure.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective
provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses
provided, collectively, such facilities shall not be less than the sum of the
requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance
with the table. The Planning Commission and City Council may allow shared
parking facilities by conditional use permit.
   (H)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the extension of or an addition
to a building or structure into an existing parking area which is required for
the original building or structure when the same amount of space taken by the
extension or addition is provided by an enlargement of the existing parking
area, or an additional area within 300 feet of such building.
   (I)   The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or
buildings, additions to new uses or buildings, and additions to existing
buildings shall be determined in accordance with the following section and the
space so required and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use.
   (J)   All parking spaces shall consist of a minimum of 180 square feet in
area (either ten by 18 feet or nine feet by 20 feet). Handicapped spaces shall
be sized and located according to the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
   (K)   Surface parking shall not exceed 125% of the minimum parking
requirement for the subject land use(s).
(Prior Code, § 13.48) (Ord. 2014-02, passed - -)
§ 154.162 PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Single-family, two-family, and townhouse units: two spaces per unit.
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings: two spaces per unit.
   (C)   Motels, motor hotels, hotels: one space for each rental unit plus one
additional space for each ten units and one space for each employee on any
shift. See also bed and breakfast provisions in §
154.131(F).
   (D)   Hospitals: two spaces for each bed and in addition one space for each
employee on any maximum shift.
   (E)   Medical, dental, or hospital out-patient clinics: one space for each
110 square feet of net floor area or seven and one-half spaces per doctor,
whichever number of parking spaces is greater.
   (F)   Office buildings and professional offices: one space for each 250
square feet of floor area.
   (G)   Manufacturing, fabricating, or processing of a product or material;
warehouse, storage, handling of bulk goods, post offices: at least eight
spaces, plus one space for every two employees on each shift based on maximum
planned employment or at a minimum one space for each 500 square feet of floor
area.
(Prior Code, § 13.49) (Ord. 2019-04, passed 8-26-2019)
§ 154.163 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   In all districts where off-street parking is required, the following minimum
standards shall apply.
   (A)   Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided.
   (B)   Such parking lots shall be maintained in a dust-proof condition, such
as concrete, blacktop or Class V material, or some other permanent surface, and
kept graded and drained to dispose of surface water.
   (C)   Whenever such a parking lot is located on a property zoned for
residential use, a setback of eight feet from the lot line shall be required.
   (D)   Necessary curbs or other protections against damage to adjoining
properties, streets, and sidewalks shall be provided and maintained.
   (E)   Plans for the construction of any such parking lot must be approved by
the city before construction is started. No such land shall be used for parking
until approved by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.50)
§ 154.164 LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   For required loading berths in connection with any structure which is to be
erected or substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution
of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, with a gross floor
area of 10,000 square feet or more, there shall be off-street loading provided
on the basis of the following.
 
Gross Floor Area       Minimum Required Loading Berths
(square feet)
10,000 to 16,000       1
16,001 to 40,000       2
40,001 to 70,000       3
70,001 to 100,000      4
Each additional 40,000 1
 
(Prior Code, § 13.51)
§ 154.165 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In all Residential Districts, detached accessory buildings shall be located
in the rear or side yard. When located within ten feet of the rear wall of the
principal building, they shall comply with all yard requirements applicable to
the principal building in the district. Where accessory buildings are to be
located more than ten feet from a rear wall of the principal building, they
shall not be located closer than five feet from an adjoining side or rear lot
line. All accessory buildings shall sit back a minimum of 20 feet from all
street right-of-way lines.
(Prior Code, § 13.52) (Ord. 2021-04, passed 7-26-2021)
§ 154.166 GARAGES.
   All garages shall, if the vehicle entrance backs upon a public alley, be set
back at least ten feet from the public alley right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 13.53)
§ 154.167 LIMITATION OF DOOR EXTENSIONS.
   In no case shall the door of any structure, building, or improvement, except
a fence, be erected or constructed so as to extend beyond any lot line.
(Prior Code, § 13.54)
§ 154.168 BUSINESS AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS.
   In Business and Manufacturing Districts, accessory buildings and uses may
occupy any of the ground area which the principal building is permitted to
occupy. Accessory buildings such as buildings for parking attendants, guard
shelters, gate houses, and transformer buildings, may be located in the front
or side yard in Industrial Districts. Parking of automobiles and other motor
vehicles is permitted in the front and side yards in Industrial Districts if
screened by a landscaped buffer five feet in width.
(Prior Code, § 13.55)
FENCING, SCREENING, LANDSCAPING, AND STORAGE
§ 154.180 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All materials and equipment, except as provided in the district
provisions of this chapter, shall be stored within a building or structure or
screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the
following:
      (1)   Usable laundry equipment (clothes lines);
      (2)   Recreational equipment and vehicles;
      (3)   Construction and landscaping material currently being used on the
premises; and
      (4)   Firewood storage as regulated in division (G) below.
   (B)   No fence, wall, structure, trees, or obstruction, other than chain
link fences with openings of one and five-eighths-inches to two inches not
exceeding 48 inches in height, shall be erected, established, or maintained on
a corner lot within a triangular area bounded by the lot lines and a line
connecting points on each lot line 20 feet from the intersection of such lot
lines. An object within this area not exceeding 30 inches in height as measured
from the centerline elevation of the street shall not be considered as an
obstruction to vision. This section does not apply to the B-1 District.
   (C)   No fence shall exceed eight feet in height, and in the case of grade
separation, the height shall be determined on the basis of measurement from the
average point between the highest and lowest grade.
   (D)   In all commercial and industrial districts adjacent to Residential
Districts and not divided by streets, there shall be provided along the
property line a 20-foot-wide planting strip composed of grass, trees, and
shrubs. A screening fence may be utilized when approved by the City Council.
Such fence shall not exceed eight feet in height nor be less than six feet in
height and shall screen up to 80% per square yard of area.
   (E)   In all zoning districts, the lot area remaining after providing for
parking, driveways, loading, sidewalks, or other requirements shall be planted
and maintained in grass, sodding, shrubs, or other acceptable vegetation or
landscaping techniques. In Residential and Business Zoning Districts, iron ore
tailings shall not be used on the surface for landscaping, parking areas,
driveways, and the like, but may be used as fill material. If iron ore tailings
are used as fill material, there must be sufficient covering on the iron ore
tailings so that the iron ore tailings are not exposed to the elements and so
that run off does not occur.
   (F)   Barbed wire or other fencing material designed with sharp edges shall
only be allowed within commercial or industrial zones within the city and shall
require a permit from the city. The Zoning Administrator or duly appointed
official shall inspect the fence to ensure that the safety of the public is not
negatively impacted by the fence design or installation.
   (G)   The stacking of firewood for personal or private use shall be allowed
on property within the city. No firewood piles or stack shall exceed the height
requirements for fencing in each zoning district. No commercial firewood
storage shall be allowed within a Residential Zoning District.
(Prior Code, § 13.56) (Ord. 2012-3, passed 9-24-2012)
UNPLATTED PROPERTY
§ 154.195 PROPERTY REGULATED.
   (A)   Any person desiring to improve unplatted property shall submit to the
city a survey of the premises and information on the location and dimensions of
proposed buildings, location of easements crossing the property, and other
information which may be necessary to ensure conformance to city ordinances.
   (B)   All buildings shall be so placed so that they will not obstruct future
planned streets which may be constructed by the city in conformity with
existing streets and according to the system and standards employed by the
city.
   (C)   The City Engineer shall review the lot survey to determine if the
division and creation of the property was in compliance with the statutes and
regulations applicable at the time of the division. If the City Engineer finds
that the division of the property was in compliance with legal requirements
applicable at the time of the division, the lot shall be recognized and
development of the property shall be allowed in conformance with the building
and zoning regulations of the city. If the City Engineer finds that the
division of the property was not in compliance with legal requirements
applicable at the time of the division, the lot shall not be recognized; and
current standards and procedures for platting shall be imposed.
(Prior Code, § 13.58)
DWELLING UNIT RESTRICTIONS
§ 154.210 SPECIFIED.
   (A)   Basements and cellars may be used as living quarters or rooms as a
portion of the principal residential dwelling.
   (B)   No garage, recreational vehicle, tent, or accessory building shall at
any time be used as a residence or dwelling unit, temporarily or permanently.
   (C)   Except in the case of planned unit developments, not more than one
principal building shall be located on a lot.
   (D)   On a through lot (a lot fronting on two parallel streets) or a corner
lot, both street lot lines shall be front lot lines for applying yard and
parking requirements.
(Prior Code, § 13.59)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 154.225 SEWER FACILITIES.
   All sewer facilities shall be connected to community sewer facilities when
available. Where sewers are not constructed or in operation, all sewer
facilities shall be connected to approved subsurface sewage treatment systems
in conformance with the State Department of Health code for on-site sewer
systems and §§
52.35 through
52.62 of this code. This provision shall not apply to temporary construction
sites or portable units.
(Prior Code, § 13.60) (Ord. 2015-03, passed 3- -2015)
§ 154.226 LIGHTING.
   Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign, or other
structure shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining
residential zone or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare from
floodlights or from high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding
shall not be directed into any adjoining property.
(Prior Code, § 13.61)
§ 154.227 SMOKE.
   The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated
by the State Pollution Control Agency standards, state regulations, and as
subsequently expanded, modified, or amended.
(Prior Code, § 13.62)
§ 154.228 DUST AND OTHER PARTICULATE MATTER.
   The emission of dust, fly ash, or other particulated matter by any use shall
be in compliance with and regulated by the State Pollution Control Agency
standards, state regulations, and as subsequently expanded, modified, or
amended.
(Prior Code, § 13.63)
§ 154.229 ODORS.
   The emission of odorous matter in such quantity as to be offensive shall not
be permitted. The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and
regulated by the State Pollution Control Agency standards and other applicable
state regulations.
(Prior Code, § 13.64) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.230 NOISE.
   All noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to
intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness and, as measured at any property
line, shall not exceed the minimum standards established by the State Pollution
Control Agency regulations.
(Prior Code, § 13.65)
HEIGHT AND YARD EXCEPTIONS
§ 154.245 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkhead, fire towers, drive-in
movie theater screens, grain elevators, silos, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water
towers, pumping towers, radio or television towers, monuments, cupolas,
steeples, and mechanical appurtenances pertaining to and necessary to the
permitted use of the district in which they are located shall not be included
in calculating the height of the principal structure.
   (B)   Outside stairways, fire escapes, fire towers, porches, platforms,
decks, balconies, boiler flues, and other similar projections shall be
considered as part of the building and not allowed as part of the required
space for yards, courts, or unoccupied space; however, this section shall not
apply to one fireplace or one chimney, not more than eight feet in length and
projecting not more than 30 inches into the allowable side yard space, nor
cornices, canopies, eaves, or other architectural features not exceeding 24
inches in width, nor to platforms, terraces, handicap accessible ramps, or
steps below the first floor level, nor to unenclosed porches or other ground
level unenclosed projections not over one story in height which may extend into
a front or rear yard not more than five feet, or into a side yard not more than
four feet, such platform shall be restricted to the five-foot required side
yard in the Residential District.
(Prior Code, § 13.66)
NONSHORELAND GRADING AND EXCAVATION
§ 154.260 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Excavation, placement, or movement of less than 50 cubic yards of dirt
outside of shoreland areas shall not require the issuance of a permit.
   (B)   Excavation, placement, or movement of more than 50 cubic yards of dirt
or fill materials on nonshoreland property shall require the issuance of a
permit from the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   The permit may be granted subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time
as feasible;
      (2)   Within a reasonable amount of time, temporary ground cover, such as
mulch, is used and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is planted;
      (3)   Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed; and
      (4)   Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards.
   (D)   The following exceptions to the permitting requirements listed in this
section shall apply to the nonshoreland areas:
      (1)   Excavation for basements associated with permitted construction
activities, subject to review and approval of the City Building Official;
      (2)   Filling associated with driveways not within the shore impact zones
or within floodplains; and
      (3)   Placement of topsoil for yards or gardens not exceeding 12 inches
of materials.
(Prior Code, § 13.67)
SIGNS
§ 154.275 INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter pertaining to signs is to establish
reasonable regulations for the design, construction, installation, and
maintenance of all exterior signs in areas under the jurisdiction of this
chapter in order to:
   (A)   Balance the right of individuals to identify their businesses and to
convey messages with the community rights against unregulated billboard or sign
construction or placement;
   (B)   Further the objectives of the comprehensive plan;
   (C)   Protect the public health, safety, and welfare;
   (D)   Reduce traffic hazards;
   (E)   Facilitate the creation of an aesthetically pleasing and harmonious
community and preserve the characteristics of the commercial, rural, and
residential character of the community;
   (F)   Protect property values; and
   (G)   Promote economic development.
(Prior Code, § 13.68)
§ 154.276 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   After June of 1998, no sign shall be erected or maintained:
   (A)   Which purports to be or resembles an official traffic-control device,
sign, or signal, or railroad sign or signal, or which hides from view or
interferes in any material degree with the effectiveness of any traffic-control
device, sign, or signal, or railroad sign or signal, or which obstructs or
interferes with the driver’s view of approaching, merging, or intersecting
traffic on a public or private road from a distance of 500 feet away, not
including private residential nameplate signs;
   (B)   Which prominently displays the word “stop” or “danger”;
   (C)   On any right-of-way, except as otherwise provided by law or allowed by
the Commissioner of the Department of Transportation, Commissioner of the
Department of Natural Resources, as outlined in state law, or the City Council;
   (D)   On private land without the consent of the owner or person with legal
authority;
   (E)   Which has flashing or moving lights; or
   (F)   Which is structurally unsafe, in disrepair, or is abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 13.69)
§ 154.277 DISTRICT PROVISIONS.
   The following chart depicts which sign types are allowed within each zoning
district.
 R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 B-2 I P
                        R-1 R-2 R-3 B-1 B-2 I P
Area identification     C   C   C   C   C   C X
Business identification X   X   X   P   P   P X
Construction            A   A   A   A   A   A X
Government              A   A   A   A   A   A A
Home occupation         A   A   A   A   A   A X
Illuminated             X   X   X   A   A   A X
Informational           A   A   A   A   A   A A
Off-premises            X   X   X   C   C   C X
Political               A   A   A   A   A   A A
Portable/temporary      X   X   X   A   A   A C
Wall                    X   X   X   A   A   A X
Window                  A   A   A   A   A   A A
A - Denotes allowed without a permit
C - Denotes conditional use permit required
P - Denotes permit required
X - Denotes prohibited sign
 
(Prior Code, § 13.70)
§ 154.278 ON-SITE GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No sign shall be placed closer than ten feet from side lot lines in
all districts.
   (B)   All signs shall meet structure setbacks from the ordinary high water
mark of public waters on all lake classifications (i.e., general development -
75 feet).
   (C)   No sign shall be placed within a delineated Type 3, 4, or 5 wetland.
   (D)   An illuminated sign shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any
private single-family residence.
   (E)   Temporary signs shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 30
calendar days during a one-year period from the time the sign was originally
installed.
(Prior Code, § 13.71) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.279 SIZE/DIMENSION STANDARDS.
   (A)   On commercially zoned property, the total area of all exterior
advertising on the property shall not exceed three square feet per lineal foot
of frontage along the public roadway.
   (B)   No single freestanding commercial sign shall exceed 128 square feet in
area per face.
   (C)   On residentially zoned property, the total area of all signage shall
not exceed four square feet per lot.
   (D)   The size for area identification signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet.
   (E)   A wall sign shall not exceed 25% of the total wall area of the
building facing the public roadway on commercially zoned property.
   (F)   Height requirements (dimensions to top of sign) are as follows:
      (1)   No sign within Residential or Public Zoning Districts shall exceed
ten feet in height above the existing grade;
      (2)   No freestanding on-site advertising sign in Commercial or
Industrial Zoning Districts shall exceed 25 feet above the existing grade; and
      (3)   No sign attached to structures in Commercial or Industrial Zoning
Districts shall project more than 25 feet above the finished grade or ten feet
above the height of the structure to which it is attached, whichever is less.
   (G)   No sign attached to a structure shall project more than four feet out
from the structure.
(Prior Code, § 13.72) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.280 NUMBER OF SIGNS.
   (A)   A commercially zoned parcel of land shall not be allowed more than two
freestanding signs advertising the business or operation on that parcel, not
including legally existing off-premises signs.
   (B)   No more than two residential identification signs shall be allowed per
residential lot.
   (C)   The number of area identification signs shall not exceed one per
entrance into the development.
(Prior Code, § 13.73) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.281 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   All signs not meeting the provisions of this subchapter, existing on June of
1998, shall be considered nonconforming signs and shall be subject to the
provisions in §
154.276 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.74)
§ 154.282 POLITICAL SIGNS.
   The placement and maintenance of political signs used during a campaign
shall be regulated by the provisions in state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 13.75)
§ 154.283 WINDOW SIGNS.
   The placement of window signs within a structure or building shall be
permitted in all zoning districts without a construction permit.
(Prior Code, § 13.76)
§ 154.284 OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   (A)   An off-premises sign shall not be located on property zoned other than
B-1, B-2, or I. No property shall be rezoned for the primary purpose of
erecting off-premises signs.
   (B)   No off-premises sign shall exceed 200 square feet per direction of
visibility. No stacked signs shall be allowed.
   (C)   Separation from off-premises and on-site advertising signs/road
setbacks are as follows.
      (1)   No off-premises sign or billboard shall be located closer than 600
feet from any other off-premises sign or billboard.
      (2)   All off-premises signs shall meet setbacks from the ordinary high
water mark of public waters on all lake classifications as follows:
         (a)   General development: 75 feet;
         (b)   Recreational development: 100 feet; and
         (c)   Natural environment: 150 feet.
      (3)   No off-premises sign shall be erected or constructed within 300
feet of an intersection of two public roadways.
   (D)   No off-premises sign shall be placed within a delineated Type 3, 4, or
5 wetland.
   (E)   No off-premises sign shall be located closer than 500 feet from a
park/playground, school building, church building, or private residence.
   (F)   No billboard or off-premises sign shall be constructed so as to exceed
35 feet in height from existing road grade as measured from the centerline of
the road surface, not including temporary sign extensions.
(Prior Code, § 13.77) Penalty, see §
154.999
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 154.295 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Any structure or use lawfully existing as of June 1998 may be
continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date,
except as hereinafter specified.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the placing of a structure in
safe condition when such structure is declared unsafe by the Building Official.
   (C)   When any unlawful nonconforming structure, or use of any structure or
land, in any district, is discontinued for a period of more than one year, or
is changed to a conforming use, any future use of said structure or land shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   When any nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire or other peril,
such as collapse, explosion, public enemy, act of war or act of God to the
extent of greater than 50% of its market value, and no building permit has been
applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged, in this case the
city may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in order to
mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
   (E)   Any structure which will, under this chapter, become nonconforming but
for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective
date hereof, or of amendments thereto, may be completed in accordance with the
approved plans; provided construction is started within 60 days of the
effective date hereof, or amendment thereof, and continues to completion within
one year. Such structure shall thereafter be a legally existing nonconforming
structure.
   (F)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or
related to a lawful nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary
nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or
intensify the nonconforming use.
   (G)   Any alterations and additions made to a nonconforming structure which
are not specifically allowed by M.S. § 462.357, Subd. le shall require a
variance.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 7-26-2021)
§ 154.296 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Any preexisting lot for which a deed, recorded contract for deed, or
other legal conveyance or plat has been recorded prior to the effective date of
the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be deemed a permittable lot
without requiring a variance, provided all the setbacks can be maintained and
sanitary provisions for well and sewage disposal can be maintained, and the lot
is at least 50 feet in width and contains at least 5,000 square feet.
   (B)   If two or more preexisting contiguous lots in total could not be
divided into two or more lots meeting 80% of the requirements of this chapter
for a new lot, and are held by the same owner on the effective date of this
chapter, they shall be considered one lot for building and zoning purposes. The
lots shall be tied together with a restriction filed with the County Recorder
permanently requiring that the lots be considered as one lot only. This shall
be required before a building permit is issued.
   (C)   Any lot, preexisting as described in division (A) above, which has
been assessed sanitary sewer and has a separate stub shall be considered a
permittable lot regardless of lot width; however, no lot containing less than
5,000 square feet shall be considered permittable. Commercial sewered lots with
a structure in existence on June of 1998, shall be permittable regardless of
width or area.
   (D)   Nonconformities in Shorelands. Nonconformities located within the
Shoreland Overlay District are subject to the provisions of M.S. § 462.357,
Subd. 1e, paragraphs (d) to (j).
(Prior Code, § 13.87) (Ord. 2021-04, passed 7-26-2021)
MANUFACTURED HOMES LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 154.315 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this amendment is to add provisions for manufactured homes in
Residential Zoning Districts.
(Prior Code, § 13.88)
§ 154.316 SPECIAL LAND USE PROVISIONS.
   Allow dwelling, manufactured housing in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts as
a permitted use as follows.
 
Use                    R-1 SF R-2 MF R-3 Man. B-1 CBD B-2 High I Ind P Pu
Dwelling, manufactured P      P                                      C
housing
C - denotes conditionally permitted use
P - denotes permitted use
Blank - denotes prohibited use
 
(Prior Code, § 13.89)
§ 154.317 AUTHORIZED PLACEMENT.
   The city authorizes the placement of manufactured homes in residential zones
within the city if such manufactured homes comply with the following
conditions.
   (A)   Manufactured homes shall comply with all zoning regulations for the
zone in which they are located.
   (B)   A building permit and any other required permits shall be obtained for
manufactured homes.
   (C)   Additionally, as to foundations, the following shall apply:
      (1)   Manufactured homes shall be placed on permanent foundations;
      (2)   Consisting of a cement slab or cement exterior foundations walls;
      (3)   Which otherwise comply with the Uniform Building Code (as between
this chapter and the Uniform Building Code, the more restrictive shall apply);
      (4)   Which are solid for the complete perimeter of the house;
      (5)   Consist of stone or block with wet joint mortar or interlocking
blocks;
      (6)   Plans and specifications must be those supplied by the manufacturer
of the home; and
      (7)   Must be submitted to the city for approval prior to commencing
construction.
   (D)   As to roofs, manufactured homes shall have a roof which is:
      (1)   Manufacturer-engineered;
      (2)   Manufacturer-approved;
      (3)   Pitched; and
      (4)   Have eaves of not less than six inches.
   (E)   All hitches and wheels must be removed.
(Prior Code, § 13.90) (Ord. 2013-4, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 2025-3, passed - -
2025)
§ 154.318 BUILDING WIDTH.
   The smallest horizontal dimension of the major portion of a dwelling which
does not include decks or patios.
(Prior Code, § 13.91)
§ 154.319 PLACEMENT IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   The city authorizes the placement of manufactured houses in residential
zones within the city if such manufactured houses comply with the following
conditions.
   (A)   Such houses shall comply with all zoning regulations for the zone in
which they are located.
   (B)   A building permit and any other required permits shall be obtained for
such manufactured housing.
   (C)   Such houses shall be placed on permanent foundations which comply with
the uniform building code as adopted in the state and which are solid for the
complete circumference of the house.
   (D)   Any such manufactured house shall have exterior siding extending from
within six inches of the dirt or two inches of concrete, which siding shall be
of a conventional exterior dwelling-type material.
   (E)   Any such manufactured house shall have a pitched roof covered with
shingles or tile and have eaves of not less than six inches.
   (F)   All such manufactured houses shall be built in compliance with M.S. §§
327.31 to 327.35, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 13.96)  (Ord. 2025-3, passed - -2025)
MOBILE HOMES
§ 154.330 IN GENERAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct on, move onto, or
place on any lot or tract of land in the platted portion of the city, any so-
called trailer house or mobile home for human habitation, commercial or
dwelling purposes, except at such place or places as the city may establish as
and for a trailer park, which trailer park when established shall be equipped
with all necessary water, sewer, power, and light facilities.
   (B)   Provided, however, that the before reservations and restrictions shall
not apply to manufactured modular homes provided the same shall have at least
600 square feet of floor space, with all hinges and wheels removed, be placed
on a permanent foundation sunk below the frost line and be connected with the
city sewer and water and otherwise comply with the Housing and Building Codes
of the city and thereafter assessed and taxed as real estate.
(Prior Code, § 13.93) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with §
10.999.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord.      Date   Description
No.    Passed
-         - -    Natural gas franchise granted to Northern Minnesota Utilities, a
                 division of UtiliCorp United Inc. (Prior Code, §§ 9.41-9.53)
-         - -    A cable television service permit is granted to Consolidated
                 Telecommunications Company. (Prior Code, §§ 9.54-9.58)
-         - -    A cable television service permit is granted to Charter
                 Communications Inc. (Prior Code, §§ 9.59-9.63)
                
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Section Code Section
M.S. Section            Code Section
12.01 et seq.           34.01
Ch. 13                  30.18,
                        111.18
14.57 to 14.70          110.23
15.99                   115.04,
                        154.011
18.77, Subd. 8          91.37
18.83, Subd. 2          91.37
65B.48, Subd. 5         71.43
84.82                   71.03
84C.01-05               151.46
88.16 to 88.22          91.70
89.01                   91.02
89.001                  91.02
89.51 through 89.64     91.02
Ch. 103B                53.01
Ch. 103F                153.001
103F.612 et seq.        154.005
103G.005, Subd. 14      153.035
103G.005, Subd. 15      53.08,
                        154.005
103G.245                153.021,
                        153.068
115.01, Subd. 5         52.01
115.01, Subd. 22        53.08
115.03, Subd. 5c        53.01
115.07                  52.01
115.55                  52.35
115.55, Subd. 11        52.58
115.56, Subd. 3(b)(3)   52.55
Ch. 116D                154.012
120A.05                 116.01
120A.24                 116.01
145A.05                 52.35
152.0263, Subd. 5       116.01
157.16                  110.03
157.16, Subd. 3d        110.03
Ch. 160                 70.18
160.22                  91.02
168.10                  152.14
168.13                  91.20
168.33                  30.03
Ch. 168B                152.14
168B.06                 152.14
                        70.15,
Ch. 169                 71.46,
                        71.47
169.01                  93.02
169.045                 71.40,
                        71.45
169.70                  71.44,
                        71.49
169.80 to 169.88        70.15
169.222, subd. 4(d)     71.60
186.07                  91.02
190.05, Subd. 5b        154.015
190.05, Subd. 5c        154.015
                        150.23,
Ch. 216D                150.24,
                        150.37
216D.01 through 216D.09 92.15
237.162                 150.15
237.163                 150.29
245.462, Subd. 23       116.01
303.06                  113.07
306.15                  95.11
Ch. 325J                113.01,
                        113.05
325J.07                 113.18
326B.148                150.02
Ch. 327                 154.053
327.31 to 327.35        154.319
Ch. 329                 112.03
333.01                  113.07
                        110.01,
                        110.02,
Ch. 340A                110.07,
                        110.10,
                        110.23
340A.14, Subd. 6        110.09
340A.24                 110.09
340A.26 Subd. 5         110.20
340A.28 Subd. 1         110.20
340A.29                 110.09
340A.101                110.03,
                        110.09
340A.301, Subd. 6(c)    110.09
340A.301 Subd. 6(d)     110.09,
                        154.005
340A.301, Subd. 6(i)    110.09
340A.301, Subd. 6(j)    110.09
340A.301 Subd. 7        110.09
340A.401, Subd. 1       110.09
340A.404, Subd. 4a      110.09
340A.404, Subd. 4b      110.09
340A.404, Subd. 5       110.09
340A.404(b)             110.09
340A.408                110.10
340A.408, Subd. 2b      110.09
340A.408, Subd. 3       110.09
340A.408, Subd. 5       110.10
340A.409                110.12
340A.414                110.22
340A.504                110.20
340A.504, Subd. 3       110.09
340A.504, Subd. 3c      110.09
340A.509                110.02
340A.707                110.06
340A.801                110.12
Ch. 342                 116.01,
                        116.02
342.01                  116.01
342.01, Subd. 50        116.01
342.11                  116.02
342.13                  116.02
342.13(c)               116.01
342.17                  116.01
342.22                  116.01,
                        116.02
342.22, Subd. 4(b)      116.02
342.22, Subd. 5(e)      116.02
342.24                  116.02
342.39, Subd. 2         116.04
343.20 to 343.40        90.19
344.02, Subd. 1(a)-(d)  153.007
Ch. 347                 90.19
347.50                  90.19
Ch. 349                 111.32
364.03, Subd. 3         113.05
364.06                  30.18,
                        111.18
364.09                  30.18,
                        111.18
375.51                  52.35
394.21 through 394.37   52.35
412.191, subd. 4        115.01
412.221, Subd. 6        70.01
412.221, Subd. 21       90.01
412.221, Subd. 22       50.01
412.851                 92.30
415.021                 10.002
                        52.25,
Ch. 429                 53.16,
                        150.34,
                        152.21
                        91.02,
429.101                 91.24,
                        91.43
437.02                  112.03
444.075                 52.26
444.075, Subd. 3        52.29
444.17                  52.25
444.20                  52.25
                        53.01,
Ch. 462                 150.34,
                        153.001
462.354                 154.008
462.357                 116.01,
                        154.001
                        116.03,
462.357, Subd. 1e       154.295,
                        154.296
462.357, Subd. 3        154.011
462.357, Subd. 6(2)     154.011
462.358                 151.10
462.358, Subd. 2b       151.10
462.3597                154.016
463.15 through 463.26   91.01
463.17                  91.23
471.82                  52.35
471.924                 113.07
Ch. 505                 151.03,
                        151.05
505.14                  92.30
514.67                  91.01
515A                    151.03
515B                    151.03
515B.1-106              151.46
Ch. 609                 10.105
609.02, Subd. 3         10.999
609.03                  10.105
609.0332                10.105
609.034                 10.105
609.293 through 609.352 114.08
609.415                 10.028
Ch. 617                 114.06
617.23 through 617.299  114.08
                        
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
1.1                10.001
1.2                10.002
1.3                10.003
1.4                10.004
1.5.1              10.005
1.5.2              10.006
1.5.3              10.007
1.5.4              10.008
1.5.5              10.009
1.5.6              10.010
1.5.7              10.999
2.1                30.01
2.2.1              31.01
2.2.2              31.02
2.2.3              31.03
2.2.4              31.04
2.2.5              31.05
2.2.6              31.06
2.2.7              31.07
2.2.8              31.08
2.2.9              31.09
2.2.10             31.10
2.2.11             31.11
2.2.12             31.12
2.2.13             31.13
2.3.1              30.02
2.4                31.14
2.5                30.04
3.1                51.01
3.2                51.02
3.3                51.03
3.4                51.04
3.5                51.05
3.6                51.06
3.7                51.07
3.8                51.08,
                   51.99
3.9                52.01
3.11               52.02
3.12               52.03
3.13               52.04
3.14               52.05
3.15               52.06
3.16               52.07
3.17               52.08
3.18               52.09
3.19               52.10
3.20               52.11
3.21               52.12
3.22               52.13
3.23               52.25
3.24               52.26
3.25               52.27
3.26               52.28
3.27               52.29
3.29               30.03,
                   95.01
3.30               95.02
3.31               95.03
3.32               95.04
3.33               95.05
3.34               95.06
3.35               95.07
3.36               95.08
3.37               95.09
3.38               95.10
3.39               95.11
3.40               95.12
3.41               95.13
3.42               95.14
3.43               95.15
3.44               95.16
3.45               95.17
3.46               95.18
3.47               95.19
3.48               95.20
4.1                150.16
4.2.1              150.17
4.2.2              150.18
4.2.3              150.19
4.2.4              150.20
4.2.5              150.21,
                   150.25
4.2.7              150.26
4.2.8              150.27
4.2.9              150.28
4.2.10             150.36
4.2.11             150.37
4.3.1              92.01
4.3.2              92.02
4.3.3              92.03
4.3.4              92.04
4.4                93.01
4.4.1              93.02
4.4.2              93.03
4.4.3              93.04
4.5.1              92.15
4.5.2              92.16
4.5.3              92.17
4.6.1              92.30
4.6.2              92.31
4.6.3              92.32
4.6.4              92.33
4.6.4.1            92.34
4.6.4.2            92.35
4.7.1              94.01
4.7.2              94.02
4.7.3              94.03
4.7.4.1            94.20
4.7.4.2            94.21
4.7.5.1            94.35
4.7.5.2            94.36
4.7.5.3            94.37
4.7.5.4            94.38
4.7.6              94.04
4.7.7              94.05
4.7.8.1            94.50
4.7.8.2            94.51
4.7.8.3            94.52
4.7.9              94.65
4.7.10.1           94.66
4.7.10.2           94.67
5.1                32.01
5.2.1              32.02
5.2.2              32.03
5.2.3              32.04
5.2.4              32.05
5.2.5              32.06
5.2.6              32.07
5.2.7              32.08
5.2.8              32.09
5.2.9              32.10
5.2.10             32.11
5.2.11             32.12
5.2.12             32.13
5.2.13             32.14
5.2.14             32.15
5.3                33.01
5.4.1              33.02
5.4.2              33.03
5.4.3              33.04
5.4.4              33.05
5.5.1              30.15 –
                   30.18
5.5.2              111.15 –
                   111.18
5.6.1.1            10.025
5.6.1.2            10.026
5.6.1.3            10.027
5.6.1.4            10.028
5.6.1.5            10.029
5.6.1.6            10.030
5.6.1.7            10.031
5.6.1.8            10.032
5.6.1.9            10.033
5.6.2.1            10.045
5.6.2.2            10.046
5.6.3.1            10.060
5.6.3.2            10.061
5.6.3.3            10.062
5.6.3.4            10.063
5.6.4.1            10.075
5.6.4.2            10.076
5.6.4.3            10.077
5.6.4.4            10.078
5.6.4.5            10.079
5.6.5.1            10.090
5.6.5.2            10.091
5.7.1              10.105
5.7.2              10.999
5.7.3              10.999
6.1                70.01
6.2.1.1            70.02
6.2.1.2            70.03
6.3                Ch. 72, Schd. I
6.4                Ch. 72, Schd. I
6.5                Ch. 72, Schd. I
6.6                Ch. 72, Schd. I
6.7                Ch. 72, Schd. I
6.8                70.40
6.9                70.41
6.10               70.42
6.11               70.43
6.12               70.44
6.14               70.45
6.15               71.01
6.16               71.02
6.17               71.03
6.18               71.04
6.19               71.05
6.20               71.06
6.21               71.07
6.23               71.20
6.24               71.21
6.25               71.22
6.26               71.23
6.27               71.24
6.28               71.25
7.7.1              34.01
7.7.2              34.02
7.7.3              34.99
8.1                150.01
8.2                150.02
8.3                150.03
9.1                111.30
9.2                111.31
9.2.1              111.32
9.2.3.1            111.33
9.2.3.2            111.34
9.2.3.3            111.35
9.2.3.4            111.36
9.2.3.5            111.37
9.2.3.6            111.38
9.11               113.01
9.12               113.02
9.13               113.03
9.14               113.04
9.15               113.05
9.16               113.06
9.17               113.07
9.18               113.08
9.19               113.09
9.20               113.10
9.21               113.11
9.22               113.12
9.23               113.13
9.24               113.14
9.25               113.15
9.26               113.16
9.27               113.17
9.28               113.18
9.29               113.19
9.30               113.20
9.31               113.21
9.32               113.22
9.33               113.23
9.34               113.24
9.35               113.25
9.36               113.26
9.37               113.27
9.38               113.28
9.39               113.99
9.41               TSO Table I
9.42               TSO Table I
9.43               TSO Table I
9.44               TSO Table I
9.45               TSO Table I
9.46               TSO Table I
9.47               TSO Table I
9.48               TSO Table I
9.49               TSO Table I
9.50               TSO Table I
9.51               TSO Table I
9.52               TSO Table I
9.53               TSO Table I
9.54               TSO Table I
9.55               TSO Table I
9.56               TSO Table I
9.57               TSO Table I
9.58               TSO Table I
9.59               TSO Table I
9.60               TSO Table I
9.61               TSO Table I
9.62               TSO Table I
9.63               TSO Table I
10.1               110.01
10.2               110.02
10.3               110.03
10.4               110.04
10.5               110.05
10.6               110.06
10.7               110.07
10.8               110.08
10.9               110.09
10.10              110.10
10.11              110.11
10.12              110.12
10.13              110.13
10.14              110.14
10.15              110.15
10.16              110.16
10.17              110.17
10.18              110.18
10.19              110.19
10.20              110.20
10.21              110.21
10.22              110.22
10.23              110.23
11.1               50.01
11.2               50.02
11.3               50.03
11.4               50.04
11.5               50.05
11.6               50.06
11.7               50.07
11.8               50.08
11.9               50.09
11.10              50.10
11.11              50.11
11.12              50.99
12.1               90.01
12.2               90.02
12.3               90.03
12.4               90.04
12.5               90.05
12.6               90.06
12.7               90.07
12.8               90.08
12.9               90.09
12.10              90.10
12.11              90.11
12.12              90.12
12.13              90.13
12.14              90.14
12.15              90.15
12.16              90.16
12.17              90.17
12.18              90.18
12.19              90.19
12.20              90.20
12.21              90.21
12.22              90.22
13.1               154.001
13.2               154.002
13.3               154.003
13.4               154.004
13.5               154.005
13.6               154.006
13.7               154.009
13.8               154.010
13.09              154.011
13.10              154.012
13.11              154.013
13.12              154.014
13.13              154.030
13.14              154.031
13.15              154.032
13.16              154.033
13.17              154.034
13.18              154.035
13.19              154.050
13.20              154.051
13.21              154.052
13.22              154.053
13.23              154.065
13.24              154.066
13.25              154.067
13.26              154.068
13.27              154.069
13.28              154.085
13.29              154.086
13.30              154.087
13.31              154.088
13.32              154.089
13.33              154.100
13.34              154.101
13.35              154.102
13.36              154.103
13.37              154.115
13.38              154.116
13.39              154.117
13.40              154.118
13.41              154.119
13.42              154.130
13.43              154.131
13.44              154.132
13.45              154.145
13.46              154.146
13.47              154.160
13.48              154.161
13.49              154.162
13.50              154.163
13.51              154.164
13.52              154.165
13.53              154.166
13.54              154.167
13.55              154.168
13.56              154.180
13.58              154.195
13.59              154.210
13.60              154.225
13.61              154.226
13.62              154.227
13.63              154.228
13.64              154.229
13.65              154.230
13.66              154.245
13.67              154.260
13.68              154.275
13.69              154.276
13.70              154.277
13.71              154.278
13.72              154.279
13.73              154.280
13.74              154.281
13.75              154.282
13.76              154.283
13.77              154.284
13.87              154.296
13.88              154.315
13.89              154.316
13.90              154.317
13.91              154.318
13.93              154.330
13.95              154.054
13.96              154.319
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No.     Date Passed  Code Section
2010-10-11.3 10-11-2010     150.40
                           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     94.01 –
                     94.05,
                     94.20,
                     94.21,
2012-2   6-25-2012   94.35 –
                     94.38,
                     94.50-
                     94.52,
                     94.65-
                     94.67
1-2012   7-9-2012    Ch. 72, Schd. I
2012-3   9-24-2012   154.180
2012-4   - -         30.15 –
                     30.18
2012-5   11-26-2012  71.40 –
                     71.50
2013-1   5-28-2013   154.015
2013-3   10-28-2013  31.13
2013-4   11-12-2013  154.317
                     114.01 –
2013-5   11-12-2013  114.14,
                     154.035
2014-01  3-24-2014   51.02
2014-02  - -         154.005,
                     154.161
                     95.13,
2014-04  4-14-2014   95.14,
                     95.19
                     95.02,
2014-05  7-14-2014   95.14-
                     95.16,
                     95.19
2014-06  11-10-2014  70.15 –
                     70.27
                     154.034,
2014-06a - -         154.069,
                     154.087
2014-07  - -         154.035
                     150.15,
                     150.16,
                     150.18,
                     150.21-
2014-08  11-10-2014  150.24,
                     150.29-
                     150.35,
                     150.38-
                     150.46
                     154.030,
                     154.034,
2015-01  - -         154.035,
                     154.068,
                     154.070
2015-02  7-13-2015   152.01 –
                     152.21
                     52.01,
                     52.04,
2015-03  3- -2015    52.35 –
                     52.62,
                     154.225
2016-01  - -         154.007
2016-02  - -         154.005,
                     154.035
                     151.01 –
                     151.10,
                     151.25-
                     151.29,
2016-03  - -         151.41-
                     151.46,
                     151.60-
                     151.64,
                     151.66,
                     151.67
2016-04  4-11-2016   110.07,
                     110.20
2016-06  5-23-2016   53.01 – 53.16, 53.99
2016-07  6-22-2016   154.034,
                     154.053
2017-01  - -         154.035
2017-02  - -         154.008
                     153.001 –
                     153.008,
                     153.020-
                     153.024,
                     153.035,
                     153.036,
                     153.050-
                     153.054,
2017-03  7-24-2017   153.065-
                     153.068,
                     153.080-
                     153.083,
                     153.095,
                     153.096,
                     153.110-
                     153.115,
                     153.130-
                     153.132
2017-04  - -         111.01,
                     111.02
2017-05  - -         154.034,
                     154.035
2018-01  - -         154.005,
                     154.035
2018-02  - -         154.005,
                     154.035
2018-03  - -         110.05,
                     110.13
                     154.005,
2018-04  - -2018     154.035,
                     154.036
2019-01  2-25-2019   31.09
2019-02  3-11-2019   154.008
2019-04  8-26-2019   154.162
2019-05  10-28-2019  154.005,
                     154.011
                     30.04,
2019-06  11-25-2019  50.11,
                     52.12,
                     52.29
2020-01  4-27-2020   154.005,
                     154.035
2020-04  8-24-2020   154.034
- -      1- -2021    154.034
2021-03  7-26-2021   151.65
                     154.165,
2021-04  7-26-2021   154.295,
                     154.296
2021-05  - -2021     31.13
2022-01  4-11-2022   154.008
2022-02  3-14-2022   71.60 –
                     71.62
2022-03  4-11-2022   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2022-04  5-23-2022   154.008
2022-05  7-25-2022   154.035
2022-07  12-12-2022  154.034
2022-08  12-27-2022  154.034
2023-1   1-23-2023   154.034
2023-2   2-27-2023   115.01 –
                     115.07
2023-03  5-22-2023   110.09
2023-04  9-25-2023   154.005,
                     154.035
2024-01  1-8-2024    115.02 –
                     115.05
2024-02  5-13-2024   50.11
2024-03  5-13-2024   52.29
2024-04  5-13-2024   51.03
2024-05  5-13-2024   52.12
2024-04  - -         154.005,
                     154.035
2024-07  12-23-2024  116.01 –
                     116.05
2025-01  5-12-2025   154.005,
                     154.016
2025-3   - -2025     154.317,
                     154.319
                     154.005,
2025-4   - -2025     154.035,
                     154.069
                    
 
