CITY CODE
of
DAWSON, MINNESOTA
2005
Code current through:
Ord. 329, passed 12-16-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Dawson, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 329, passed December 16, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 259
ORDINANCE ADOPTING CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF DAWSON
The city of Dawson adopts the provisions of the city code of Dawson, Minnesota,
2005. The provisions of this code shall be held to be minimum requirements and
shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
The 2005 city code is adopted for the orderly administration of city affairs,
for the purpose of protecting public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience and general welfare, protecting and preserving resources, promoting
orderly development within the city,
Section 1:   Administration
Section 2:   Boards And Commissions
Section 3:   Business And License Regulations
Section 4:   Public Health And Safety
Section 5:   Police Regulations
Section 6:   Motor Vehicles And Traffic
Section 7:   Public Ways And Property
Section 8:   Public Utilities
Section 9:   Franchises
Section 10:   Building Regulations
Section 11:   Zoning Regulations
Section 12:   Subdivision Regulations
Section 13:   Flood Control
Passed and approved:      /s/ Merlin Ellefson   
         Mayor
January 17, 2006
ATTEST:
/s/ Melva Larson   
City Clerk
1st Reading    January 3, 2006   
2nd Reading    January 17, 2006   
Publication    January 24, 2006   
CHARTER FOR DAWSON
Chapter One
Name, Boundaries, Powers, And Form Of Government
1.01   Name And Boundaries.
The City of Dawson, Lac Qui Parle County, Minnesota, shall continue to be a
municipal corporation under that name and with boundaries as are now or
hereafter established.
1.02   Powers Of The City.
The city shall have all powers which may now or hereafter be possible for a
municipal corporation in this state to exercise in harmony with the
constitutions of this state and of the United States. It is the intention of
this charter to confer upon the city every power which it would have if it were
specifically mentioned. The charter shall be construed liberally in favor of
the city and the specific mention of particular municipal powers in other
sections of this charter does not limit the powers of the city to those thus
mentioned. Unless granted to some other officer or body, all powers are vested
in the city council.
1.03   City Officers And Administration Of City Affairs.
Section 1: Form Of Government. The form of government established by this
charter is the mayor-council-manager plan. Except as otherwise provided by law
or this charter, all powers of the city are vested in the council. The city
manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city government
and shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all
city affairs.
Section 2: Mayor; City Council. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the
council, but shall not vote on matters requiring council vote unless there is a
tie vote. The council shall choose from its members a president pro tem who
shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. He shall serve as president
in the mayor’s absence and as mayor in case of the mayor’s disability or
absence from the city. The mayor shall be recognized as head of the city
government for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purpose of
serving civil process, and by the governor for purposes of martial law.
All ordinances and resolutions shall, before they take effect, be presented to
the mayor for his approval or rejection and if he approves the same, he shall
endorse his approval upon and sign the same, and such as he shall not approve,
he shall return to the council with his objections thereto by presenting the
same to the city clerk to be considered by the council at its next regular or
special meeting, and upon such return to the council, the vote by which said
ordinance or resolution was passed shall be reconsidered, and, after
reconsideration, it shall be passed by unanimous vote of the council, it shall
have the same effect as if approved by the mayor. In any case where an
ordinance or resolution is presented to the mayor and not returned by the mayor
within five (5) days, Sunday excepted, said ordinance or resolution shall have
the same effect as if approved by him.
Section 3: The City Manager. The city manager shall be the chief administrative
officer of the city. He shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of
his training, experience, executive and administrative qualifications. He need
not be a resident of the city at the time of his appointment, but may reside
outside the city while in office only with the approval of the council. The
city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be removed at
any time by an affirmative vote of a majority of the council; but after he has
served as manager for one year, he may demand written charges and a public
hearing on the charges before the council prior to the date when his final
removal takes effect. After the hearing, if one is demanded, the council shall
have unlimited discretion to either reinstate the manager or make his removal
final. Pending the hearing and removal, the council may suspend the manager
from office. With the approval of the council, the manager may designate some
properly qualified person to perform the duties of the manager during his
absence or disability or while the office is vacant.
Section 4: Powers And Duties Of The City Manager.
Subdivision 1. The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the
administration of the city’s affairs. He shall have the powers and duties set
forth in the following subdivisions.
Subdivision 2. He shall see that this charter and the laws, ordinances and
resolutions of the city are enforced.
Subdivision 3. He shall direct and supervise all departments, offices and
agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by law or charter.
Subdivision 4. He shall attend all meetings of the council and may take part in
discussion but not vote; but the council may, in its discretion, exclude him
from any meeting at which his removal is considered.
Subdivision 5. He shall recommend to the council for adoption such measures as
he deems necessary for the welfare of the people and the efficient
administration of the city’s affairs.
Subdivision 6. He shall keep the council fully advised on the financial
condition and the needs of the city and he shall prepare and submit to the
council the annual budget and capital program.
Subdivision 7. He shall submit to the council and make available to the public
a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city at
the end of each fiscal year.
Subdivision 8. He shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by the
charter and ordinance pursuant thereto.
Section 5. Subordinate Officers. There shall be a city clerk and such other
officers subordinate to the city manager as the council may establish by
ordinance. The city clerk shall be subject to the direction of the city manager
and shall have such duties in connection with the keeping of the public
records, the custody and disbursement of the public funds, and the general
administration of the city’s affairs as the council may prescribe. He may be
designated to act as secretary of the council and also as treasurer. The
council may by ordinance abolish offices which have been created by ordinance
and it may combine the duties of various offices as it may see fit.
Section 6. City Attorney. There shall be a city attorney who shall be a person
admitted to practice in all courts in this state. The city attorney shall be
legal counsel to the mayor, council and all the officers of the city upon all
subjects arising by virtue of this charter and the ordinances and resolutions
adopted in accordance therewith and upon all subjects arising from the
governmental function of the city. The city attorney shall represent the city
in all legal actions to which the city is party and shall perform such other
services as shall properly pertain to the office of city attorney.
The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council
and shall hold office at the pleasure of the council.
Section 7. Purchases And Contracts. The city manager shall be the chief
purchasing agent of the city. All city purchases and contracts shall be made or
let by the city manager when the amount involved does not exceed twenty five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00). All other purchases shall be made and all other
contracts let by the council after the recommendation of the city manager has
first been obtained. Contracts shall be made in compliance with the uniform
contracting law, and whenever competitive bids are required, the contracts
shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder. All contracts, bonds, and
instruments of any kind to which the city is a party shall be signed by the
mayor and the city manager on behalf of the city and shall be executed in the
name of the city. The council may by ordinance adopt further regulations for
the making of bids and the letting of contracts. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
1.04   City To Succeed To Rights And Obligations Of Former City.
The city shall succeed to all the property, rights, and privileges, and shall
be subject to all legal obligations of the city under the former charter.
(Charter, 11-2-1976)
1.05   Existing Ordinances Continued.
All ordinances and regulations of the city in force when this charter takes
effect and not inconsistent with this charter are continued in full force and
effect until amended or repealed. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
1.06   Ward Boundaries.
There shall be only one ward containing any land within the city of Dawson. All
city elections shall be at the Dawson municipal building. (Ord. 276, 4-21-2009)
1.07   Extending The Boundaries And Platting.
Whenever the owner of land abutting upon this city, or a majority of the owners
of land so abutting, or a majority of the owners of separate but adjoining
tracts of land, any one or more of which shall adjoin the city, shall petition
the city council to have such land included within the city and made a part
thereof, the city council, by ordinance, may so extend the city boundaries as
to include the same. The city council shall have the sole power to accept and
approve plats of additions to the city, and to prescribe the location and width
of streets and alleys in said additions.
The width of all streets and alleys of all additions to such shall be graded in
the same manner, and they shall conform to the grades and the width of existing
streets and alleys of this city, and no plat of any addition to this city shall
be accepted or approved by the city council until the grades of all streets and
alleys therein shall have been duly established under the direction of the city
council, and all filling, grading and excavation required to make such new
streets and alleys conform to the grades as established shall be done by the
owner of such new addition and without expense to the city, but the city
council may by a unanimous vote of all its members cause such grading, filling
or excavation to be made at the expense of the city or such part of such
grading, filling and excavation as they may deem necessary and just.
Whenever any person shall subdivide any piece of ground within the city, he
shall cause the same to be surveyed and platted in accordance with the
appropriate state law. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
Chapter Two
City Council
2.01   Boards And Commissions.
The city council shall have the power to establish the following commissions by
resolution:
1)   A zoning commission which will advise the city council on granting
building permits, variances, and conditional uses; it is within the power of
the city council to grant the commission power to enforce the building code;
2)   A planning commission which will take the place of the housing and
redevelopment board, which will advise the city council concerning the
development districts of the city of Dawson, tax increment financing, platting,
annexation and related matters;
3)   A charter commission, which will review the charter and ordinances for
deficiencies, and advise the city council on ways to correct the deficiencies;
4)   A park board, which will have the power to maintain the parks and
recreational areas of the city as well as any problems with plants or trees
within the city; and
5)   A library board, which will have the power to operate and maintain a
public library.
The city council itself shall be and perform the duties and exercise the powers
of such boards and commissions provided for by statute. (The city council may,
however, establish boards and commissions to advise the city council with
respect to any municipal function or activity, to investigate any subject of
interest to the city, or to perform quasi-judicial functions.) (Charter, 11-2-
1976)
2.02   Incompatible Offices.
No member of the city council shall be appointed city manager, nor shall any
member hold any paid full-time municipal office or paid full-time employment
under the city; and until one year after the expiration of his term as mayor or
councilman no former member shall be appointed to any paid appointive office or
employment under the city which was created or the compensation for which was
increased during his term as councilman. However, this section shall not be
construed to preclude the city council from establishing the position of
building inspector, allowing one member of the city council, if qualified, to
serve in that capacity with added compensation set by the city council. (Ord.
275, 1-20-2009)
2.03   Council Composition And Election.
The council shall be composed of a mayor and six (6) councilmen who shall be
qualified electors and who shall be elected at large. Each councilman and the
mayor shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is
elected and qualifies, provided, however, that the officers of the city at the
time of the adoption of this charter shall continue to hold their respective
offices for the duration of that term for which they were elected at the
municipal election last preceding adoption. (Ord. 277, 4-21-2009)
2.04   Vacancies.
An elective office becomes vacant when the person elected or appointed thereto
dies before taking office or fails to qualify, or the incumbent dies, resigns
in writing filed with the city clerk, is convicted of a felony, ceases to
reside in the city, or is adjudged incompetent by a court of competent
jurisdiction. In each such case, the city council shall by resolution declare
the vacancy to exist and may appoint an eligible person to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term, or set a special city election to fill the
vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. If the vacancy occurs in a
general election year, the city council may place on the general election
ballot the issue of filling the unexpired term of the vacancy. (Ord. 250, 6-4-
2002)
2.05   Salaries.
The mayor and councilmen shall receive such compensation as is fixed by the
council in accordance with law. The city manager and all subordinate officers
and employees of the city shall receive such salaries or wages as may be fixed
by the city council. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
2.06   Investigation Of City Affairs.
The city council may make investigations of the affairs of the city and the
conduct of any city department, office or agency and for this purpose may
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the
production of evidence. The city council shall provide for an audit of the
city’s accounts at least once a year by the state department in charge of such
work or by a public accountant. At any time the city council may provide for an
examination or audit of the accounts of any city officer or agency and it may
provide for any survey or research study of any subject of municipal concern.
(Charter, 11-2-1976)
2.07   Administrative Organization.
The city council may by ordinance establish city departments, offices, and
agencies and prescribe their functions. No power or duty conferred by this
charter upon a particular office or agency shall be transferred to any other.
(Charter, 11-2-1976)
Chapter Three
Conduct Of Meetings, Ordinances, Resolutions
3.01   Council Meetings.
The city council shall meet regularly at least once each month at such times
and places as the city council may designate by rule. The mayor or any three
members of the city council may call special meetings of the city council upon
at least twelve (12) hours’ written notice to each member. To the extent
provided by law, all meetings of the city council and its committees shall be
public and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records of the city
council at all reasonable times. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
3.02   Rules Of Procedure And Quorum.
The city council shall determine its own rules and order of business. A
majority of all members shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may
adjourn from time to time. The city council may by rule provide a means by
which a minority may compel the attendance of absent members. (Charter, 11-2-
1976)
3.03   Ordinances, Resolutions And Motions.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all legislation shall be by
ordinance. The votes of council members on any action taken shall be recorded
in accordance with statute. Except as otherwise provided in this charter of
Minnesota statutes, an affirmative vote of the majority of the quorum of the
city council shall be required for the adoption of all ordinances and
resolutions. (Ord. 263, 10-17-2006)
3.04   Procedure On Ordinances.
Every proposed ordinance shall be presented in writing. No ordinance shall
contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title.
The enacting clause shall be, “The City of Dawson ordains”. No ordinance except
an emergency ordinance shall be adopted at the meeting at which it is
introduced and at least three (3) days shall elapse between its introduction
and final passage. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
3.05   Emergency Ordinances.
An emergency ordinance is an ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation
of the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare in which the emergency
is defined and declared in a preamble and the ordinance is adopted by a vote of
at least five (5) members of the city council. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
3.06   Procedure On Resolutions.
Every resolution shall be presented in writing and be read in full before
adoption, unless the reading is dispensed with by unanimous consent. (Charter,
11-2-1976)
3.07   Publication Of Ordinances And Resolutions.
Every ordinance shall be published at least once in the official newspaper. To
the extent and in the manner provided by law an ordinance may incorporate by
reference a statute, state administrative rule or regulation of Minnesota, a
code or ordinance or part thereof without publishing the material referred to
in full. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
3.08   When Ordinances And Resolutions Take Effect.
Every resolution and emergency ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
publication or as it specifies. Every other ordinance shall take effect upon
publication or at such later date as it specifies. Every ordinance and
resolution adopted by the voters of the city shall take effect immediately upon
its adoption or at such later date as it specifies.
3.09   Official Publication.
The council shall annually at its first meeting of the year designate a legal
newspaper of general circulation in the city as its official newspaper in which
shall be published ordinances and other matters required by law to be so
published as well as such other matters as the council may deem it in the
public interest to have published in this manner.
3.10   Amendment And Repeal Of Ordinances And Resolutions.
Every ordinance or resolution repealing all or part of a previous ordinance or
resolution shall give the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or
resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. No ordinance or resolution shall
be amended by reference to the title alone but such an amending ordinance or
resolution shall set forth in full each section or subdivision to be amended
and shall indicate by appropriate type or symbols matter to be omitted or
added.
3.11   Revision And Codification Of Ordinances.
The city may revise, rearrange, and codify its ordinances with such additions
and deletions as may be deemed necessary. The ordinance code may be published
in book, pamphlet or continuously revised looseleaf form and copies shall be
made available by the council at the office of the city clerk for general
distribution to the public free or for a reasonable charge. Publication in such
code shall be a sufficient publication of any ordinance provision not
previously published as long as copies of the codification are available at the
office of the city clerk as published in the official newspaper for at least
two successive weeks.
Chapter Four
Oath Of Office, Bond, Enactment Of Charter
4.01   Oath Of Office.
Every elected or appointed official of this city, before entering upon the
duties of his office, shall take and subscribe an oath of office in
substantially the following form:
“I do solemnly swear to support the Constitution of the United States and of
this State, and to discharge faithfully the duties devolving upon me as (title
of office) of the City of Dawson to the best of my judgment and ability.”
4.02   Official Bonds.
The city manager, the city clerk, the city treasurer and such other officers or
employees of the city as may be specified by ordinance shall each, before
entering upon the duty of his respective office or employment, give a corporate
surety bond to the city as security for the faithful performance of his
official duties and the safekeeping of the public funds. Such bonds shall be in
such form and amount as the council determines and may be either individual or
blanket bonds in the discretion of the council. They shall be approved by the
city council and filed with the city clerk. The provisions of state laws
relating to official bonds not inconsistent with this charter shall be complied
with. Premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city.
4.03   Ordinances To Make Charter Effective.
The council shall by ordinance, resolution, or other appropriate action take
such steps as may be necessary to make effective the provisions of this
charter. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
Chapter Five
Nominations And Elections
5.01   The Regular Municipal Election.
The regular municipal election shall be held the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in each even numbered year commencing in 1988 at such place
or places as the city council may designate. The city clerk shall give at least
two weeks published notice of the time and place of holding such election and
the officers to be elected, failure to give such notice shall not invalidate
the election. (Ord. 203, 1-5-1988)
5.02   Special Elections.
The council may by resolution order a special election and provide all means
for holding it. The city clerk shall give at least two (2) weeks published
notice of a special election. The procedure at such election shall conform as
nearly as possible to that prescribed for other city elections.
5.03   Filing For Office.
No earlier than ninety days or later than thirty days before the municipal
election, any voter of the city qualified under the state constitution for
elective office may, by filing an affidavit and paying a filing fee of $5.00 to
the city clerk, have his name placed on the municipal primary election ballot
or, if there is no primary, then on the municipal election ballot.
5.04   Procedure At Election.
Subject to this charter and applicable state laws, the council may by ordinance
further regulate the conduct of municipal elections. Except as otherwise
provided by this charter and supplementary ordinances, general state laws on
elections shall apply to municipal elections.
Chapter Six
Initiative And Referendum
6.01   General Voter Authority.
The voters of the city shall have the right, in accordance with this charter,
to propose ordinances and to require ordinances to be submitted to a vote by
processes known respectively as initiative and referendum. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
6.02   Petitions.
An initiative or referendum shall be initiated by a petition signed by
registered voters of the city equal in number to thirty percent (30%) of those
who voted for mayor in the last preceding city election. Each petition shall be
sponsored by a committee of five (5) voters whose names and addresses shall
appear on the petition. A petition may consist of one or more papers, but each
paper circulated separately shall contain at its head or attached to it the
statement required by section 6.05 or 6.06, as the case may be. Each signer
shall sign their name and provide their date of birth and street address. Each
separate page of the petition shall have appended to it a certificate verified
by oath, that each signature is a genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be. The person making the certificate shall be a resident of the
city. Any person whose name appears on the petition may withdraw his name by a
statement in writing filed with the city clerk before the clerk advises the
council of the sufficiency of the petition. (Ord. 253, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord.
328, 10-20-2025)
6.03   Determination Of Sufficiency.
Immediately upon receipt of the petition, the city clerk shall examine the
petition as to its sufficiency and report to the council within twenty (20)
days. Upon receiving the report, the council shall determine by resolution the
sufficiency of the petition.
6.04   Disposition Of Insufficient Petition.
If the council determines that the petition is insufficient or irregular, the
city clerk shall deliver a copy of the petition, together with a written
statement of its defects, to the sponsoring committee. The committee shall have
thirty (30) days in which to file additional signature papers and to correct
the petition in all other particulars. If at the end of that period the council
finds that the petition is still insufficient or irregular, the city clerk
shall file the petition in his office and notify the sponsoring committee. The
final findings if the petition is insufficient or irregular shall not prejudice
the filing of a new petition for the same purpose nor shall it prevent the
council from referring the ordinance to the voters at the next regular or
special election at its option.
6.05   Initiative.
Any ordinance, except an ordinance relating to the budget or capital program,
the appropriations of money, the levy of taxes, or the salaries of city
officers and employees may be proposed by a petition which shall state at the
head of each page or attached thereto the exact text of the proposed ordinance.
If the council passes the proposed ordinance with amendments and a majority of
the sponsoring committee do not disapprove the amended form by a statement
filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days of its passage by the council,
the ordinance need not be submitted to the voters. If the council fails to
enact the ordinance in an acceptable form within sixty (60) days after the
final determination of sufficiency of the petition the ordinance shall be
placed on the ballot at the next election occurring in the city. If no election
is to occur within one hundred and twenty (120) days after the filing of the
petition, the council shall call a special election on the ordinance to be held
within such period. If a majority of those voting on the ordinance vote in its
favor it shall become effective thirty (30) days after adoption unless the
ordinance specifies a later effective date.
6.06   Referendum.
Any ordinance subject to the initiative may be subjected to referendum by a
petition which shall state, at the head of each page or attached thereto, a
description of the ordinance. Any ordinance upon which such petition is filed,
other than an emergency ordinance, shall be suspended in its operation as soon
as the petition is found sufficient. If the ordinance is not thereafter
entirely repealed, it shall be placed on the ballot at the next election or at
a special election called for that purpose, as the council determines. If a
majority of the voters voting thereon favors the ordinance, it shall go into
effect immediately or on the date specified in the ordinance; if a majority of
the electors voting thereon vote against the ordinance, it shall be considered
repealed upon certification of the election results. If a petition is filed
against an emergency ordinance, the ordinance shall remain in effect but shall
be repealed if a majority of the voters voting on the ordinance vote against
it.
Chapter Seven
Taxation And Finances
7.01   Council To Control Finances.
The council shall have full authority over the financial affairs of the city.
It shall provide for the collection of all revenues and other assets, the
auditing and settlement of accounts, the safekeeping and disbursement of public
monies.
7.02   Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the city shall be the calendar year.
7.03   System Of Taxation.
Subject to the state constitution, and except as forbidden by it or by state
law, the council shall have full power to provide by ordinance a system of
local taxation. This authority includes the power by ordinance to assess, levy,
and collect taxes on all subjects or objects of taxation except as limited or
prohibited by the state constitution, by this charter or by laws imposing
restrictions upon the city irrespective of charter provisions.
7.04   Submission Of Budget.
Annually the city manager shall submit to the council his recommended budget in
accordance with the budget calendar to be established by ordinance or, in the
absence of ordinance, by September 1.
The budget shall provide a complete fiscal plan for all city funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or
charter, shall be in such form as the manager deems desirable or the council
requires. It shall include a summary and shall include in detail all estimated
income and all proposed expenditures, including debt service and comparative
figures for the current fiscal year, actual and estimated, of the preceding
fiscal year. In addition to showing proposed expenditures for current
operations, it shall show proposed capital expenditures to be made during the
year and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure. For
each utility operated by the city, the budget shall show anticipated net
surplus or deficit and the proposed method of its disposition; in subsidiary
budgets for each such utility giving income and expenditure information shall
be included or attached as appendices. The total proposed operating budget to
be provided from the property tax shall not exceed the amount authorized by law
and this charter. Consistent with these provisions, the budget shall contain
such information and be in the form prescribed by ordinance and by law.
7.05   Capital Improvement Program.
The city manager shall prepare and submit to the council a recommended five-
year capital improvement program no later than June 1 each year. The capital
improvement program shall include a list of all capital improvements proposed
to be undertaken during the next five (5) fiscal years, with supporting
information as to the necessity for such improvements, estimates, methods of
financing, and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and the
estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining facilities to be constructed
or acquired. This information shall be revised and extended each year for
capital improvements still pending or in process. The council shall hold a
public hearing on the capital improvement program and adopt it with or without
amendment no later than August 15.
7.06   Council Action On Budget.
The budget shall be considered at the first regular monthly meeting of the
council in September and at subsequent meetings until the budget is adopted for
the ensuing year. The meetings shall be so conducted as to give interested
citizens a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The council may revise the
proposed budget but no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized
expenditures to an amount greater than the estimated income. The council shall
adopt the budget not later than the first week in October by a resolution which
shall set forth the total for each budgeted fund and each department with such
segregation as to objects and purposes of expenditures as the council deems
necessary for the purposes of budget control. The council shall also adopt a
resolution levying the amount of taxes provided in the budget and the city
clerk shall certify the tax resolution to the county auditor in accordance with
law not later than October 10. Adoption of the budget resolution shall
constitute appropriations at the beginning of the fiscal year, the sum was
fixed in the resolution for the several purposes named.
7.07   Enforcement Of The Budget.
The city manager shall enforce strictly the provisions of the budget. He shall
not authorize any payment or the incurring of any obligation by the city unless
an appropriation has been made in the budget resolution and there is sufficient
unexpended balance left after deducting the total past expenditures and
encumbrances against the appropriations. No officer or employee of the city
shall place any order or make any purchase except for purposes and to the
amount authorized in the budget resolution. No checks shall be issued or
transfer made to any account other than the one owned by the city until the
claim to which it relates has been supported by an itemized bill, payroll, or
time sheet or other document approved and signed by the responsible city
officer who vouches for its correctness and reasonableness.
7.08   Alterations In The Budget.
After the budget resolution has been adopted, the council shall not increase
the amounts fixed in the resolution beyond the estimated receipts except to the
extent that the annual receipts exceed the estimate. At any time the council
may, by resolution approved by a majority of its members, reduce the sums
appropriated for any purpose by the budget resolution or authorize the transfer
of sums from unencumbered balances of appropriations in the budget resolution
to other purposes.
7.09   Funds.
There shall be maintained in the city treasury a general fund and such other
funds as may be required by statute, ordinance, or resolution. The council may,
by ordinance or resolution, make interfund loans, except from trust and agency
funds, as it may deem necessary and appropriate.
7.10   City Indebtedness.
Except as provided in sections 7.11 and 7.12, no obligation shall be issued to
pay current expenses, but the city may issue and sell obligations for any other
municipal purpose in accordance with law and within the limitations prescribed
by law. Except in the case of obligations for which an election is not required
by this charter or by law, no such obligation shall be issued and sold without
the approval of the majority of the voters voting on the question at a general
election or special election.
7.11   Tax Anticipation Certificates.
At any time after January 1 the council may issue certificates of indebtedness
in anticipation of the collection of taxes levied the previous year for any
fund not yet collected. The total amount of certificates issued against any
fund for any year together with interest thereon until maturity shall not
exceed the total current taxes for the fund uncollected at the time of
issuance. Such certificates shall be issued on such terms and conditions as the
council may determine, but they shall become due not later than April 1 of the
year following their issuance. The proceeds of the tax levied for the fund
against which the tax anticipation certificates are issued in the full faith
and credit of the city shall be irrevocably pledged for the redemption of the
certificates.
7.12   Emergency Debt Certificates.
If in any year the receipts from taxes or other sources shall from some
unforeseen cause become insufficient for the ordinary expenses of the city, or
if any calamity or other public emergency necessitates the making of
extraordinary expenditures, the council may by ordinance issue on such terms
and in such manner as the council determines emergency debt certificates to run
not to exceed three (3) years. A tax sufficient to pay principal and interest
on such certificates with the margin required by law shall be levied as
required by law. The ordinance authorizing an issue of such emergency debt
certificates shall state the nature of the emergency and be approved by at
least five (5) members of the council. It may be passed as an emergency
ordinance.
7.13   Contribution To A Hospital District.
The city council shall have the power to grant up to $10,000.00 annually from
the municipal liquor dispensary fund to the Dawson area hospital district for
purposes of construction, maintenance, or operation of a public hospital or
health care facility.
Chapter Eight
Public Improvements And Special Assessments
8.01   Power To Make Improvements And Levy Assessments.
The city may make any type of public improvement not forbidden by laws and levy
special assessments to pay all or part of the cost of such improvements as are
of a local character. The total assessments for any local improvement may not
exceed the cost of the improvement, including all costs and expenses connected
therewith, with interest. No assessment shall exceed the benefits to the
property.
8.02   Assessments For Services.
The council may provide by ordinance that the costs of city services to
streets, sidewalks, or other public or private property may be assessed against
property benefited and collected in the same manner as special assessments.
8.03   Local Improvement Procedure.
When the city undertakes any local improvements to which the state local
improvement code applies, it shall comply with the provisions of the law. The
council may by ordinance prescribe the procedures to be followed in making any
other local improvement and levying assessments therefor.
Chapter Nine
Eminent Domain
9.01   Acquisition Of Property.
The city may acquire, by purchase, gift, condemnation or otherwise, any
property, either within or without its boundaries, that may be needed by the
city.
Chapter Ten
Franchises
10.01   Franchises Required.
Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, firm, or corporation shall
place or maintain any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures in, over, upon, or
under any street or public place for the purpose of operating a public utility
or for any other purposes without a franchise therefor from the city. Franchise
shall only be granted by ordinance, which shall not be an emergency ordinance.
Every ordinance granting a franchise shall contain all terms and conditions of
the franchise. The grantee shall bear the cost of publication of the franchise
ordinance and shall make a sufficient deposit with the clerk to guarantee
publication before the ordinance is passed.
10.02   Term.
No exclusive or perpetual franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise for a
term exceeding twenty (20) years shall be effective until approved by a
majority of the electors voting thereon.
10.03   Public Hearing.
Before any franchise ordinance is adopted or any rates, fares, or prices to be
charged by a public utility are fixed by the council, the council shall hold a
public hearing on the matter. Notice of such hearing shall be published at
least once in the official newspaper not less than ten (10) days prior to the
public hearing.
10.04   Power Of Regulation Reserved.
Subject to any applicable law the council may by ordinance reasonably regulate
and control the exercise of any franchise, including the maximum rates, fares,
or prices to be charged by the grantee. No franchise value shall be included in
the valuation of the grantee’s property in regulating utility rates, fares, or
prices under any applicable law, ordinance, or regulation or in proceedings for
municipal acquisition of the grantee’s property by purchase or eminent domain.
10.05   Renewals Or Extensions.
Every renewal or modification of a franchise, including an existing franchise,
shall be subject to the same limitations and shall be granted in the same
manner as a new franchise.
10.06   Utilities Commission.
The city council shall be empowered by ordinance to form a utilities commission
which shall determine the rates and schedules of any franchises granted by the
council. Any recommendations regarding rates made by the franchise utilities
commission shall be followed by the council unless there is a contravening
reason which would make the application of such recommendations unjust and
perverse to public policy.
Chapter Eleven
Public Ownership And Operation Of Utilities
11.01   Acquisition And Operation Of Utilities.
The city may own and operate any water, gas, light, power, heat, telephone,
transportation, or other public utility for supplying its own needs, for
utility service or for supplying utility service to private consumers or other
governmental agencies. It may construct all facilities reasonably needed for
that purpose and may acquire any existing utility properties so needed. The
city shall not acquire or construct any public utility unless the proposition
to acquire or to construct it has been incorporated in ordinance and adopted by
the council. Such ordinance shall not be an emergency ordinance.
11.02   Regulations And Rates.
The council may by ordinance fix rates, fares and prices for any municipal
utility; prescribe the time and manner of payment for any such service; make
such other regulations as may be necessary; and prescribe penalties for
violations of such regulations.
11.03   Lease Of Plant.
The council may by ordinance contract with any person, firm, or corporation for
the operation of any municipal utility for a term not to exceed ten (10) years.
Such ordinance shall not be an emergency ordinance.
11.04   Sale Of Public Utility.
No public utility owned by the city shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by
the city unless the full terms of the proposition of sale or other disposition
are embodied in an ordinance approved by a majority of the voters voting
thereon in a general or special election. Any sale, lease or an abandonment of
a waterworks or a light plant shall be subject, in addition, to the
requirements of state law.
Chapter Twelve
General Provisions
12.01   Official Interest In Contracts.
Except as otherwise permitted by law, no officer of the city who is authorized
to take part in any manner in any contract with the city shall voluntarily have
a personal financial interest in or personally benefit from such contract.
12.02   Sale Of Real Property.
No property of the city shall be disposed of except by resolution. The net cash
proceeds of any sale of the property shall be used to retire any outstanding
indebtedness incurred by the city in the acquisition or improvement of the
property. Any remaining net proceeds shall be used to finance other
improvements in the capital improvement budget or to retire any other bond of
indebtedness.
12.03   Vacation Of Streets.
The council may by ordinance vacate any street or alley thereof within the
city. Such vacation may be made only after published notice and an opportunity
for property owners and the public to be heard has been given, and upon such
further terms and by such procedure as the council by ordinance may prescribe.
A notice of completion of such proceedings shall be filed with the proper
county officer in accordance with law.
12.04   Pending Condemnations, Improvements And Assessments.
Any condemnation, improvement or assessment proceeding in progress when this
charter takes effect shall be continued and completed under the laws under
which such proceedings were begun. All assessments made by the city prior to
the time when this charter takes effect shall be collected as if this charter
had not been adopted.
12.05   Effective Date.
This charter becomes effective upon adoption by the electorate of the city of
Dawson. (Charter, 11-2-1976)
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
DAWSON CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Purpose
1-1-3: Acceptance
1-1-4: Amendments
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-6: Use And Sale
1-1-7: Supplemental Materials
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Dawson. This city code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the DAWSON CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-4 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2005 Code)
1-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this code is to effect a general revision and codification of
the ordinances of the city so as to revise and present in an orderly manner the
provisions of the ordinances of a general nature of the city, add such
provisions as may promote the efficient operation of the city and the public
welfare, and eliminate obsolete and unneeded ordinance provisions. (1982 Code §
1.112)
1-1-3: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2005 Code)
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Code Amendments: This code may be amended by subsequent ordinances.
Amendments shall be deemed incorporated into this code, and repeals shall take
effect, as of the effective date of the amending ordinance. Reference to this
code, or any part of it, shall be deemed to include this code as amended.
Amendments shall be constructed in accordance with the manifest intent of the
city council in their enactment even though the amendments are irregular or
deficient for some reason in the manner in which they amend this code. (1982
Code § 1.511)
   B.   Transition Provisions:
      1.   Existing Rights And Liabilities: The repeal of any ordinance or
portion of it upon the enactment of this code, or of any amendment to it, shall
not affect in any manner rights and liabilities existing at that time. Any act
done, offense committed, right accruing, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred or assessed prior to the effective date of this code or of
any amendment shall not be affected by the enactment of this code or the
amendment. (1982 Code § 1.711)
      2.   Continuing Of Existing Rates And Requirements: This code provides
that the council shall, by resolution, establish various rates, requirements
and other matters. Until the city council does so on any subject, the rates,
requirements and other matters required to be established by resolution shall
remain, insofar as they remain applicable, the same as they existed prior to
the enactment of this code. (1982 Code § 1.712)
   C.   Form; Codification: Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth
the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended,
and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement
pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code.
All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to
the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion
in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall
be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
city code. (2005 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any
person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every effort to
maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the city
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the
city council. (2005 Code)
1-1-6: USE AND SALE:
   A.   Copies For Public Inspection: The city clerk shall keep copies of this
code and amendments to it for public inspection. (1982 Code § 1.211)
   B.   Sale And Distribution: The city clerk shall keep copies of this code
and amendments to it for sale at a reasonable charge. The city clerk may
distribute without charge copies of this code and amendments to it for use by
public officials, the judiciary and other persons when the municipal welfare
will be served by doing so. (1982 Code § 1.212)
1-1-7: SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS:
Any table of contents, appendices, index and all other supplemental materials
which may from time to time be printed with this code shall not be considered a
part of this code. They are intended for convenience only. (1982 Code § 1.313)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Conflict With Charter
1-2-5: Severability Clause
1-2-6: Notice Of Asserted Invalidity
1-2-7: No Right Of Action Against City Created
1-2-8: Notice Requirements
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (2005 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2005 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (2005 Code)
1-2-4: CONFLICT WITH CHARTER:
In case any provision of this code conflicts with any provision of the city
charter, the charter provision shall control. (1982 Code § 1.416)
1-2-5: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
Unless otherwise provided with respect to particular provisions, all provisions
of this code shall be severable. If any provision of this code is held invalid
or suspended, the remaining provisions shall remain valid and in operation
unless the court finds that the valid provisions are so essentially connected
with and so dependent upon the void provision that the court cannot presume the
council would have enacted the remaining valid provisions without the void one,
or unless the court finds the remaining valid provisions, standing alone, are
incomplete and are incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of
the city council. (1982 Code § 1.418)
1-2-6: NOTICE OF ASSERTED INVALIDITY:
When the validity of any part of this code is drawn into question in any action
to which the city is not a party, the party asserting the invalidity shall
notify the city attorney of such contention as soon as practicable. (1982 Code
§ 1.419)
1-2-7: NO RIGHT OF ACTION AGAINST CITY CREATED:
This code includes various provisions for licensure, approval, investigation,
inspection and regulation of businesses and activities. These provisions have
been enacted to assist the city in promoting public health, safety and welfare.
It is not the intention of the city council that any person shall rely upon the
city or its agents in any licensure, approval, investigation, inspection or
other regulation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, no provision of this
code relieves any person of the responsibility for that person's own protection
or the protection of others. Nor shall any provision create any right of action
against the city or its agents that would not exist without the provision.
Neither the city nor its agents shall have any liability by reason of the
enforcement of, or failure to enforce, any provision of this code. (1982 Code §
1.420)
1-2-8: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever any provision of this code requires notice to be given to any person,
the notice shall be in writing. Unless personal, published, posted or some
other method of notice in required, notice may be given by regular or certified
mail at the person's last known address, by delivery to the person personally,
by leaving the notice for the person at the person's usual place of abode with
a person of suitable age and discretion then residing there, or by any method
of service sufficient for service of process in a civil suit. Published or
posted notice may be given where permitted by law, charter, or this code, and
shall be given when required. Failure to give notice or defects in the notice
shall not invalidate the proceeding for which notice was required if a good
faith effort was made to give the notice required, if due to special
circumstances the notice could not be given, if the person not receiving notice
or receiving defective notice was not prejudiced thereby or if the person
received actual notice in some other manner. (1982 Code § 1.421)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Grammar And Punctuation
1-3-3: Definitions, General
1-3-4: Substantially Similar Prior Provisions
1-3-5: Irreconcilable Provisions
1-3-6: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   In construing this code, the following rules shall govern unless their
observance would involve a construction inconsistent with the manifest intent
of the city council or be repugnant to the context of the relevant provisions
of this code:
      1.   Words and phrases shall be construed according to rules of grammar
and according to their common and approved usage, but technical words and
phrases and such others as have acquired a special meaning or are defined in
this code shall be construed according to their special meaning or definition.
      2.   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      3.   Words used in the past or present tense include the future.
      4.   General words are restricted in meaning by particular words. (1982
Code § 1.411)
      5.   As used in this code, "may" is permissive and "shall" is mandatory,
except that, unless expressly provided otherwise, "shall" is directory when
used with reference to the duties of any officer or employee of the city. (1982
Code § 1.412)
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2005 Code)
1-3-2: GRAMMAR AND PUNCTUATION:
Grammatical errors shall not invalidate any provision of this code. A
transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when a sentence is
without meaning as it stands. Punctuation shall not control over the intent of
the city council in the enactment of a provision. Words and phrases which do
not conflict with the obvious purpose and intent of a provision nor in any way
affect its scope and operation may be added when necessary to the proper
interpretation of the provision. (1982 Code § 1.413)
1-3-3: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
When used in this code, the following terms shall have the meaning given to
them in this section, except as further defined in relation to specific
provisions of this code, or unless another intention clearly appears:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CHARTER: The city charter of the city of Dawson.
CITY: The city of Dawson, county of Lac Qui Parle, state of Minnesota.
CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Dawson.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Dawson.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Dawson.
COUNTY: The county of Lac Qui Parle, state of Minnesota.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Dawson".
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Dawson".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, organization or
corporation. It also includes any executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or
other representative appointed by law. As applied to partnerships, associations
and organizations, it includes the partners, members and employees. As applied
to corporations, it includes the officers, agents and employees.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Minnesota.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TREASURER: The city treasurer of the city of Dawson.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1982 Code § 1.417; amd. 2005 Code)
1-3-4: SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR PRIOR PROVISIONS:
Insofar as provisions of this code are the same or substantially the same as
preexisting ordinance provisions, and insofar as any amendment to the code
reenacts then existing provisions of the code, the later provisions shall be
construed as a continuation of the earlier provision. (1982 Code § 1.414)
1-3-5: IRRECONCILABLE PROVISIONS:
Provisions are to be construed so that effect may be given to each. In case of
conflict, they shall be construed as follows, in the priority listed:
   A.   If a special provision is in irreconcilable conflict with a general
provision, the special provision shall prevail and be construed as an exception
to the general provision unless the general provision has been enacted later
and shows a manifest intent of the city council that the general provision
shall prevail.
   B.   If enacted at different times, the latest in date of enactment shall
prevail.
   C.   If part of the same provision or set of provisions, the provision,
portion or clause last in position shall prevail.
   D.   Provisions shall be liberally construed to effect the well being of the
city and to promote good government at minimum expense. (1982 Code § 1.415)
1-3-6: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Separate Violations
1-4-3: Costs Of Prosecution
1-4-4: Application Of Provisions
1-4-5: Application To City Personnel
1-4-6: Enforcement
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Petty Misdemeanors: Whenever an act or omission is declared by this
code, or by any law or code adopted by reference in this code, to be a petty
misdemeanor or a petty offense, any person violating the provision shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00).
   B.   Misdemeanors And Penalty For Other Offenses: Except when declared to be
a petty misdemeanor or a petty offense, or except when another lesser penalty
is expressly provided, any person violating any provision of this code, or any
law or code adopted by reference in this code, shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 265, 3-6-2007)
   C.   Administrative Offenses: Any person violating an administrative rule,
or any offense that would otherwise be a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor for
which the city has established a scheduled penalty, shall be subject to the
scheduled penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense. The determination as to whether to treat an offense as an
administrative offense, petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor shall be up to the
discretion of the complainant. (Ord. 274, 12-2-2008)
1-4-2: SEPARATE VIOLATIONS:
Unless otherwise provided, each act or omission in violation of this code
constitutes a separate offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day upon which a violation continues. (1982 Code § 1.613)
1-4-3: COSTS OF PROSECUTION:
Whenever any person is convicted of a violation of any provision of this code,
the costs of prosecution may be added. (1982 Code § 1.614)
1-4-4: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to
every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Prosecuting Officer Discretion: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   General Application: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2005 Code)
1-4-5: APPLICATION TO CITY PERSONNEL:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2005
Code)
1-4-6: ENFORCEMENT:
In the event of a violation or threatened violation of this code, the city
council, in addition to other remedies specified in this code or otherwise
allowed by law, may cause any lawful action to be taken or proceeding to be
commenced to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or threatened
violation. (1982 Code § 1.616)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 1
SECTION:
1-5-1: City Council Meetings
1-5-2: Compensation
 
Notes
1 1. See also city charter.
1-5-1: CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS 1 :
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on
the first Tuesday of each month at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. (1982 Code
§ 2.311)
   B.   Special And Adjourned Meetings: The city council may, at any regular
meeting, establish a date, time and place for holding an adjourned or special
meeting. At other times, special meetings may be called by the mayor or by any
two (2) members of the city council by writing filed with the city clerk, who
shall then mail or deliver a notice to each council member of the time and
place of the meeting at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, unless
it is impossible to give twenty four (24) hours' notice due to the urgency of
the meeting, in which case notice shall be given as soon as possible. Notice of
any special meeting not called at the time of a regular meeting shall be posted
at the city hall, and, when time permits, published in the official newspaper.
(1982 Code § 2.312)
   C.   Place Of Meetings: All meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings, shall be held at the city council chambers in the city hall, except
that the city council may adjourn any meeting to some other place, or hold a
special meeting at some other place, for the convenience of the public or where
the nature of the matter under consideration makes it reasonably necessary to
consider the matter at the other place. (1982 Code § 2.313)
 
Notes
1 2. See also city charter chapter three, MSA § 412.191, subd. 2.
1-5-2: COMPENSATION 1 :
   A.   Mayor: The mayor shall be paid one thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200.00) annually for attending regular meetings of the city council. The
mayor shall be paid twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each special or adjourned
meeting of the city council attended.
   B.   City Council: Each council member shall be paid nine hundred dollars
($900.00) annually for attending regular meetings of the city council. Each
council member shall be paid twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each special or
adjourned meeting of the city council attended. (Ord. 205, 11-7-1988; amd. 2005
Code)
   C.   Date Of Change: Unless a later date is established in any ordinance
changing the compensation of the mayor or of the city council, no change in
salary enacted pursuant to the authority granted in Minnesota Statutes
Annotated section 415.11 shall take effect until after the next succeeding
municipal election, and until that date the salary shall remain as last
previously established. (1982 Code § 2.333)
 
Notes
1 3. MSA § 415.11.
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Officers
1-6-2: City Manager
1-6-3: City Clerk
1-6-4: City Treasurer
1-6-5: Additional Offices And Employees
1-6-6: Personnel Policy
1-6-7: Criminal History Background Checks
1-6-1: OFFICERS 1 :
The city shall have such officers as have been established by charter. Pursuant
to the authority granted by charter, other offices may be established by the
city council by ordinance. (1982 Code § 2.111)
 
Notes
1 1. See city charter, chapter one, 1.03, sections 5 and 6, and chapter four;
  MSA § 412.111.
1-6-2: CITY MANAGER 1 :
   A.   Office Created: The office of city manager is hereby created in the
city.
   B.   Appointment; Removal: The city manager shall be appointed and removed
as provided in the city charter, chapter one, 1.03, section 3. The city manager
shall be appointed for an indefinite period of time and shall be paid for his
services at such a salary as the city council from time to time may determine.
   C.   Bond: The city manager shall be bonded at city expense, through a
position bond (faithful performance) which will indemnify the city in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   D.   Powers And Duties: The city manager shall be the chief administrative
officer of the city and shall perform the following duties and as set forth in
chapter one, 1.03, section 4 of the city charter:
      1.   Supervision and management of the various subordinate offices,
agencies and departments of the city.
      2.   Coordinate the administration of the various divisions and
departments of the city.
      3.   Make recommendations to the city council regarding personnel
policies, employment and dismissal of subordinate officers and employees.
      4.   Develop and issue all administrative rules, regulations and
procedures necessary to ensure the proper functioning of and coordination with
all departments. Such rules, regulations and procedures shall be consistent
with federal and Minnesota law, city ordinances, and written city council
policy. Said rules, regulations and procedures shall be effective upon issuance
and shall continue to be in effect until rescinded by the city manager or by
express action of the city council.
      5.   Submit to the city council at least thirty (30) days prior to call
by the county auditor, a single consolidated budget document which shall
include statements relating to projected revenue and proposed sources of
revenue, and all proposed expenditures to be made and obligations to be
incurred by the city in the forthcoming fiscal year.
      6.   Advise the city council on all matters pertaining to or affecting
the operation of the city government and the city proper.
      7.   The city manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of all
laws and ordinances within the city, and whenever necessary shall make
recommendations for changes, amendments or repeal of existing ordinances.
      8.   The city manager shall be directly responsible to the city council
for the faithful and satisfactory performance of the duties of the office;
shall attend all council meetings, but shall not vote; and shall attend such
committee meetings as the city council may direct.
      9.   The city manager shall be the chief purchasing agent of the city and
all city purchases and contracts shall be made or let by the city manager when
the amount involved does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). All other purchases shall be made and all other contracts shall be
let by the city council after the recommendation of the city manager has first
been obtained. All contracts, bonds and instruments of any kind to which the
city is a party shall be signed by the mayor and the city manager on behalf of
the city. (1982 Code § 2.114)
      10.   In addition to the stated powers and duties, the city manager shall
be responsible for the employment and termination of city personnel, other than
otherwise provided for by code or charter. Personnel being involuntarily
terminated shall follow the grievance procedures in the city personnel policy.
(Ord. 195, 6-4-1985)
      11.   Perform such other duties as are required by state law, city
ordinance or as the city council shall from time to time direct. (1982 Code §
2.114)
 
Notes
1 2. See city charter, chapter one, 1.03, sections 3 and 4, and chapter four;
  MSA § 412.641.
1-6-3: CITY CLERK 1 :
A city clerk shall be appointed by the city council, receive such compensation
as the city council may fix, and serve at the pleasure of the city council. The
city clerk shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law, by
charter and as the city council may determine. (1982 Code § 2.112)
 
Notes
1 1. See city charter, chapter one, 1.03, section 5, and chapter four; MSA §
  412.151.
1-6-4: CITY TREASURER 1 :
A city treasurer shall be appointed by the city council, receive such
compensation as the city council may fix, and serve at the pleasure of the city
council. The city treasurer shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed
by law, by charter and as the city council may determine. (1982 Code § 2.113)
 
Notes
1 2. MSA § 412.111.
1-6-5: ADDITIONAL OFFICES AND EMPLOYEES:
In addition to the departments, boards, commissions, agencies and other offices
created by charter or in title 2 of this code or other provisions of this code,
the city council may create such additional offices and may designate such
other employees and agents as may be necessary or helpful to the efficient
government of the city and operation and maintenance of the public facilities.
(1982 Code § 2.491)
1-6-6: PERSONNEL POLICY:
The personnel policy for city employees shall be as adopted from time to time
by resolution of the city council. Copies are on file in the office of the city
clerk. (2005 Code)
1-6-7: CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS:
   A.   The Dawson police department is authorized to do a criminal history
background check investigation on applicants for city employment, volunteer
positions and contractors/consultants hired to provide services to the city.
Background investigations of contractors/consultants will only be done if they
have access to sensitive city systems and information such as security
information and private data. Before the investigation is undertaken, the
applicant/individual must authorize the police department in writing to
undertake the investigation and to release the information to the city council,
city manager and other city staff as appropriate. Should the city reject the
applicant/individual due, partially or solely, to the applicant/individual's
prior conviction of a crime, the city manager shall notify the applicant/
individual in writing of the following:
      1.   The grounds and reason for denial;
      2.   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
Minnesota statutes section 364.06;
      3.   The earliest date the applicant/individual may reapply for
employment; and
      4.   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication. (Ord. 291, 2-15-2011)
CHAPTER 7
HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Conduct Of Hearings
1-7-2: Notice
1-7-3: Opportunity To Be Heard
1-7-4: Adoption Of Rules
1-7-5: Record
1-7-1: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
Unless otherwise provided in this code, by charter or by law, every public
hearing required to be held on any legislative or administrative matter shall
be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1982 Code §
2.211)
1-7-2: NOTICE:
At least ten (10) days' mailed notice of the time, place and purpose of any
hearing shall be given to all persons entitled to notice. (1982 Code § 2.212)
1-7-3: OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD:
At the hearing, each party in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard
and to present evidence relevant to the hearing. (1982 Code § 2.213)
1-7-4: ADOPTION OF RULES:
The city council or other body charged with conduct of any hearing may adopt
rules governing the conduct of hearings, records to be made and such other
matters as it deems necessary for the proper conduct of hearings to be held by
it. (1982 Code § 2.214)
1-7-5: RECORD:
Upon the disposition of any matter after hearing, the body conducting the
hearing shall cause to be prepared a written summary of its findings and
decisions and enter the summary in the official minutes of its meetings. (1982
Code § 2.215)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION 1
SECTION:
2-1-1: Policy
2-1-2: Establishment And Composition
2-1-3: Members Of Commission
2-1-4: Officers
2-1-5: Meetings; Rules; Records
2-1-6: Powers And Duties
2-1-7: Expenditures
 
Notes
1 1. See city charter, chapter two, 2.01, subsections 1) and 2); MSA § 62.354,
  subd. 1.
2-1-1: POLICY:
The city council desires to encourage sound and harmonious growth to the city
and its environment, encourage efficiency and economy in the provision of
facilities and services, ensure maximum return for expenditures of public funds
and avoid error and waste resulting from unplanned and uncoordinated
development. To these ends and for these purposes, the city council finds it
desirable that municipal planning activities be undertaken for guiding the
future development and improvement of the city. (1982 Code § 2.451)
2-1-2: ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION:
There shall be a planning commission. The planning commission shall be the city
planning agency. The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members.
Four (4) members shall be appointed by the city council and may be removed by a
five-sixths (5/6) vote of the city council. The city council shall elect one
member of the commission from among its own members. The city manager and the
city attorney shall be ex officio members. (1982 Code §§ 2.452, 2.453)
2-1-3: MEMBERS OF COMMISSION:
   A.   Terms Of Office:
      1.   Appointed Members: Of the members of the commission first appointed,
one shall be appointed for the term of one year, one for the term of two (2)
years, one for the term of three (3) years and one for the term of four years.
Their successors shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. Both original
and successive appointees shall hold their offices until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
      2.   Ex Officio Members: The terms of the city manager and of the city
attorney shall correspond to their respective official tenures.
      3.   Council Member: The commission member elected by the city council
from its members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council, during the
term of office of the member or such lesser period of time as the city council
may determine in making the election.
      4.   Oath: Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the
discharge of his duties, take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the
duties of his office. (1982 Code § 2.454)
   B.   Vacancies: The chairperson of the commission shall notify the city
council promptly of any vacancy occurring upon the commission. The city council
shall fill any vacancy for the unexpired portion of the original term of the
appointment. (1982 Code § 2.460)
   C.   Compensation: Members of the commission shall receive no salaries or
fees for their services upon the commission. Members shall be allowed necessary
travel and other expenses while on official business for the commission. (1982
Code § 2.462)
   D.   Voting And Other Rights: All members, including the chairperson and the
ex officio members, shall be entitled to vote and shall otherwise have the full
rights and privileges of a member of the commission. (1982 Code § 2.457)
2-1-4: OFFICERS:
The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its
appointed members who are not ex officio members and may create such other
offices as it may determine. It shall provide itself with a secretary either by
election from among its members or by appointment of an officer or employee of
the city who is not a member of the commission. (1982 Code § 2.456)
2-1-5: MEETINGS; RULES; RECORDS:
   A.   Meetings: The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each
month and shall hold any other meetings necessary to the conduct of its
business. (1982 Code § 2.455)
   B.   Rules: The commission shall adopt rules for its governance and for the
transaction of its business. (1982 Code § 2.458)
   C.   Records: The commission shall keep a record of attendance at its
meetings and of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations,
showing the vote of each member on each question requiring a vote, including
whether the member was absent or abstained. The records of the commission shall
be a public record. (1982 Code § 2.459)
2-1-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
In addition to the following, the commission shall be the planning agency. It
shall have the powers and duties given such agencies generally by Minnesota
Statutes Annotated sections 462.351 through 462.364 and other provisions of law
relating to planning agencies. It shall also exercise the duties conferred upon
it by this code. (1982 Code § 2.463)
   A.   Public Hearings On Zoning Ordinances: The commission shall hold a
public hearing upon any proposed zoning ordinance or proposed amendment to a
zoning ordinance, as required by Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 462.357.
(1982 Code § 2.464)
   B.   Approval Of Plats: Any subdivision plat submitted to the city council
for approval shall, prior to final approval, be referred to the commission for
review and recommendation. Any plat so referred shall be returned to the
council by the commission with its recommendations within thirty (30) days. If
the commission fails to act within that time, the city council may then proceed
with its consideration of the plat. (1982 Code § 2.465)
   C.   Annual Report: On or before January 30 of each year the commission
shall submit to the city council a report of its work during the preceding
calendar year. (1982 Code § 2.466)
2-1-7: EXPENDITURES:
Expenditures of the commission shall be within amounts appropriated for the
purpose by the city council. (1982 Code § 2.461)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
2-2-1: Agency Created
2-2-2: Director
2-2-3: Organization And Functions
2-2-4: Intergovernmental Arrangements
2-2-5: Emergency Plan
2-2-6: Studies And Reports
2-2-1: AGENCY CREATED:
In accordance with and pursuant to the requirements of Minnesota Statutes
Annotated chapter 12, there shall be an emergency management agency within the
city. (1982 Code § 2.471)
2-2-2: DIRECTOR:
An emergency management director shall be appointed by the mayor for an
indefinite term and may be removed by the mayor at any time. The director shall
receive such compensation as the city council may fix and shall be paid
necessary expenses. The director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the emergency services agency,
subject to the direction and control of the city council. (1982 Code § 2.472)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The emergency management agency shall be organized into such divisions and
bureaus, consistent with state and local emergency plan, as the director deems
necessary for the efficient performance of local emergency functions during an
emergency. The agency shall perform emergency functions within the city and in
addition shall conduct such functions outside the city as may be required by
law and by this code. (1982 Code § 2.473)
2-2-4: INTERGOVERNMENTAL ARRANGEMENTS:
With the consent of the mayor, the director shall represent the city on any
regional or state organization for emergencies. The director shall develop
proposed mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions within or
without the state for reciprocal emergency aid and assistance in an emergency
too great to be dealt with unassisted. The director shall present any agreement
to the city council for its action. The agreement shall be consistent with the
emergency plan. During an emergency, the emergency services agency shall render
assistance in accordance with the provisions of the agreement. Any mutual aid
agreement with a political subdivision of another state shall be subject to the
approval of the governor as provided by law. (1982 Code § 2.474)
2-2-5: EMERGENCY PLAN:
The director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for the emergency
management of the city. The director shall present the plan to the city council
for its approval. The city council shall adopt or reject the plan by
resolution. It may adopt the plan subject to any modifications as it deems fit.
When the city council has adopted the plans, all emergency management services
of the city shall perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan. The
plan may be modified in like manner. The director, as circumstances dictate,
shall from time to time submit proposed modifications of the plan to the city
council for its consideration. (1982 Code § 2.475)
2-2-6: STUDIES AND REPORTS:
The director shall, from time to time, make such studies and surveys relating
to emergency management as the director deems necessary for proper planning of
the continued emergency management of the city. The director shall prepare and
periodically present to the city council a report of activities and
recommendations. (1982 Code § 2.476)
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-3-1: Establishment
2-3-2: Composition
2-3-3: Health Officer
2-3-4: Compensation
2-3-5: Duties Of Board
2-3-6: Right Of Entry
2-3-7: Interference
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There shall be a board of health. (1982 Code § 2.431)
2-3-2: COMPOSITION:
The board shall consist of three (3) or more persons. They shall be appointed
by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. (1982
Code § 2.432)
2-3-3: HEALTH OFFICER:
At least one member of the board of health shall be a physician, who shall be
the local health officer and executive of the board. The health officer shall
execute the lawful orders of the state and city boards of health and shall have
such powers and duties as are prescribed by law, by regulation of the state
board of health, by charter, by this code and as the city council may
determine. (1982 Code § 2.433)
2-3-4: COMPENSATION:
Members shall receive necessary expenses for their service upon the board as
allowed by the city council. In addition, the physician member shall receive
such compensation as the city council may fix. Members who are not physicians
shall receive no other compensation for their service on the board. (1982 Code
§ 2.434)
2-3-5: DUTIES OF BOARD:
The board of health shall make such investigations and reports and obey such
directions concerning communicable diseases as the state board of health may
require or give. Under the general supervision of the state board of health, it
shall cause all laws and regulations relating to the public health, including
all health regulations included in this code, to be obeyed and enforced. (1982
Code § 2.435)
2-3-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
For the purposes of performing their official duties, the health officer and
other members of the board of health shall have the right at any reasonable
hour, and during an emergency at any hour, to enter any building, conveyance or
place where contagion, infection, filth or any other source or cause of
preventable disease exists or is reasonably suspected. (1982 Code § 2.436)
2-3-7: INTERFERENCE:
No person shall obstruct, interfere with, or impede the health officer or board
of health in the performance of official duties or remove any sign posted by
order of the health officer in any area or on any building. (1982 Code § 8.311)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSES AND PERMITS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Application Of Provisions
3-1-2: License Required
3-1-3: License Fees
3-1-4: Bond; Insurance
3-1-5: Issuance
3-1-6: Posting
3-1-7: Term
3-1-8: Duplicate License
3-1-9: Transfer Of License
3-1-10: Renewal
3-1-11: Conditions Of License
3-1-12: Inspection
3-1-13: Misuse Of License
3-1-14: Suspension; Revocation
3-1-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
All licenses and permits required by this title shall be governed by the
requirements of this chapter unless otherwise provided by law or in this code.
As used in this title, "license" includes both a license and a permit and
"licensee" includes both a licensee and a permittee. (1982 Code § 7.111)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Application:
      1.   Form: Every application shall be made to the city clerk on a form
provided by the city clerk.
      2.   Information: The applicant shall provide all information required by
the application form.
      3.   False Statement: No person shall make a false statement in or
concerning any application. (1982 Code § 7.112)
   B.   Multiple Devices:
      1.   Single License: When multiple tables, machines or other devices of
one kind are licensed at one place of business, the city clerk may issue one
license for all of them and indicate on the license the number of them licensed
under the license.
      2.   Replacement Devices: The licensee may replace any device with
another device without the necessity for transfer of the license.
      3.   Additional Devices: If the license adds to the number of devices
used during the license year, a new license shall be obtained for the
additional devices.
      4.   Separate Licenses: Upon request of the licensee or at the discretion
of the city council or the city clerk, a separate license may instead be issued
for each device. (1982 Code § 7.119)
3-1-3: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fee: The application shall be accompanied by payment in full for the
license. Unless a specific fee is provided for, the council shall, by
resolution, establish the fees to be charged for each kind of license. (1982
Code §§ 7.112, 7.116)
   B.   Pro Rata Fees: Unless otherwise specified by law or in this title, if a
portion of the license year has elapsed when an annual license is granted, the
fee shall be one-twelfth (1/12) of the annual fee for each month or fraction of
a month remaining in the license year. No license fee shall be prorated during
the time which a licensee was required to have a license but failed to apply
for one. The council may, by resolution, fix a minimum pro rata fee which is
required for processing the application. (1982 Code § 7.117)
   C.   Refunds:
      1.   Before Issuance: If an application is rejected, the city treasurer
shall refund in full the amount paid, unless the city council, in rejecting the
license, orders that the fee be retained from an applicant making a false
statement in or concerning the application or from an applicant ineligible to
receive a license. (1982 Code § 7.112)
      2.   After Issuance: After issuance, license fees shall not be refunded
in whole or in part unless otherwise specified by law or in this title. (1982
Code § 7.122)
3-1-4: BOND; INSURANCE:
   A.   Surety Bond; Deposit:
      1.   Required: When a bond is required for any license, the applicant
shall file with the city clerk a good and sufficient corporate surety bond, or
in lieu of it, cash in the amount for which the bond is required or United
States government bonds of an equivalent market value.
      2.   Minimum Amount: Except where otherwise provided, the bond or other
security shall be in the sum of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
      3.   Indemnification: The bond or other security shall be conditioned
that the licensee will comply with all requirements of law and of this code
pertaining to the licensed activity and that the licensee will indemnify the
city and save it harmless from all loss or damage by reason of any act or
omission of the licensee or agents or employees of the licensee. (1982 Code §
7.113)
   B.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   Required: When liability insurance is required for any license, the
licensee shall have on file with the city clerk at all times a currently
effective liability insurance policy issued by a reliable insurance company
authorized to do business in Minnesota.
      2.   Minimum Coverage: Except where otherwise provided, coverage shall be
in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one
person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for more than one
person arising out of a single occurrence.
      3.   Payment: The policy shall specifically provide for the payment by
the insurance company on behalf of the insured of all sums which the insured
shall become obligated to pay by reason of liability imposed upon the insured
for injury or damages to persons other than employees.
      4.   Notice Of Cancellation: The policy shall also provide that no
cancellation of the policy for any cause can be made by either the insured or
the insurance company without first giving ten (10) days' notice to the city in
writing of intention to cancel, addressed to the city clerk.
5. Decreased Coverage: No payment of any claim by the insurance company shall
in any manner decrease the coverage provided for in respect to any other claim
or claims brought against the insured or insurance company thereafter.
6. In Lieu Of Bond: If the insurance policy is made subject to all the
conditions of a bond, it may be filed in lieu of the bond. (1982 Code § 7.114)
C. Approval Of Bond And Insurance:
1. Commencement Of Business: No licensee shall commence business until any
required security, other than cash, and any required insurance policy has been
approved by the city clerk if the license is granted by the city clerk and by
the city council if the license is granted by the city council.
2. Continuance Of Business: No licensee shall continue in business after the
security or insurance is no longer in force.
3. Disapproval: The bond or other security or the insurance policy may be
disapproved upon a finding that the security or policy does not meet
requirements of this code or of law, or that the surety or insurer may become
unable to pay any claim which may arise. (1982 Code § 7.115)
D. Automatic Termination: A license shall automatically terminate upon
termination of any required bond, insurance coverage or other security. (1982
Code § 7.130)
3-1-5: ISSUANCE:
If the license does not require city council approval, the city clerk shall
issue the license upon being satisfied that there is no reason to believe the
public health, safety or welfare would be injured by issuance, and that all
requirements of law and of this code relating to the license have been met. If
the city clerk is not so satisfied, or if council approval is required, the
city clerk shall present the application to the city council for action. The
city clerk shall thereupon issue the license if approval is granted. (1982 Code
§ 7.118)
3-1-6: POSTING:
A. Posting Of License Required: The licensee shall post the license in a
conspicuous place on the premises, in the vehicle or on or near the device to
which the license relates.
B. Multiple Devices: If a license relates to multiple devices at a single
premises, the license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
C. Licensed Activity: If the license authorizes the licensee to engage in a
particular line of employment, the license shall be carried on the licensee's
person when the licensee is carrying on the licensed activity, unless the
licensee carries on the activity from a single place of business in the city,
in which case it shall be posted at the place of business.
D. All Other Cases: In all other cases, the license shall be posted at the
licensee's place of business within the city, or such other place in the city
as the city clerk may designate upon the license.
E. Multiple Premises: In addition, if a license relates to multiple premises,
the licensee shall obtain from the city clerk and post a copy of the license in
a conspicuous place on each premises to which the license relates. (1982 Code §
7.126)
F. Copies For Posting: Whenever a licensee is required to post copies of a
license at a place other than where the original license is posted, the city
clerk shall issue a sufficient number of copies for that purpose, marking each
copy with the word "copy" on its face. (1982 Code § 7.120)
3-1-7: TERM:
A. Temporary License: A temporary license shall be issued for a specific
period, which shall be stated on the license, during which a special event is
being held.
B. General Effective Date: Every other license shall become effective when
issued and any required approval of security or insurance is obtained, or such
later date as is requested in the application.
C. Expiration: The license shall expire on December 31 following its
commencement. (1982 Code § 7.123)
3-1-8: DUPLICATE LICENSE:
The city clerk shall issue a duplicate license upon the licensee submitting an
affidavit that the license has been lost, stolen or destroyed. The city clerk
shall make any duplicate with the word "duplicate" on its face. The city
council may, by resolution, establish a fee for issuance of a duplicate
license. (1982 Code § 7.121)
3-1-9: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. Individuals: No license may be transferred to any other person.
B. Premises: When a license relates to specific premises, it may be transferred
to another place only upon request to the city clerk. The city clerk shall
consider the transfer request and approve the transfer or submit it to the city
council in accordance with requirements for issuance of the license.
C. Vehicle; Device: When a license relates to a specific vehicle or device, it
may be transferred to a replacement vehicle or device upon filing with the city
clerk an affidavit of the reasons for the transfer, a description of the
vehicle or device to which it is to be transferred and the disposition of the
vehicle or device from which it is to be transferred.
D. Fee: The city council may, by resolution, impose a transfer fee. (1982 Code
§ 7.125)
3-1-10: RENEWAL:
Applications for renewals of licenses may be made within the three (3) months
prior to expiration. (1982 Code § 7.124)
3-1-11: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Every license shall be subject to the following conditions:
A. The license shall comply with all laws, regulations and provisions of this
code relating to the licensed activity.
B. The act of any employee respecting the licensed activity shall be deemed the
act of the licensee.
C. The licensee shall not permit any gambling upon the licensed premises or by
use of the licensed device or activity.
D. The licensee shall maintain order and shall see to it that the peace is
preserved upon the licensed premises or in the use of any licensed device.
(1982 Code § 7.128)
E. The city of Dawson or the city police department or both shall have the
right to enter, inspect and search the licensed premises without a search and
seizure warrant during the hours in which the licensed premises are open for
the sale of alcoholic beverages.
F. The city of Dawson or the city police department shall conduct at least two
(2) compliance checks each year, and shall issue citations to any licensee
violating the provisions of their license or any relevant provisions of
Minnesota statutes 340A.
G. A violation of a provision of this section is subject to the administrative
penalties set forth in a resolution adopting fees.
H. Any officer of the city police department or any other person employed by
the city, authorized in writing by the city manager, and having authority to
enforce this code, shall, upon determining that there has been a violation,
notify the violator. This notice shall set forth the nature, date and time of
violation, and amount of the scheduled penalty.
I. Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may, within seven (7) days
of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule
of penalties for the violation, or may request a hearing in writing, as is
provided for hereafter. The penalty may be paid in person or by mail, and
payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.
J. Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this chapter
may, within seven (7) days of the time of issuance of the notice, request a
hearing by a hearing officer who shall forthwith conduct an informal hearing to
determine if a violation has occurred. The hearing officer shall have authority
to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the penalty. If the violation is
sustained by the hearing officer, the violator shall pay the penalty imposed.
K. In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the
penalty, a criminal charge may be brought against the alleged violator in
accordance with applicable statutes. If the penalty is paid or if an individual
is found not to have committed the administrative offense by the hearing
officer, no such charge may be brought by the city for the same violation.
(Ord. 270, 10-21-2008)
3-1-12: INSPECTION:
A. Permitted Entry: The licensee shall permit any law enforcement officer or
health officer or any other duly designated officer or employee of the city
engaged in the performance of official duties with respect to the licensed
activity to enter and inspect the licensed premises and to examine the books
and records of the activity to which the license relates at any time during
which the premises are open for business.
B. Refused Entry: A valid search warrant shall be obtained before conducting
the inspection or examination if the licensee objects to the inspection or
examination. Refusal to permit the inspection or examination is grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license. (1982 Code § 7.127)
3-1-13: MISUSE OF LICENSE:
No person shall lend or give to any other person a license while it is in
effect. No person shall alter, deface or destroy any license while it is in
effect. (1982 Code § 7.129)
3-1-14: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION:
The city council may suspend or revoke any license upon finding that the
licensee has failed to comply with any statute, regulation or provision of this
code relating to the licensed activity, or for any other sufficient cause.
Except when suspension or revocation may be made without hearing, the licensee
shall be granted an opportunity for hearing before decision is made. The notice
of hearing shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the charges
against the licensee. When the licensee holds more than one license, violation
of any law, regulation or provision respecting any license shall be cause for
suspension or revocation of all other licenses of the same kind issued to the
licensee or upon the premises. A license may be suspended or revoked without
hearing, or with such hearing as conditions warrant, if immediate suspension or
revocation is necessary for protection of the public health, safety or welfare.
In that event, upon demand by the licensee within ten (10) days of the action,
a hearing shall be held as soon as may be done. Licenses may instead be
suspended or revoked in the manner provided by law with respect to any license.
(1982 Code § 7.131)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL 1
SECTION:
3-2-1: Issuance Of Permits
3-2-2: Permit Fee
3-2-3: Minors
3-2-4: Public Consumption
3-2-5: Restricted Sales
 
Notes
1 1. MSA ch. 340A.
3-2-1: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
The city manager and city clerk shall issue the permit when all requirements of
this code and further requirements set by the city council have been complied
with. (Ord. 196, 7-2-1985)
3-2-2: PERMIT FEE:
The city council shall, by motion, establish the fee to be charged. (Ord. 196,
7-2-1985)
3-2-3: MINORS:
No person under the legal age for the purchase of intoxicating beverages shall:
   A.   Misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic
beverages.
   B.   Purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage.
   C.   Induce or attempt to induce another person to purchase any alcoholic
beverage for him.
   D.   Consume any alcoholic beverage unless in the company of his parent or
guardian and unless the consumption is otherwise permitted by law.
   E.   Possess any alcoholic beverage with intent to consume the alcoholic
beverage at a place other than the household of his parent or guardian.
Possession by the person of an alcoholic beverage at a place other than the
household of his parent or guardian shall be prima facie evidence of intent to
consume the alcoholic beverage at a place other than the household of his
parent or guardian. (1982 Code § 6.113)
3-2-4: PUBLIC CONSUMPTION:
No person shall consume or display any alcoholic beverage on any public street,
alley or sidewalk, or in a public park, except the dispensary or other place
where the consumption and display of the alcoholic beverage is lawfully
permitted on the property pursuant to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 196,
7-2-1985)
3-2-5: RESTRICTED SALES:
   A.   Unlicensed Public Places: No person shall display, mix, prepare for
consumption or consume any alcoholic beverage in any place of business, open to
the public for such purposes, which is not licensed for the display,
consumption, sale or furnishing of setups for the alcoholic beverage. (1982
Code § 6.112)
   B.   Softball Fields, Designated Drinking Area: A designated drinking area
is allowed at the Dawson softball fields. Such area shall be marked by
appropriate signs and limited in area by such signs in which the consumption of
alcoholic beverages is lawfully permitted. Such designated drinking area shall
be allowed by motion of the city council. (Ord. 196, 7-2-1985)
      1.   The designated drinking area for the Dawson softball fields listed
in this subsection B may be changed for special events. The change must be made
by permit issued by the city of Dawson and be for the length of the special
event. The permit may be allowed by city staff or by motion of the city
council. Such area shall be marked by appropriate signs and limited in area by
such signs in which the consumption of alcoholic beverages is lawfully
permitted. (Ord. 300, 6-5-2012)
   C.   City Park And Campgrounds:
      1.   City Park: Consumption or display of any alcoholic beverage in the
city park is prohibited except within the shelter house at the city park.
Consumption shall be allowed in the shelter house by permit.
      2.   Campgrounds: Consumption of alcoholic beverages in the campgrounds
at city park is prohibited except if such consumption is by registered campers
and such alcoholic beverage is consumed within the campsite.
   D.   Theodore Christianson Park: Consumption of any alcoholic beverage in
Theodore Christianson Park is prohibited except by permit. (Ord. 196, 7-2-1985)
   E.   Veterans Park: Consumption of any alcoholic beverage in Veterans Park
is prohibited except by permit. (Ord. 279, 7-7-2009)
   F.   Baseball Field, Designated Drinking Area: A designated drinking area is
allowed at the Dawson (Nelson) baseball field in the seating area. Such area
shall be marked by appropriate signs and limited in area by such signs in which
the consumption of alcoholic beverages is lawfully permitted. Sale and
consumption of any alcoholic beverage is also restricted to the times which are
allowed by permit from the city to a lawful vendor. Such designated drinking
area shall be allowed by motion of the city council. (Ord. 294, 12-6-2011)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. NONINTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Definitions
3-2A-2: State Law Adopted
3-2A-3: License Required
3-2A-4: Types Of Licenses
3-2A-5: Application
3-2A-6: Fees
3-2A-7: Term
3-2A-8: Number Of Licenses
3-2A-9: Eligible Applicants
3-2A-10: Restrictions Upon Premises
3-2A-11: Investigation
3-2A-12: Security
3-2A-13: Hearing
3-2A-14: Issuance
3-2A-15: Hours Of Sale
3-2A-16: Conditions Of License
3-2A-17: Inspection
3-2A-18: Transfer Of License
3-2A-19: Automatic Termination
3-2A-20: Suspension; Revocation
3-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to limitations established under state law relating to
nonintoxicating malt liquor, the following terms shall be further limited to
the meaning given to them:
BONA FIDE CLUB: Any nonprofit corporation duly organized under the laws of this
state or by an act of congress for civic, fraternal, social or intellectual
improvement, or any unit of such corporation, which shall for more than one
year have been in existence in the city, and whose affairs and management are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or other similar body
chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose, none of whose
members, officers, agents or employees are paid directly or indirectly any
compensation by way of profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the
members of the organization, or to its guests, beyond the amount of such
reasonable salary or wages as may be fixed and voted each year by the directors
or other governing body.
HOTEL: A place of not less than eight (8) sleeping rooms offering to the public
sleeping accommodations for periods of not less than one week, where a
restaurant or dining room is operated in connection therewith offering service
to the public and to those using the hotel accommodations.
RESTAURANT: Any place where preparing and serving lunches or meals to the
public to be consumed on the premises constitutes a major business thereof,
whether called a lunchroom, cafe, restaurant or some other name. (1982 Code §
6.212)
3-2A-2: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The provisions of this article relating to the retail sale, distribution,
display and consumption of nonintoxicating malt liquor are adopted pursuant to
and supplement Minnesota Statutes Annotated chapter 340A, and establish
additional requirements on the subject as allowed by law. All requirements of
law apply to this article. (1982 Code § 6.211)
3-2A-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, except a person by law not required to obtain a license from the
city, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, offer for sale or keep for
sale any nonintoxicating malt liquor within the city without a license to do so
as provided in this article. (1982 Code § 6.213)
3-2A-4: TYPES OF LICENSES:
Licenses shall be of the following kinds:
   A.   Off Sale Licenses: Off sale licenses shall permit the sale of
nonintoxicating malt liquor at retail in the original package for consumption
off the premises only. (1982 Code § 6.222)
   B.   On Sale Licenses: On sale licenses shall permit sale of nonintoxicating
malt liquor for consumption on the licensed premises only. On sale licenses
shall be granted only to restaurants, hotels, bona fide clubs, and
establishments for the sale of nonintoxicating malt beverages, cigars,
cigarettes, all forms of tobacco, beverages and soft drinks at retail. (1982
Code § 6.223)
   C.   Temporary On Sale Licenses: Temporary on sale licenses shall permit the
temporary sale of nonintoxicating malt liquor to be consumed on the premises
only. Temporary on sale licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs and
charitable, religious and nonprofit organizations and shall be subject to such
terms as may be prescribed as a condition of the issuance of the license. (1982
Code § 6.224)
3-2A-5: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license shall file with the city clerk a verified written
application in the form prescribed by the city clerk. Every application shall
give such information as the city council or city clerk may require. No person
shall make any false statement in or concerning any application. (1982 Code §
6.233)
3-2A-6: FEES:
   A.   License Fees:
      1.   Established By Resolution: The city council shall, by resolution,
establish the fee to be charged for each kind of license.
      2.   Reduced Fee: The city council may establish a reduced fee for on
sale licenses issued to clubs which sell only to club members and bona fide
guests of club members. (1982 Code § 6.241)
   B.   Pro Rata Fees: If a portion of the license year has elapsed when the
license is granted, the fee shall be one-twelfth (1/12) of the annual fee for
each month or fraction of a month remaining in the license year. The city
council may, by resolution, fix a minimum pro rata fee. (1982 Code § 6.242)
   C.   Payment: Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment
in full for the license. All license fees shall be paid into the general fund
of the city. If an application is rejected, the city treasurer shall refund in
full the amount paid, unless the city council, in rejecting the license, orders
that the fee, or any part of it, be retained from an applicant making a false
statement in or concerning an application or from an applicant ineligible to
receive a license. (1982 Code § 6.244)
   D.   Refunds:
      1.   Prohibited; Exception: No part of the fee for a license which has
been issued may be refunded, except that the city council may refund any
license fee paid when the licensee ceases business under any of the conditions
for which a refund may by law be allowed.
      2.   Application For Refund: An application for refund must be made to
the city council within thirty (30) days from the happening of the event for
which refund may be made.
      3.   Grant/Denial Of Application: The city council may grant or deny the
refund in its discretion. If the refund is granted, there shall be refunded a
pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the license, computed
on a monthly basis, excluding the month during which the event occurs from the
computation of the unexpired period of the license.
      4.   Minimum License Fee: In any event, the city shall retain as a
minimum license fee an amount equal to the amount, if any, of any minimum fee
charged for issuance of a prorated license. (1982 Code § 6.245)
3-2A-7: TERM:
A temporary license shall be issued for a specific period, which shall be
stated on the license, during which a special event is being held. Every other
license shall become effective when any required approval of security or
insurance is obtained or such later date as is requested in the application and
shall expire on April 30 following its commencement. (1982 Code § 6.237)
3-2A-8: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The city council may, by resolution, limit the number of any kind of license
which may be issued. (1982 Code § 6.229)
3-2A-9: ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS:
Applicants for licenses shall meet all requirements of law and of this article
1 . (1982 Code § 6.231)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 340A.402.
3-2A-10: RESTRICTIONS UPON PREMISES:
The licensed premises shall meet all requirements of law and of this article.
Licenses shall be granted only for any premises situated and fronting on Sixth
Street between Spruce Street and Walnut Street, or for premises situated and
fronting on Highway 212 or located in block 2, American Legion addition to the
city, or fronting Chestnut Street between Fifth And Sixth Streets in the city,
except that, in the case of bona fide clubs, the city council may, by
resolution, define additional areas of the city where licensed premises may be
situated, and temporary licenses may be issued for any location within the
city. No license shall be granted for any premises on which taxes, assessments
or other financial claims of the city are delinquent. (Ord. 254, 5-20-2003)
3-2A-11: INVESTIGATION:
The city council shall make such investigation of the statements in the
application, the fitness and eligibility of the applicant for a license, the
eligibility and suitability of the premises for a license, whether the public
interest will be served by issuance of the license, and such other matters as
it may deem appropriate. (1982 Code § 6.234)
3-2A-12: SECURITY:
   A.   Bond: Before issuance of a license, the applicant shall file with the
city clerk a good and sufficient corporate surety bond, or, in lieu of it, cash
in the amount for which the bond is required or United States government bonds
of equivalent market value. The bond or security shall be in the sum of at
least three thousand dollars ($3,000,00). The bond or security shall be
conditioned as follows:
      1.   The licensee will pay the city when due all taxes, license fees,
penalties and other charges provided by law.
      2.   The licensee will pay to the principal amount of the bond or
security any damages for death or injury caused by or resulting from the
violation of any provision of law or this article relating to nonintoxicating
malt liquor. (1982 Code § 6.251)
   B.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   Required: In addition to the bond required, the licensee shall have
on file with the city clerk, at all times, a currently effective liability
insurance policy issued by a reliable insurance company authorized to do
business in Minnesota.
      2.   Minimum Coverage: Coverage shall be in the amount of at least one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one person and three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for more than one person arising out of a single
occurrence.
      3.   Payments: The policy shall specifically provide for the payment by
the insurance company on behalf of the insured of all sums which the insured
shall become obligated to pay by reason of liability imposed upon the insured
for injury or damages to persons, other than employees.
      4.   Cancellation: The policy shall also provide that no cancellation of
the policy for any cause can be made by either the insured or the insurance
company without first giving ten (10) days' notice to the city in writing of
intention to cancel, addressed to the city clerk.
      5.   Decreased Coverage: No payment of any claim by the insurance company
shall in any manner decrease the coverage provided for in respect to any other
claim or claims brought against the insured or insurance company thereafter.
      6.   In Lieu Of Bond: If the insurance policy is made subject to all the
conditions of a bond under subsection A of this section, it may be filed in
lieu of the bond. (Ord. 201, 4-7-1987)
   C.   Approval Of Bond And Insurance: No licensee shall commence business
until any required security, other than cash, and any required insurance
policy, has been approved by the city council or by such state official as by
law must grant approval. No licensee shall continue in business after the
security or insurance is no longer in force. The bond or other security, or the
insurance policy, may be disapproved upon a finding that the security or policy
does not meet requirements of this code or of law, or that the surety or
insurer may become unable to pay any claims which may arise. (1982 Code §
6.253)
3-2A-13: HEARING 1 :
Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license. (1982 Code § 6.235)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 7 of this code.
3-2A-14: ISSUANCE:
After investigation and hearing, the city council shall grant or deny the
application in its discretion. If the application is approved, the city clerk
shall issue the license to the applicant upon the applicant complying with all
requirements of law and of this code relating to issuance of the license. (1982
Code § 6.236)
3-2A-15: HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   Prohibited Sales: No sale of nonintoxicating malt liquor shall be made
at any time that sale is prohibited by law 1 . (1982 Code § 6.262)
   B.   Display And Consumption During Prohibited Hours:
      1.   Display: No licensee shall display nonintoxicating malt liquor to
the public during hours that sale is prohibited.
      2.   Consumption: Consumption must cease and the premises closed to the
public within one-half (1/2) hour of sales being prohibited.
      3.   Additional Rooms: If the licensee maintains dining rooms, meeting
rooms, or any other rooms on the licensed premises for public use at a time
when sale is prohibited, the part of the premises where the nonintoxicating
malt liquor is kept shall be locked against access to it from the other room or
rooms during the hours that sales are prohibited. (Ord. 196, 7-2-1985)
 
Notes
1 2. MSA § 340A.504.
3-2A-16: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Every license shall be subject to the following conditions:
   A.   All requirements of this article relating to nonintoxicating malt
liquor and all other applicable provisions of this code.
   B.   All requirements imposed by law or other regulation.
   C.   The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises at
all times.
   D.   No sale may be made to any intoxicated person, to any disorderly
person, or to any person to whom sale is prohibited by law.
   E.   The licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of the licensed
business, and for conditions of sobriety and order in it.
   F.   The act of any employee on the licensed premises shall be deemed the
act of the licensee.
   G.   No licensee not also holding a license or permit to do so shall sell or
permit the display or consumption of any intoxicating liquor on the licensed
premises or serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor
upon the premises. (1982 Code § 6.265)
   H.   No licensee shall sell or serve nonintoxicating malt liquor, or any
other alcoholic beverage, to any person under twenty one (21) years of age, or
permit a person under age twenty one (21) to consume such beverages on the
licensed premises. (Ord. 254, 5-20-2003)
3-2A-17: INSPECTION:
The licensee shall permit any law enforcement officer or health officer or
other duly designated officer or employee of the city to enter and inspect the
premises at any time during which the premises are open for business. (1982
Code § 6.264)
3-2A-18: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be
transferable to any other holder. Each license shall be issued for the premises
described in the application and may be transferred to another place only with
the approval of the city council. Any transfer of shares of a corporate
licensee or other than of a publicly held corporation without prior city
council approval is cause for revocation of the license. (1982 Code § 6.261)
3-2A-19: AUTOMATIC TERMINATION:
A license shall automatically terminate upon termination of any required bond,
insurance coverage or other required security. (1982 Code § 6.266)
3-2A-20: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION:
The city council may suspend or revoke any license upon a finding that the
licensee has failed to comply with any statute, regulation or provision of this
code relating to nonintoxicating malt liquor, or for any other sufficient
cause. Except when by law no hearing is required, the licensee shall be granted
an opportunity for hearing before decision is made. The notice of hearing shall
state the date, time and place of the hearing and the charges against the
licensee. (1982 Code § 6.267)
ARTICLE B. INTOXICATING LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-2B-1: State Law Adopted
3-2B-2: License Required
3-2B-3: Types Of Licenses
3-2B-4: Application
3-2B-5: Fees
3-2B-6: Submission Of Information
3-2B-7: Term
3-2B-8: Number Of Licenses
3-2B-9: Eligible Applicants
3-2B-10: Eligible Premises
3-2B-11: Investigation
3-2B-12: Security
3-2B-13: Hearing
3-2B-14: Issuance
3-2B-15: Hours Of Sale
3-2B-16: Conditions Of License
3-2B-17: Inspection
3-2B-18: Transfer Of License
3-2B-19: Automatic Termination
3-2B-20: Suspension; Revocation
3-2B-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The provisions of this article relating to the retail sale, distribution,
display and consumption of intoxicating liquor are adopted pursuant to and
supplement Minnesota Statutes Annotated chapter 340A, and establish additional
requirements on the subject as allowed by law. All requirements of law apply to
this article. (1982 Code § 6.311)
3-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No persons except a person by law not required to obtain a license from the
city, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, offer for sale or keep for
sale any intoxicating liquor within the city without a license to do so as
provided in this article. (1982 Code § 6.313)
3-2B-3: TYPES OF LICENSES:
Licenses shall be of the following kinds:
   A.   Club On-Sale Licenses: Club on-sale licenses shall permit sale of
intoxicating liquor to club members and bona fide guests of club members only,
for consumption on the licensed premises only. Club on-sale licenses may be
granted only to incorporated congressionally chartered veterans organizations
which have been in existence for at least ten (10) years. (1982 Code §§ 6.321,
6.326)
   B.   On-Sale Liquor Licenses: On-sale liquor licenses shall be issued only
to hotels, restaurants and bowling alleys and shall permit on-sale of liquor
only. "Restaurant" means an eating facility, other than a hotel, under the
control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared
on the premises and served at tables to the general public. To be a
"restaurant" as defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license
from the state as required by Minnesota statutes section 157.16, as it may be
amended from time to time, and meet the definition of either a "small
establishment", "medium establishment" or "large establishment" as defined in
Minnesota statutes section 157.16 subdivision 3(d), as it may be amended from
time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that receives heat
treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is heated and
served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of this chapter
unless it meets the definition of "small establishment", "medium establishment"
or "large establishment" and is licensed as such.
   C.   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to the
exclusive liquor store. Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be granted
for the sale of liquor in original packages in retail stores for consumption
off or away from the premises where sold. No “off-sale” license shall be issued
to a place where 3.2 percent malt liquor is sold for consumption on the
premises. The city shall be limited to the issuance of once (1) off-sale
license.
(Ord. 271, 11-5-2008; amd. Ord. 326, 5-7-2024)
3-2B-4: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license shall file with the city clerk a verified written
application in the form prescribed by the commissioner of public safety. Every
application shall include such additional information as the city council or
city clerk may require. No person shall make any false statement in or
concerning any application. (1982 Code § 6.333)
3-2B-5: FEES:
   A.   License Fees: The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fee
to be charged for each kind of license within the limits of law. (1982 Code §
6.341)
   B.   Pro Rata Fees: If a portion of the license year has elapsed when the
license is granted, the fee shall be one-twelfth (1/12) of the annual fee for
each month or fraction of a month remaining in the license year. The city
council may, by resolution, fix a minimum pro rata fee. (1982 Code § 6.342)
   C.   Payment: Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment
in full for the license. All license fees shall be paid into the general fund
of the city. If an application is rejected, the city treasurer shall refund in
full the amount paid, unless the city council, in rejecting the license, orders
that the fee, or any part of it, be retained from an applicant making a false
statement in or concerning an application or from an applicant ineligible to
receive a license. (1982 Code § 6.344)
   D.   Refunds:
      1.   Prohibited; Exception: No part of the fee for a license which has
been issued may be refunded, except that the city council may refund any
license fee paid when the licensee ceases business under any of the conditions
for which a refund may by law be allowed.
      2.   Application For Refund: An application for refund must be made to
the city council within thirty (30) days from the happening of the event for
which refund may be made.
      3.   Grant/Denial Of Application: The city council may grant or deny the
refund in its discretion. If the refund is granted, there shall be refunded a
pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the license, computed
on a monthly basis, excluding the month during which the event occurs from the
computation of the unexpired period of the license.
      4.   Minimum License Fee: In any event, the city shall retain as a
minimum license fee an amount equal to the amount, if any, of any minimum fee
charged for issuance of a prorated license. (1982 Code § 6.345)
3-2B-6: SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION:
The city clerk shall, within the time required by law, submit to the
commissioner of public safety, or such other official as may be required, any
license, license application or any information concerning any license required
by law to be submitted to that official. (1982 Code § 6.314)
3-2B-7: TERM:
Every license shall become effective when any required approval of security or
insurance is obtained or such later date as is requested in the application.
The license shall expire on April 30 following its commencement. (1982 Code §
6.337)
3-2B-8: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
Within any limits established by law, the city council may, by resolution,
limit the number of any kind of license which may be issued. (1982 Code §
6.329)
3-2B-9: ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS:
Applicants for licenses shall meet all requirements of law and of this article.
(1982 Code § 6.331)
3-2B-10: ELIGIBLE PREMISES:
The licensed premises shall meet all requirements of law and of this article.
No license shall be granted for any premises on which taxes, assessments or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent. (1982 Code § 6.332)
3-2B-11: INVESTIGATION:
The city council shall make such investigation of the statements in the
application, the fitness and eligibility of the applicant for a license, the
eligibility and suitability of the premises for a license, whether the public
interest will be served by issuance of the license, and such other matters as
it may deem appropriate or as may be provided for by law. (1982 Code § 6.334)
3-2B-12: SECURITY:
   A.   Bond: Before issuance of a license, the applicant shall file with the
city clerk a good and sufficient corporate surety bond, or, in lieu of it, cash
in the amount for which the bond is required or United States government bonds
of equivalent market value. The bond or security shall be in the sum of at
least three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). It shall be conditioned as is
provided by law and shall meet all requirements of law. (1982 Code § 6.351)
   B.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   Required: In addition to the bond required, the licensee shall have
on file with the city clerk at all times a currently effective liability
insurance policy issued by a reliable insurance company licensed to do business
in Minnesota.
      2.   Minimum Coverage: Coverage shall be in the amount of at least one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one person and three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for more than one person arising out of a single
occurrence.
      3.   Compliance: The policy shall include all of the provisions and be
subject to all of the requirements of Minnesota Statutes Annotated section
340.412 relating to such policies.
      4.   In Lieu Of Bond: If the insurance policy is made subject to all of
the conditions of a bond under state law, the policy may be filed in lieu of
the bond required under subsection A of this section. (1982 Code § 6.352)
   C.   Approval Of Bond And Insurance: No licensee shall commence business
until any required security, other than cash, and any required insurance
policy, has been approved by the city council or by such state official as by
law must grant approval. No licensee shall continue in business after the
security or insurance is no longer in force. The bond or other security, or the
insurance policy, may be disapproved upon a finding that the security or policy
does not meet requirements of this code or of law, or that the surety or
insurer may become unable to pay any claims which may arise. (1982 Code §
6.353)
3-2B-13: HEARING 1 :
Opportunity shall be given for any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license. (1982 Code § 6.335)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 7 of this code.
3-2B-14: ISSUANCE:
After investigation and hearing, the city council shall grant or deny the
application in its discretion. If the application is approved, the city clerk
shall issue the license to the applicant upon the applicant complying with all
requirements of law and of this chapter relating to issuance of the license. If
any license, or the security or insurance for any license, is required by law
to be approved by the commissioner of public safety or any other official, the
license shall not become effective until approval is granted. (1982 Code §
6.336)
3-2B-15: HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   Prohibited Sales: No sale of intoxicating liquor shall be made at any
time that sale is prohibited by law. (1982 Code § 6.362)
   B.   Display And Consumption During Prohibited Hours:
      1.   Display: No licensee shall display intoxicating liquor to the public
during hours that sale is prohibited.
      2.   Consumption: Consumption must cease and the premises closed to the
public within one-half (1/2) hour of sales being prohibited.
      3.   Additional Rooms: If the licensee maintains dining rooms, meeting
rooms, or any other rooms on the licensed premises for public use at a time
when sale is prohibited, the part of the premises where the intoxicating liquor
is kept shall be locked against access to it from the other room or rooms
during the hours that sales are prohibited. (Ord. 196, 7-2-1985)
3-2B-16: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Every license shall be subject to the following conditions:
   A.   All requirements of this article relating to intoxicating liquor, and
all other applicable provisions of this code.
   B.   All requirements imposed by law or regulation.
   C.   The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises at
all times.
   D.   No sale may be made to any intoxicated persons to any disorderly
person, or to any person to whom sale is prohibited by law.
   E.   The licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of the licensed
business and for conditions of sobriety and order in it.
   F.   The act of any employee on the licensed premises shall be deemed the
act of the licensee.
   G.   No licensee not also holding a license or permit to do so shall sell or
permit the display or consumption of any nonintoxicating malt liquor on the
licensed premises or serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquor upon the premises. (1982 Code § 6.365)
   H.   No licensee shall sell or serve intoxicating liquor, or any other
alcoholic beverage, to any person under twenty one (21) years of age, or permit
a person under age twenty one (21) to consume such beverages on the licensed
premises. (1982 Code § 6.365; amd. 2005 Code)
3-2B-17: INSPECTION:
The licensee shall permit any law enforcement officer or health officer or
other duly designated officer or employee of the city to enter and inspect the
premises at any time during which the premises are open for business. (1982
Code § 6.364)
3-2B-18: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be
transferable to any other holder. Each license shall be issued for the premises
described in the application and may be transferred to another place only with
the approval of the city council. Any transfer of shares of a corporate
licensee, other than of a publicly held corporation, shall be deemed a transfer
of the license. A transfer of shares, other than of a publicly held
corporation, without prior council approval is cause for revocation of the
license. (1982 Code § 6.361)
3-2B-19: AUTOMATIC TERMINATION:
A license shall automatically terminate upon termination of any required bond,
insurance coverage or other required security. (1982 Code § 6.366)
3-2B-20: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION:
The city council may suspend or revoke any license upon finding that the
licensee has failed to comply with any statute, regulation or provision of this
code relating to intoxicating liquor, or for any other sufficient cause. Except
when by law no hearing is required, the licensee shall be granted an
opportunity for hearing before decision in made. The notice of hearing shall
state the date, time and place of the hearing and the charges against the
licensee. (1982 Code § 6.367)
ARTICLE C. WINE 1
SECTION:
3-2C-1: State Law Adopted
3-2C-2: License Required
3-2C-3: On-Sale Wine Licenses
3-2C-4: Application
3-2C-5: Fees
3-2C-6: Eligible Applicants
3-2C-7: Restrictions On Premises
3-2C-8: Security
3-2C-9: Investigation; Hearing; Issuance
3-2C-10: Display During Prohibited Hours
3-2C-11: Conditions Of License
3-2C-12: Inspection
3-2C-13: Transfer Of License
3-2C-14: Suspension; Revocation
3-2C-15: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 340A.404, subd. 5.
3-2C-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
Provisions of Minnesota Statutes Annotated chapter 340A, relating to the
definition of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, conditions of bonds, of
licenses, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale,
distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor insofar as they are
applicable to wine licenses authorizing the sale of wine not exceeding fourteen
percent (14%) alcohol by volume for consumption on the licensed premises only
in conjunction with the sale of food, are adopted and made a part of this
article as if set out in full. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   On-Sale License: No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer to the
extent authorized under state license, and the municipal liquor dispensary,
shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for sale in the city any
wine not exceeding fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume without an on-sale
license. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
   B.   Intoxicating Malt Liquor Sales: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
Annotated 340A.404, subdivision 5, the city authorizes a holder of an on-sale
wine license issued pursuant to subsection A of this section, who is also
licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at on-sale pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes Annotated section 340A.411, and whose gross receipts are at least
sixty percent (60%) attributable to the sale of food, may sell intoxicating
malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license. (Ord. 242, 4-17-2001)
3-2C-3: ON-SALE WINE LICENSES:
On-sale wine licenses shall be issued only to hotels, restaurants and bowling
alleys and shall permit on-sale of wine only. "Restaurant" means an eating
facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at
tables to the general public. To be a "restaurant" as defined by this section,
an establishment shall have a license from the state as required by Minnesota
statutes section 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet the
definition of either a "small establishment", "medium establishment" or "large
establishment" as defined in Minnesota statutes section 157.16 subdivision 3
(d), as it may be amended from time to time. An establishment which serves
prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or
frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall not be considered to be a
restaurant for purposes of this chapter unless it meets the definition of
"small establishment", "medium establishment" or "large establishment" and is
licensed as such. (Ord. 280, 12-15-2009)
3-2C-4: APPLICATION:
   A.   Required Information: Every applicant for an on sale wine license shall
state:
      1.   The name of the applicant;
      2.   His age;
      3.   Representations as to his character, with such references as the
city council may require;
      4.   His citizenship;
      5.   The restaurant in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location;
      6.   Whether the applicant is owner and operator of the restaurant;
      7.   How long he has been in the restaurant business at that place; and
      8.   Such other information as the city council may require from time to
time.
   B.   Form: In addition to containing such information, the application shall
be in the form prescribed by the commissioner of public safety and shall be
verified and filed with the city clerk.
   C.   False Statement: No person shall make a false statement in an
application. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-5: FEES:
   A.   License Fees: The annual fee for a wine license is sixty dollars
($60.00).
   B.   Term; Pro Rata Fees: Each license shall be issued for a period of one
year, except that if the application is made during the license year, a license
may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with an
unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Every license shall
expire on April 30 following its commencement.
   C.   Payment; Application Fee Refund: Each application for a wine license
shall be accompanied by payment in full for the license. All license fees shall
be paid into the general fund of the city. If an application is rejected, the
treasurer shall refund in full the amount paid, unless the city council, in
rejecting the license, orders that the fee, or any part of it, be retained from
an applicant making a false statement in or concerning an application or from
an applicant ineligible to receive a license.
   D.   Refunds After License Issued:
      1.   Prohibited; Exception: No part of the fee for a license which has
been issued may be refunded, except that the city council may refund any
license fee paid when the licensee ceases business under any of the conditions
for which a refund may by law be allowed.
      2.   Application For Refund: An application for refund must be made to
the city council within thirty (30) days from the happening of the event for
which refund may be made.
      3.   Grant/Denial Of Application: The city council may grant or deny the
refund in its discretion. If the refund is granted, there shall be refunded a
pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the license, computed
on a monthly basis, excluding the month during which the event occurs from the
computation of the unexpired period of the license.
      4.   Minimum License Fee: In any event, the city shall retain as a
minimum license fee an amount equal to the amount, if any, of any minimum fee
charged for issuance of a prorated license. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-6: ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS:
No wine license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for such license
by state law. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-7: RESTRICTIONS ON PREMISES:
No wine license shall be issued for any restaurant ineligible for such a
license under state law. No license shall be granted for any premises which is
not situated and fronting on Sixth Street between Spruce Street and Walnut
Street or for premises situated and fronting on Highway 212 or located in block
2, American Legion addition to the city or fronting Chestnut Street between
Fifth And Sixth Streets in the city, except that in the case of bona fide
clubs, the city council may, by resolution, define additional areas of the city
where licensed premises may be situated and temporary licenses may be issued
for any location within the city. No license shall be granted for any premises
on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are
delinquent. (Ord. 254, 5-20-2003)
   A.   Distance From School Or Church: No license shall be granted for a
building within three hundred feet (300') of any school or within three hundred
feet (300') of any church.
   B.   Delinquent Taxes And Charges: No license shall be granted for operation
on any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the
city are delinquent and unpaid. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-8: SECURITY:
   A.   Bond: Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a surety
bond or, in lieu thereof, cash or United States government bonds of equivalent
market value as provided in Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 340A.409. Such
surety bond or other security shall be in the sum of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) for an application for an on sale wine license.
   B.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   Required; Minimum Coverage: Prior to the issuance of a wine license,
the applicant shall file with the city clerk a liability insurance policy in
the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) coverage for one
person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) coverage for more than
one person and shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Annotated
section 340A.409 relating to liability insurance policies.
      2.   In Lieu Of Bond: If a liability insurance policy is made subject to
all the conditions of a bond under that statute, the policy may be accepted by
the city council in lieu of the bond required under subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Approval Of Bond And Insurance: The security offered under this section
shall be approved by the city council and the commissioner of public safety.
Surety bonds and liability insurance policies shall be approved as to form by
the city attorney. Operation of a licensed business without having on file with
the city at all times effective security as required in subsections A and B of
this section is a cause for revocation of the license. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-9: INVESTIGATION; HEARING; ISSUANCE:
The city council shall investigate all facts set out in the application.
Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the city council
shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application. No wine license
shall become effective until it, together with the security furnished by the
applicant, has been approved by the commissioner of public safety. (Ord. 200,
3-3-1987)
3-2C-10: DISPLAY DURING PROHIBITED HOURS:
No licensee shall display wine to the public during hours when the sale of wine
is prohibited. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-11: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Every license is subject to the conditions in the following subsections and all
other provisions of this article and of any other applicable ordinance, state
law or regulation:
   A.   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of his place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it.
   B.   The act of any employee on the licensed premised authorized to sell
intoxicating liquor there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the
licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this article and the law
equally with the employee. (Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-12: INSPECTION:
Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, or properly
designated officer or employee of the city to enter, inspect, and search the
premises of the licensee during business hours without a warrant. (Ord. 200, 3-
3-1987)
3-2C-13: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person
or place without city council approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate
licensee is deemed a transfer of the license and a transfer of stock without
prior city council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. (Ord.
200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-14: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION:
The city council may either suspend for not to exceed sixty (60) days or revoke
any on sale wine license upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to intoxicating
liquor. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has
been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Minnesota statutes.
(Ord. 200, 3-3-1987)
3-2C-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in
subsection 1-4-1B of this code, plus the cost of prosecution in any case. (Ord.
200, 3-3-1987; amd. 2005 Code)
ARTICLE D. MUNICIPAL LIQUOR DISPENSARY
SECTION:
3-2D-1: Dispensary Continued
3-2D-2: Location
3-2D-3: Manager
3-2D-4: Additional Employees
3-2D-5: Revenues
3-2D-6: Hours
3-2D-7: Restrictions
3-2D-1: DISPENSARY CONTINUED:
The municipal liquor dispensary heretofore established is hereby continued for
the off sale of intoxicating liquor. No person other than a duly acting
employee of the dispensary shall sell intoxicating liquor at off sale in the
city unless allowed to do so by law or pursuant to other provisions of this
code. (1982 Code § 6.411)
3-2D-2: LOCATION:
The dispensary shall be located at such suitable place in the city as the city
council determines. No premises upon which taxes, assessments or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent shall be leased for dispensary
purposes. (1982 Code § 6.412)
3-2D-3: MANAGER:
   A.   Selection: The dispensary shall be in the immediate charge of a liquor
store manager elected by the city council.
   B.   Compensation: The manager shall be paid such compensation as is fixed
by the city council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. (1982
Code § 6.413)
   C.   Duties: The manager shall operate the dispensary under the direction of
the city manager. The manager shall perform such duties in connection with the
dispensary as may be required by the city council or the city manager. The
manager shall conduct the dispensary in full compliance with this code and with
all laws relating to the sale and consumption of intoxicating liquor. (1982
Code § 6.414)
   D.   Bond: The manager shall furnish a surety bond to the city, conditioned
upon the faithful discharge of the duties of the manager, in such sum as the
city council may require. The bond premium shall be paid by the city. (1982
Code § 6.416)
3-2D-4: ADDITIONAL EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Employment: The city council may also employ such additional employees
as may be required for the dispensary.
   B.   Compensation: All such employees shall be paid such compensation as is
fixed by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.
   C.   Age Requirement: No person under nineteen (19) years of age shall be
employed in the dispensary. (1982 Code § 6.415)
   D.   Bond: The council, at its discretion, may require other employees to
furnish bond. The bond premium shall be paid by the city. (1982 Code § 6.416)
3-2D-5: REVENUES:
   A.   Dispensary Fund: The municipal liquor dispensary fund is hereby
continued.
      1.   Receipts; Disbursements: All revenues received from operation of the
dispensary shall be deposited into such fund and all ordinary operating
expenses shall be paid from it.
      2.   Borrowing From General Fund: Any amount which it may be necessary to
borrow from the general fund of the city in connection with the dispensary
shall be reimbursed to the general fund out of the first available monies
coming into the dispensary fund thereafter.
      3.   Surplus Funds: Surpluses in the dispensary fund may be transferred
to the general fund or to any other appropriate fund by the city by resolution
of the council and expended for any municipal purpose, or may be expended for
hospital purposes as allowed by charter 1 . (1982 Code § 6.417)
   B.   Handling Of Monies: Handling of dispensary receipts and disbursements
shall comply with the procedures prescribed by law or by charter for receipt
and disbursement of city funds generally. (1982 Code § 6.418)
   C.   Audit: The city council shall provide as soon as possible following the
close of each fiscal year for an audit of the accounts of the municipal liquor
dispensary for that fiscal year. (1982 Code § 6.419)
 
Notes
1 1. See city charter, chapter seven, section 7.13.
3-2D-6: HOURS:
No sale shall be made at any time that sale of intoxicating liquor is
prohibited by law. The dispensary shall not be open for business during any
time that such sales are prohibited. (1982 Code § 6.420)
3-2D-7: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions apply to the dispensary:
   A.   Employees shall comply with all requirements of law and of this code.
   B.   No sale shall be made on credit. (1982 Code § 6.421)
   C.   No sale shall be made to a person under age twenty one (21), an
intoxicated person, or any other person to whom sale is prohibited.
   D.   No person who is under age twenty one (21), intoxicated or disorderly
shall be permitted to remain in the dispensary, nor shall any person be
permitted to loiter in the dispensary.
   E.   No person shall be permitted to gamble in the dispensary. (1982 Code §
6.421; amd. 2005 Code)
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENT PLACES AND DEVICES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Amusement Devices
3-3-2: Pool Halls
3-3-3: Bowling Alleys
3-3-4: Traveling Exhibitions
3-3-5: Motion Picture Theaters
3-3-6: Roller Skating Rinks
3-3-7: Public Dances And Dancing Places
3-3-1: AMUSEMENT DEVICES 1 :
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, "coin operated amusement device"
includes any machine, screen or other device which, upon the insertion of a
coin, token or slug, or upon payment of a price, directly or indirectly, for
the privilege, may be operated by one or more players for amusement by
manipulating special equipment on or in the device, the object of which is to
secure a special number or score, or a high or low total score. It does not
include any device required to be licensed under any other provision of this
title.
   B.   Licensed Required: No person shall keep within the city for public use
for which any money is charged, directly or indirectly, any coin operated
amusement device without having first obtained a license to do so. (1982 Code §
7.211)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 9 of this title and title 11, chapter 2 of this code for
  provisions regarding sexually oriented businesses.
3-3-2: POOL HALLS:
No person shall keep within the city for public use for which any money is
charged, directly or indirectly any billiard table, pool table or similar
device without having first obtained a license to do so. (1982 Code § 7.221)
3-3-3: BOWLING ALLEYS:
No person shall keep within the city for public use for which any money is
charged, directly or indirectly, any bowling alley without having first
obtained a license to do so. (1982 Code § 7.231)
3-3-4: TRAVELING EXHIBITIONS:
   A.   License Required: No person except a bona fide club or a nonprofit
organization shall make or exhibit any traveling show, caravan, circus, play,
game, concert, performance or other exhibition whatsoever within the city for
which, directly or indirectly, money is received or charged, including money
received through donations, without having first obtained a license to do so.
(1982 Code § 7.241)
   B.   Application: Each application shall state the full name and address of
the person making the application, the full name and address of the owner or
sponsor of the traveling exhibition, the place at which the traveling
exhibition is to be conducted, the name and address of the person responsible
for the conduct of the traveling exhibition, and such other information as may
be required on the application form. (1982 Code § 7.242)
   C.   Issuance: The city council shall approve issuance of the license upon
being satisfied that all requirements of law and of this code have been met and
that the public health, safety and welfare will not be adversely affected if
the license is granted. (1982 Code § 7.243)
   D.   Conditions Of License: The licensee shall see to it that the exhibition
is conducted in an orderly manner at all times. The license shall be subject to
such additional conditions as the city council may impose for the protection of
public health, safety and welfare. (1982 Code § 7.244)
3-3-5: MOTION PICTURE THEATERS:
No person shall, within the city, operate any motion picture theater which is
open to the public for which an admission fee is charged, directly or
indirectly, without having first obtained a license to do so. (1982 Code §
7.251)
3-3-6: ROLLER SKATING RINKS:
No person shall keep, maintain or operate for hire within the city any roller
skating rink, whether indoors or outdoors, which is open to the public for
which an admission fee is charged, directly or indirectly, without having first
obtained a license to do so. (1982 Code § 7.261)
3-3-7: PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCING PLACES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall give, hold or conduct a public dance
or operate a public dancing place within the city unless the owner or
proprietor of the public dancing place, or the person giving the dance and in
charge of it, has first obtained a permit to do so. (1982 Code § 7.271; amd.
2005 Code)
   B.   Application: Application shall be made to the city clerk as provided by
law. The applicant shall give such information in the application as is
required by law or as the city council or the city clerk may otherwise require.
Applicant, and the premises to which the permit relates, shall meet all
requirements of law. (1982 Code § 7.272)
   C.   Fees:
      1.   Established By Resolution: The city council shall, by resolution,
establish fees to be charged for permits for public dances and public dancing
places.
      2.   Reduced Fees: In doing so, it may provide for a reduced fee, or no
fee, if the dance or dancing place is not for profit, or if the dance is given
for the benefit of a nonprofit organization or charity.
      3.   Increased Fee: The council may also provide for an increased fee for
any application not submitted in time to be considered at a regular meeting of
council or not submitted such other period of time in advance as the city
council may determine.
      4.   Additional Costs: In addition, the applicant shall pay the expense
of any investigation conducted by the city respecting the application and the
fees and expenses of any officer of the law required to attend at the dance.
All fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. (1982 Code § 7.273)
   D.   Issuance: Permits shall be considered as provided by law, and, if
issued, shall be subject to such conditions as may be provided by law and as
the city council may otherwise impose for the protection of public health,
safety and welfare. (1982 Code § 7.274)
   E.   Term: A dance permit may be issued for one or more public dances and
shall be valid for such days and times as may be specified in the permit. A
permit for a public dancing place shall expire on December 31 following its
issuance. (1982 Code § 7.275)
CHAPTER 4
REFUSE COLLECTORS
SECTION:
3-4-1: License Required
3-4-2: Application
3-4-3: Fees
3-4-4: Bond; Insurance
3-4-5: Approval; Issuance
3-4-6: Term
3-4-7: Additional Rules
3-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, other than employees of the municipal refuse collection system, in
the course of their work, whether or not for hire, shall collect or remove any
refuse from the premises of another, or transport the same over any street,
alley, or other public way, within the city, without first having obtained a
license to do so. (1982 Code § 8.471)
3-4-2: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license shall file an application with the city clerk in
the form prescribed by the city clerk. The application shall state the name,
address and age of the applicant, the type of equipment to be used, a schedule
of rates to be charged for the services provided, the place to which the refuse
is to be hauled and such other information as the city council may require. No
person shall make a false statement on any application. (1982 Code § 8.472)
3-4-3: FEES:
The city council shall, by resolution, establish the license fees to be
charged. (1982 Code § 8.473)
3-4-4: BOND; INSURANCE:
   A.   Bond: When the city council deems it reasonably necessary in view of
the applicant's proposed services, equipment, experience and training, the city
council may require as a condition of the issuance of a license that the
applicant furnish bond in an amount determined by the city council for the
performance of the licensed activity in accordance with all provisions of law
and administrative regulation and of this code.
   B.   Insurance: The council may, in addition to or in lieu of bond, require
that a licensee file with the city clerk a policy of insurance in such kinds
and amounts as the city council may determine. (1982 Code § 8.474)
3-4-5: APPROVAL; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Investigation: The city council may make such investigation of the
fitness of any applicant for a license as it deems appropriate.
   B.   Denial Of Application: The city council may deny a license to any
applicant when it finds that the applicant lacks sufficient training
experience, equipment or employees to provide the services proposed at the
rates proposed in a safe, sanitary or efficient manner, or if it finds that no
need exists for the service proposed.
   C.   Approval Of Application; Issuance: If the city council approves
issuance of a license, the city clerk shall issue the license upon the
applicant paying the necessary fees and filing with the city clerk any required
bond or policy of insurance. (1982 Code § 8.475)
3-4-6: TERM:
Licenses shall be issued for one year. (1982 Code § 8.476)
3-4-7: ADDITIONAL RULES:
The city council may, by resolution, provide such additional rules and
regulations as may be proper to carry out and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. (1982 Code § 8.477)
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLERS, HAWKERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Peddlers And Hawkers
3-5-2: Transient Merchants
3-5-1: PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall go in or upon any private residence
or other private property within the city for the purpose of selling or
soliciting orders for the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise without
having first obtained a license to do so. Pursuant to Minnesota constitution,
article 13, section 7, no person shall be required to obtain a license to sell
or peddle the products of the farm or garden occupied and cultivated by him or
her. (1982 Code § 7.321)
   B.   Posted Premises: No person shall sell or solicit orders for the sale of
any goods, wares or merchandise at any private premises conspicuously posted
near the entrance with a sign stating "No Peddlers" or any other message
indicating that the occupants do not want to have any peddler or solicitor call
upon them, or to otherwise have their privacy disturbed. (1982 Code § 7.322)
3-5-2: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS:
No transient merchant shall operate in the city without having first obtained a
license to do so. No license shall be required of any transient merchant
excepted by law from having to obtain any transient merchant's license also
required by law. (1982 Code § 7.331)
CHAPTER 6
CIGARETTE SALES
SECTION:
3-6-1: License Required
3-6-2: Restrictions
3-6-3: Conditions Of License
3-6-4: Blind Persons
3-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall, directly or indirectly, or by means of any device, keep for
retail sales sell at retail or otherwise furnish to another for any
consideration, whether directly or indirectly, any cigarette, cigarette paper,
or cigarette wrapper within the city without having first obtained a license to
do so. (1982 Code § 7.311)
3-6-2: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to the issuance of a license:
   A.   Moral Character Of Applicant: No license shall be issued except to a
person of good moral character.
   B.   Place Of Business; Temporary License: No license shall be issued to an
applicant for sale of cigarettes at any place other than the applicant's
established place of business, nor shall a license be issued for the sale of
cigarettes at a movable place of business. However, a temporary license may be
issued at a temporary place of business for the duration of a special event
only.
   C.   Individual Premises: Each license shall be issued for the sale of
cigarettes at only one place of business.
   D.   Proximity To Church Or School: No license, other than a temporary
license, shall be issued for any business within fifty feet (50') of any public
school or within fifty feet (50') of any church, as measured by the shortest
distance between the nearest points of the business and the school or church
building. (1982 Code § 7.312)
3-6-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
In addition to conditions established elsewhere in this code, every license
shall be subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Harmful Substances: No licensee shall keep for sale, sell or give away
any cigarette containing opium, morphine, Jimson weed, belladonna, strychnia,
cocaine, marijuana or any other deleterious or poisonous drug except nicotine.
   B.   Sale To Children 1 : No licensee shall sell, give away, or permit any
vending machine to be used to sell any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette
wrapper to any person below eighteen (18) years of age. (1982 Code § 7.314)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 609.685.
3-6-4: BLIND PERSONS:
Pursuant to the requirements of Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 461.15, no
blind person shall be required to pay the license fee. (1982 Code § 7.313)
CHAPTER 7
GAMBLING 1
SECTION:
3-7-1: Purpose
3-7-2: State Law Adopted
3-7-3: License Required
3-7-4: Application
3-7-5: License Fee
3-7-6: Eligibility For License
3-7-7: Eligible Premises
3-7-8: Permit Required, Certain Lawful Gambling Activities
3-7-9: Gambling Manager
3-7-10: Reporting Requirements
3-7-11: Profits
3-7-12: Suspension; Revocation
3-7-13: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 25.
3-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to closely regulate and control the conduct of
gambling. (Ord. 226, 9-19-1996)
3-7-2: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes Annotated chapter 349, section 609.75,
subdivision 3, and section 609.761 relating to the definition of terms,
licensing, and restrictions of gambling are adopted and made a part of this
chapter as if set out in full. (Ord. 226, 9-19-1996; amd. 2005 Code)
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall directly or indirectly operate a gambling device or conduct a
raffle without a license to do so as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 226, 9-19-
1996)
3-7-4: APPLICATION:
   A.   Form: Application for a license shall be made upon a form prescribed by
the city council.
   B.   False Statement: No person shall make a false representation in an
application.
   C.   City Council Action: The city council shall act upon said application
within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of application. The city
council shall review each application as an initial application. (Ord. 226, 9-
19-1996)
3-7-5: LICENSE FEE:
There shall be an investigation fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable
every two (2) years to conduct lawful gambling within the city. (Ord. 285, 7-6-
2010)
3-7-6: ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
A license shall be issued only to fraternal, religious, and veterans'
organizations, or any corporation, trust, or association organized for
exclusively scientific, literary, charitable, educational, or artistic
purposes, or any club which is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure
or recreation. Such organization must have been in existence for at least three
(3) years and shall have at least thirty (30) active members. (Ord. 226, 9-19-
1996)
3-7-7: ELIGIBLE PREMISES:
Gambling shall be conducted by a licensed organization only upon premises which
it owns or leases. Leases shall be in writing and shall be for a term of at
least twelve (12) months. No lease shall provide that rental payments be based
on a percentage of receipts. A copy of the lease shall be filed with the city
clerk. (Ord. 226, 9-19-1996)
3-7-8: PERMIT REQUIRED, CERTAIN LAWFUL GAMBLING ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person or organization shall conduct the following
gambling activities exempt from licensure requirements of Minnesota Statutes
Annotated section 349.16, without first obtaining a permit from the city:
      1.   Bingo conducted in connection with a civic celebration if it is not
conducted for more than twelve (12) consecutive days in a calendar year.
      2.   Bingo conducted by an organization which conducts four (4) or fewer
bingo occasions in a calendar year.
      3.   Raffles conducted by an organization wherein the value of all raffle
prizes awarded by the organization in a calendar year does not exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) with prizes valued at fair market value.
      4.   Raffles conducted by an organization which directly or under
contract to the state or political subdivision delivers health or social
services and is exempt from taxation under internal revenue code 501(c)(3), if
prizes awarded in the raffles are real or personal property donated by an
individual, firm or other organization.
   B.   Application: To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an
application in a form furnished for such purpose. The application shall contain
the following:
      1.   Name and address of organization requesting permit.
      2.   Address of officers and person accounting for receipts, expenses and
profits for the event.
      3.   Dates of bingo occasion or raffle for which permit is requested.
      4.   Premises on which event will occur.
      5.   Copy of any rental or leasing arrangement connected with the event
including rental to be charged to the organization.
      6.   Estimated value of prizes to be awarded.
   C.   Permit Fee: No fee shall be required for a permit issued.
   D.   Use Of Profits: Profits from the conduct of a bingo occasion or raffle
shall be used for "lawful purposes" 1 . (Ord. 226, 9-19-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 349.12, subd. 25.
3-7-9: GAMBLING MANAGER:
   A.   Designation: All lawful gambling operations shall be under the
supervision of a single gambling manager to be designated by the organization.
   B.   Qualifications: The gambling manager shall be an active member of the
organization and shall qualify under state law.
   C.   Bond: The gambling manager shall provide a fidelity bond in the sum of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in favor of the organization conditioned on
the faithful performance of his duties.
   D.   Responsibilities: The gambling manager shall be responsible for gross
receipts and profits from lawful gambling and for their operation. The gambling
manager shall be responsible for using profits for a proper purpose. (Ord. 226,
9-19-1996)
3-7-10: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Gross Receipts: Each organization licensed to operate lawful gambling
shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and profits for each single
gathering or occasion at which lawful gambling is used. All deductions from
gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with
receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the service
or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of
profits shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
   B.   Separation Of Funds: Gross receipts from the operation of lawful
gambling shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization and placed
in a separate account. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and
profits from the lawful gambling shall not be the same person who accounts for
other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Monthly Reports: Each organization licensed to operate lawful gambling
shall report monthly to its membership and to the city clerk, its gross
receipts, expenses and profits from gambling devices or raffles, and the
distribution of profits. The organization will provide the city clerk with an
annual audit at the end of the license year. The licensee shall preserve such
records for three (3) years. (Ord. 226, 9-19-1996)
3-7-11: PROFITS:
Profits from the operation of lawful gambling shall be used for "lawful
purposes" as contained in Minnesota Statutes Annotated 349.12, subdivision 25.
Each organization conducting lawful gambling within the city shall contribute
at least sixty five percent (65%) of its lawful purpose expenditures in the
trade area. The city's trade area shall be the city limits of the city. (Ord.
226, 9-19-1996)
3-7-12: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION:
   A.   Suspension: Any license may be suspended or revoked for any violation
of this chapter. A license shall not be suspended or revoked until the
procedural requirements of subsection B of this section have been complied
with; provided, that in cases where probable cause exists as to a violation,
the city may temporarily suspend upon service of notice of the hearing provided
for in subsection B of this section. Such temporary suspension shall not extend
for more than two (2) weeks.
   B.   Revocation: A license shall not be revoked under subsection A of this
section until notice and a opportunity for a hearing have first been given to
the licensee. The notice shall be personally served and shall state the
provision reasonably believed to be violated. The notice shall also state that
the licensee may demand a hearing on the matter, in which case the license will
not be suspended until after the hearing is held. If the licensee requests a
hearing, one shall be held on the matter by the council at least one week after
the date on which the request is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the
council finds that a violation exists, then the city council may suspend or
terminate the license. (Ord. 226, 9-19-1996)
3-7-13: PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. A person
convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
as provided in the general penalty in subsection 1-4-1B of this code, plus in
either case the costs of prosecution. (Ord. 226, 9-19-1996; amd. 2005 Code)
CHAPTER 8
KENNELS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definition
3-8-2: License Required
3-8-3: Application
3-8-4: Fee
3-8-5: Issuance
3-8-6: Term
3-8-7: Tags
3-8-8: Conditions And Restrictions
3-8-1: DEFINITION:
"Kennel" means any establishment where dogs are boarded for profit or are kept
for the purpose of breeding or sale, and any other place where three (3) or
more dogs over the age of six (6) months are kept. (Ord. 283, 6-1-2010)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate any kennel within the city without first having
obtained a license to do so. (1982 Code § 8.592)
3-8-3: APPLICATION:
Application for a kennel license shall be made to the city clerk. (1982 Code §
8.593)
3-8-4: FEE:
The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fee for a kennel license.
(1982 Code § 8.594)
3-8-5: ISSUANCE:
A license shall be issued by the city clerk upon proper application accompanied
by payment of the required fee. (1982 Code § 8.595)
3-8-6: TERM:
Each license issued shall become effective when issued and shall expire on the
last day of the same month in the next calendar year that it was issued. (1982
Code § 8.596)
3-8-7: TAGS:
   A.   Issuance: The city clerk shall issue with the license a number of metal
tags equal to the number of dogs for which the kennel is licensed.
   B.   Form: The tags shall be made in a form so that they may be readily
distinguishable from the individual license tags for the same year.
   C.   Collar: The licensee shall at all times keep a tag attached to the
collar of each dog over six (6) months old kept in the kennel under a kennel
license.
   D.   Transfer Of Tags: The tags may be transferred from one dog to another
within the kennel. (1982 Code § 8.597)
3-8-8: CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Condition Of Premises: The licensee shall keep the premises in a clean,
quiet, orderly and sanitary condition. (1982 Code § 8.598)
   B.   Location: No kennel may be located except in a commercial district
under subsection 11-1-2C2 of this code, or in an industrial district under
subsection 11-1-2D of this code. (Ord. 284, 6-1-2010)
   C.   Compliance Required: The licensee shall obey all requirements imposed
by law, regulation and this code.
   D.   Other Licenses Or Permits: The issuance of a kennel license shall not
relieve any licensee of obtaining any other license or permit which may be
required by law or by any other part of this code. (1982 Code § 8.598)
   E.   Rental Property: If the kennel is located on rented property, the
applicant shall obtain written consent from the recorded owners of the
property. (Ord. 286, 7-6-2010)
CHAPTER 9
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 1
SECTION:
3-9-1: Purpose
3-9-2: License Required
3-9-3: Application
3-9-4: License Fees
3-9-5: Granting Of License
3-9-6: Persons Ineligible For License
3-9-7: Premises Ineligible For License
3-9-8: Building Standards
3-9-9: Conditions Of License
3-9-10: Hours Of Operation
3-9-11: Existing Licensee Compliance
3-9-12: Principal Use License Fees
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 11, chapter 2 of this code.
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing the licensing
of sexually oriented businesses classified as adult use-principal in the city
and to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. (Ord. 227, 5-6-
1997)
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a sexually oriented business classified as "adult use-
principal" defined in section
11-2-4 of this code and "adult uses-accessory" defined in section
11-2-5 of this code without having first secured a license as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 227, 5-6-1997)
3-9-3: APPLICATION:
In addition to such applicable information as the city may require, an
application for the license required by this chapter shall include the
following information:
   A.   Applicant: The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the
applicant, if an individual; and if a corporation, the names, residences, phone
numbers and birth dates of those owners holding more than five percent (5%) of
the outstanding stock of the corporation.
   B.   Manager: The name, address, phone number and birth date of the manager
of such operation, if different from the owners.
   C.   Premises: The premises where in the adult use is to be located.
   D.   Prior Offenses: A statement detailing each gross misdemeanor or felony
relating to a sex offense and/or the operation of adult uses and related
activities of which the applicant or, in the case of a corporation, the owners
of more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation,
having been convicted, and whether or not the applicant has ever applied for or
held a license to operate a similar type of business in other communities.
   E.   Type Of Business: The activities and types of business to be conducted.
   F.   Hours: The hours of operation.
   G.   Minors: The provisions made to restrict access by minors.
   H.   Building Plan: A building plan of the premises detailing all internal
operations and activities. (Ord. 227, 5-6-1997)
3-9-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Payment Required; Refund: Each application for a license shall be
accompanied by a receipt from the city for payment in full of the required fee
for the license. All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the
municipality. Upon rejection of any applications for a license, the city may
refund the license fee paid, minus the amount of costs necessary for
application, investigation and review, including, but not limited to, costs
relating to administration, planning, legal, inspection and police
investigation.
   B.   Term; Proration: All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each
calendar year. Each license shall be issued for a period of one year, except
that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is made,
a license may be issued for the remainder of the year, any unexpired fraction
of a month shall be counted as one month.
   C.   Annual Fee: The annual fee for an adult use-principal license shall be
as set forth in section
3-9-12 of this chapter.
   D.   Criteria For Refund: No part of the fee paid by any licensee shall be
refunded except in the following instances upon application to the city manager
within thirty (30) days from the happening of any of the following events.
There shall be refunded a pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period
of the license, computed on a monthly basis, when operation of the licensed
business ceases not less than one month before expiration of the license
because of:
      1.   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe;
      2.   The licensee's disabling illness;
      3.   The licensee's death. (Ord. 227, 5-6-1997)
3-9-5: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
   A.   Investigation; Hearing: The city manager or his or her designated
representatives shall investigate all facts set out in the application. A
public hearing shall be held before the city council prior to any action taken
on the license application.
   B.   City Council Action; Criteria For Evaluation: After such investigation
and hearing, the city council shall grant or refuse the application. Criteria
for evaluating a license shall include the following:
      1.   Application shall be completed in full.
      2.   Applicant shall be eligible for license.
      3.   Location shall be eligible for license.
      4.   Applicant shall provide description of merchandise, services or
entertainment for sale in premises.
      5.   Applicant shall identify means of restricting access by minors and
shall not employ any minors.
      6.   Applicant shall provide property owner's name and address and
business owner's name and address.
      7.   The adult use shall be in compliance with all applicable city code
regulations
   C.   Transferability: Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and
shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only
for the premises described in the application. No license shall be transferred
to another place without the approval of the city council. (Ord. 227, 5-6-1997)
3-9-6: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be granted to or held by any person:
   A.   Age: Under twenty one (21) years of age;
   B.   Felony Conviction: Who has been convicted of a felony or of violating
any law of this state or local ordinance relating to sex offenses and/or adult
uses;
   C.   Proprietor: Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which
the license is issued. (Ord. 227, 5-6-1997)
3-9-7: PREMISES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Prior Violations: No license shall be granted for adult uses on any
premises where a licensee has been convicted of a violation of this chapter, or
where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause, until one year has
elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
   B.   Compliance With Zoning: Except for uses lawfully existing at the time
of the adoption of this chapter, no license shall be granted for any adult use
which is not in compliance with the city's zoning regulations. (Ord. 227, 5-6-
1997)
3-9-8: BUILDING STANDARDS:
   A.   Prohibited Activities: No commercial building, structure, premises, or
part thereof, or facilities therein used by a sexually oriented business
classified as an adult use-principal shall be so constructed, used, designed or
operated for the purpose of engaging in, or permitting persons to engage in
"sexual activities" as defined in section
11-2-2 of this code.
   B.   Prohibited Partitions, Booths, Stalls, Etc.: No person shall own,
operate, manage, rent, lease, or exercise control of any commercial building,
structure, premises, or portion or part thereof, which contains:
      1.   Partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a
building, structure or premises having an aperture which is designed or
constructed to facilitate sexual activity between persons on either side of the
partition.
      2.   Booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room, or individual
rooms, used for adult uses, having doors, curtains or portal partitions, unless
such booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms so
used shall have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the
area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room. Such areas shall
be lighted in a manner that the persons in the area used for adult uses are
visible from the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be of such
intensity as to prevent the viewing of motion pictures or other offered adult
uses.
   C.   Viewing Areas Or Booths:
      1.   Accessibility: All viewing areas or booths in movie arcades shall be
accessible from a continuous main aisle.
      2.   Location: All viewing areas or booths shall be located together
along a continuous main aisle to eliminate the possibility of secluded booths
elsewhere on the premises.
      3.   Number Of Persons Allowed: No more than one person shall be
permitted to enter or remain in a viewing area or booth at any time.
      4.   Maintenance: The viewing areas or booth shall be maintained at all
times in a clean and sanitary manner.
   D.   Entrances: All entrances to the business, with the exception of
emergency fire exits not usable to enter the business, shall be visible from a
public right of way. (Ord. 227, 5-6-1997)
3-9-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Subject To Code And Applicable Law: Every license shall be granted
subject to all of the conditions of this code, and of any other applicable
county, state or federal law.
   B.   Posting Of License: All licensed premises shall have the license posted
in a conspicuous place at all times.
   C.   Minors: No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
   D.   Right Of Entry: Any designated inspection officer of the city shall
have the unqualified right to enter and inspect all public areas of the
premises of a licensee during regular business hours.
   E.   Responsibility For Conduct: Every licensee shall be responsible for the
conduct of his place of business and shall maintain conditions of order. (Ord.
227, 5-6-1997)
3-9-10: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Sexually oriented businesses adult use-principal operations shall be restricted
from operating between the hours of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 227, 5-6-1997)
3-9-11: EXISTING LICENSEE COMPLIANCE:
All existing businesses shall be required to conform with this chapter on or
before August 1, 1997. Failure to comply will result in the license being
revoked effective twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight August 1, 1997. (Ord. 227, 5-
6-1997)
3-9-12: PRINCIPAL USE LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Investigation Fee: Nonrefundable investigation fee shall be as set by
resolution of the city council.
   B.   Annual License Fee: Annual license fee for adult use-principal license
shall be as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 227, 5-6-1997)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Department Continued
4-1-2: Duties
4-1-1: DEPARTMENT CONTINUED:
A nonprofit volunteer fire department duly incorporated under the laws of the
state of Minnesota is hereby continued. (1982 Code § 2.421)
4-1-2: DUTIES:
Members of the fire department shall perform such duties relating to the
extinguishment and prevention of fires, protection of life and property from
fires, and have such other powers and duties relating to firefighting and fire
prevention as are prescribed by law, by charter, by this code and as the city
council may determine. (1982 Code § 2.422)
CHAPTER 1A
EMERGENCY PROTECTION FIRE SERVICES
SECTION:
4-1A-1: Purpose And Intent
4-1A-2: Definitions
4-1A-3: Parties Affected
4-1A-4: Rates
4-1A-5: Billing And Collection
4-1A-6: Mutual Aid Agreement
4-1A-7: Application Of Collections To Budget
4-1A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the city of Dawson to
charge for fire service as authorized by Minnesota statutes sections 366.011,
366.012, and 415.01. (Ord. 296, 1-3-2012)
4-1A-2: DEFINITIONS:
FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACT: A contract between the city and a town or other city
for the city to provide fire service.
FIRE SERVICE: Any deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to
extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to protect
equipment, life, or property in an area threatened by fire. It also includes
the deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to provide fire
suppression, rescue, extrication, and any other services related to fire and
rescue as may occasionally occur.
FIRE SERVICE CHARGE: The charge imposed by the city for receiving fire service.
JOINT POWERS AGREEMENT: An agreement between the city and townships or other
cities for the city's fire department to provide fire service to that township
or city.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally manufactured
to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not operated
exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes semitrailers. It does not include
snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all-terrain vehicles, or park trailers.
MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT: An agreement between the city and a town or other city
for the city's fire department to provide assistance to the fire department of
a town or other city. (Ord. 296, 1-3-2012)
4-1A-3: PARTIES AFFECTED:
   A.   Owners of property within the city who receive fire service.
   B.   Anyone who receives fire service as a result of a motor vehicle
accident or fire within the city.
   C.   Owners of property in towns or cities to which the city provides fire
service pursuant to a fire protection contract or a joint powers agreement.
(Ord. 296, 1-3-2012)
4-1A-4: RATES:
The rate charged to the parties affected in section
4-1A-3 of this chapter shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each fire
service. The fire service charge for each fire service will be charged to the
parties affected under section
4-1A-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 296, 1-3-2012)
4-1A-5: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Parties requesting and receiving fire services may be billed directly
by the city. Additionally, if the party receiving fire services did not request
services but a fire or other situation exists which, at the discretion of the
fire department personnel in charge requires fire service, the party will be
charged and billed. All parties will be billed whether or not the fire service
is covered by insurance. Any billable amount of the fire charge not covered by
a party's insurance remains a debt of the party receiving the fire service.
   B.   Parties billed for fire service will have thirty (30) days to pay. If
the fire service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered
delinquent and the city will send a notice of delinquency.
   C.   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after
this notice of delinquency is sent, the city will use all practical and
reasonable legal means to collect the fire service charge. The party receiving
fire service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by the city
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
   D.   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after
the notice of delinquency is sent, the city council may also, on or before
October 15 of each year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the county
auditor in which the recipient of the services owns real property for
collection with property taxes. The county auditor is responsible for remitting
to the city all charges collected on behalf of the city. The city must give the
property owner notice of its intent to certify the unpaid fire service charge
by September 15.
   E.   The first three (3) false alarms will not be billed as a fire call. If
a fourth false alarm occurs, a fire service charge will be billed as set out in
section
4-1A-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 296, 1-3-2012)
4-1A-6: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT:
When the city fire department provides fire service to another fire department
pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, the billing will be determined by the
mutual aid agreement. (Ord. 296, 1-3-2012)
4-1A-7: APPLICATION OF COLLECTIONS TO BUDGET:
All collected fire charges will be city funds and used to offset the expenses
of the city fire department in providing fire services. (Ord. 296, 1-3-2012)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE SAFETY
SECTION:
4-2-1: False Alarms
4-2-2: Interference Prohibited
4-2-3: Driving Over Fire Hose
4-2-4: Injury To Apparatus Or Equipment
4-2-1: FALSE ALARMS 1 :
No person shall give or make or cause to be given or made a fire alarm without
probable cause. (1982 Code § 8.211)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 609.686.
4-2-2: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED 1 :
No person shall neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of any
firefighter at a fire, or interfere with the fire department in the discharge
of its duties. (1982 Code § 8.212)
 
Notes
1 2. MSA § 609.50.
4-2-3: DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE 1 :
No person without permission of a firefighter at the scene shall drive any
vehicle over any fire hose. (1982 Code § 8.212)
 
Notes
1 3. MSA § 169.41.
4-2-4: INJURY TO APPARATUS OR EQUIPMENT:
No person shall intentionally injure any fire hose or any other fire apparatus
or equipment. (1982 Code § 8.212)
CHAPTER 3
NUISANCES 1
SECTION:
4-3-1: Public Nuisances Prohibited
4-3-2: Unwholesome Meat And Food
4-3-3: Unsanitary Uses
4-3-4: Abatement
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 23.
4-3-1: PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall, by any act or by any failure to perform a legal duty,
intentionally do any of the following:
   A.   Maintain or permit a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number or numbers of the public.
   B.   Interfere with, obstruct or render dangerous for passage any public
highway, right of way or waters used by the public.
   C.   Engage in any other act or omission declared by law or by this code to
be a public nuisance. (1982 Code § 8.111)
4-3-2: UNWHOLESOME MEAT AND FOOD:
No person shall sell, expose for sale or in any manner dispose of to the public
any emaciated, tainted or putrid meat or any unwholesome food of any kind.
(1982 Code § 8.312)
4-3-3: UNSANITARY USES:
No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the city, any dead animal or offal, any human or animal
excrement, or any garbage, rubbish, litter or any other objectionable wastes.
Any such deposit or accumulation is a public nuisance. (1982 Code § 8.313)
4-3-4: ABATEMENT:
   A.   Notice:
      1.   Notice To Abate: Whenever any public nuisance exists, the city
council may, by resolution, direct the city clerk to give notice to the person
responsible for creating, maintaining or permitting the nuisance or to the
owner of the property, or to any or all of them, to abate the nuisance.
      2.   Contents Of Notice: The notice shall describe each nuisance, and
shall specify the time, considering the nature of each nuisance and the
difficulty of correcting it, within which each nuisance or all of them must be
abated.
   B.   Failure To Abate: Any person who fails to abate any public nuisance
when required to do so shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1982 Code § 8.112)
   C.   Abatement By City: If each nuisance is not corrected within the time
specified, the city council may, by resolution, order the nuisance abated at
the expense of the person notified. If the owner of real property was notified,
the cost of abatement shall also be a lien against the property and may be
collected as a special assessment if not promptly paid. (1982 Code § 8.113)
   D.   Abatement Procedures In Special Cases: Abatement of hazardous buildings
shall be made pursuant to the requirements of Minnesota Statutes Annotated
sections 463.15 through 463.26. Abatement of any other nuisances for which
special requirements are provided by law shall be in the manner provided by
law. (1982 Code § 8.114)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
ARTICLE A. GENERAL REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
4-4A-1: Definitions
4-4A-2: Use Of Municipal Or Licensed Collector Required
4-4A-3: Open Burning Prohibited
4-4A-4: Improper Deposit Of Refuse
4-4A-5: Scattering Refuse
4-4A-6: Removal Of Refuse
4-4A-7: Burying And Composting
4-4A-8: Recyclables
4-4A-9: Junked Vehicles And Machinery
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 22.
4-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning given to
them:
GARBAGE: Organic waste attending the preparation and consumption of food,
decayed, spoiled or discarded food, offal and other putrescible solid waste and
all other similar wastes from the sale, preparation, consumption and discarding
of food.
RECYCLABLES: Any paper, plastic, metal, aluminum, oil, glass and other items
capable of being recycled, but only when such items are being properly stored
for recycling and are at appropriate intervals taken from the premises to a
place where they are collected to be recycled.
REFUSE: Garbage and rubbish plus all other solid wastes. It does not include
recyclables actually and reasonably being stored for recycling.
RUBBISH: Paper boxes, cartons, cans, bottles, metals, tires and tubes, plastic,
glass and other similar articles of debris which are unsightly or may endanger
health or safety if allowed to accumulate or scatter. (1982 Code § 8.411)
4-4A-2: USE OF MUNICIPAL OR LICENSED COLLECTOR REQUIRED:
No householder, occupant or owner of any residence shall cause or allow any
refuse to be taken from the property except by the municipal refuse collection
system or a refuse collector licensed by the city. A householder, occupant or
owner of any residence, who also has ownership in a business which receives
refuse collection may take refuse from his residence to the business for
collection by the municipal refuse collection system or a refuse collector
licensed by the city. (Ord. 264, 2-20-2007)
4-4A-3: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall dispose of any garbage, rubbish or other refuse by open
burning, nor shall any person owning or having control of any premises cause or
permit the same, in the city, except upon application to and approval by the
appropriate state agency and in the manner and under the conditions and
restrictions established by law and administrative regulation. (1982 Code §
8.412)
4-4A-4: IMPROPER DEPOSIT OF REFUSE:
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse:
   A.   In any stream or other body of water;
   B.   Upon any street, alley or other public property, except that refuse
from picnicking or other use at a park, from pedestrians using a sidewalk and
from other similar uses may be deposited in proper containers provided for that
purpose;
   C.   Upon the property of another without permission to do so or in
violation of any requirement of law, regulations or this code; or
   D.   Upon property owned by, occupied by or otherwise in control of the
person doing so unless in proper containers for storage of the refuse until
collected or otherwise disposed of properly. (1982 Code § 8.413)
4-4A-5: SCATTERING REFUSE:
No person shall keep or haul, or allow to be kept on or hauled to or from
premises owned by, occupied by, or in control of that person, any refuse in a
manner that the wind, water or any other cause will or is likely to scatter the
refuse from the place of keeping or transport. (1982 Code § 8.414)
4-4A-6: REMOVAL OF REFUSE:
Refuse which accumulates between collections shall be set out for removal with
each collection from premises regularly served by a refuse collection service.
Refuse from other premises shall be removed and disposed of properly at such
intervals as will prevent it from becoming rotten and offensive to smell and as
will prevent a greater accumulation than can be held by the containers used. No
person shall cause or allow any unsanitary or unsightly accumulation of refuse
upon any property owned by, occupied by or in the control of that person. Any
such accumulation is a public nuisance. (1982 Code § 8.415)
4-4A-7: BURYING AND COMPOSTING:
No person shall bury any refuse in the city except in an approved sanitary
landfill, except that leaves, lawn clippings and suitable, easily biodegradable
garbage may be composted on the premises where they have accumulated.
Composting may be done only in a rodentproof container, in a sanitary manner,
with no objectionable odors, and in full compliance with all other applicable
requirements. (1982 Code § 8.416)
4-4A-8: RECYCLABLES:
Recyclables shall be kept in suitable containers or bundled neatly. The
containers or bundles shall be kept in an enclosed building or otherwise
protected from public view. Recyclables shall be taken to a place where they
are collected for recycling whenever necessary to prevent an excessive
accumulation of them. When stored on the premises, they shall be kept in a safe
and sanitary manner. (1982 Code § 8.417)
4-4A-9: JUNKED VEHICLES AND MACHINERY:
No person shall leave upon any property within the city, and no person in
charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow to remain on the property, any
partially dismantled, inoperative, wrecked, junked, unlicensed or discarded
vehicle or machinery for longer than ten (10) days, unless the vehicle or
machinery is in an enclosed building or on the premises of a lawfully operated
business engaged in the repair, storage or junking of such vehicles. (1982 Code
§ 8.419)
ARTICLE A. GENERAL REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
4-4A-1: Definitions
4-4A-2: Use Of Municipal Or Licensed Collector Required
4-4A-3: Open Burning Prohibited
4-4A-4: Improper Deposit Of Refuse
4-4A-5: Scattering Refuse
4-4A-6: Removal Of Refuse
4-4A-7: Burying And Composting
4-4A-8: Recyclables
4-4A-9: Junked Vehicles And Machinery
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 22.
4-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning given to
them:
GARBAGE: Organic waste attending the preparation and consumption of food,
decayed, spoiled or discarded food, offal and other putrescible solid waste and
all other similar wastes from the sale, preparation, consumption and discarding
of food.
RECYCLABLES: Any paper, plastic, metal, aluminum, oil, glass and other items
capable of being recycled, but only when such items are being properly stored
for recycling and are at appropriate intervals taken from the premises to a
place where they are collected to be recycled.
REFUSE: Garbage and rubbish plus all other solid wastes. It does not include
recyclables actually and reasonably being stored for recycling.
RUBBISH: Paper boxes, cartons, cans, bottles, metals, tires and tubes, plastic,
glass and other similar articles of debris which are unsightly or may endanger
health or safety if allowed to accumulate or scatter. (1982 Code § 8.411)
4-4A-2: USE OF MUNICIPAL OR LICENSED COLLECTOR REQUIRED:
No householder, occupant or owner of any residence shall cause or allow any
refuse to be taken from the property except by the municipal refuse collection
system or a refuse collector licensed by the city. A householder, occupant or
owner of any residence, who also has ownership in a business which receives
refuse collection may take refuse from his residence to the business for
collection by the municipal refuse collection system or a refuse collector
licensed by the city. (Ord. 264, 2-20-2007)
4-4A-3: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall dispose of any garbage, rubbish or other refuse by open
burning, nor shall any person owning or having control of any premises cause or
permit the same, in the city, except upon application to and approval by the
appropriate state agency and in the manner and under the conditions and
restrictions established by law and administrative regulation. (1982 Code §
8.412)
4-4A-4: IMPROPER DEPOSIT OF REFUSE:
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse:
   A.   In any stream or other body of water;
   B.   Upon any street, alley or other public property, except that refuse
from picnicking or other use at a park, from pedestrians using a sidewalk and
from other similar uses may be deposited in proper containers provided for that
purpose;
   C.   Upon the property of another without permission to do so or in
violation of any requirement of law, regulations or this code; or
   D.   Upon property owned by, occupied by or otherwise in control of the
person doing so unless in proper containers for storage of the refuse until
collected or otherwise disposed of properly. (1982 Code § 8.413)
4-4A-5: SCATTERING REFUSE:
No person shall keep or haul, or allow to be kept on or hauled to or from
premises owned by, occupied by, or in control of that person, any refuse in a
manner that the wind, water or any other cause will or is likely to scatter the
refuse from the place of keeping or transport. (1982 Code § 8.414)
4-4A-6: REMOVAL OF REFUSE:
Refuse which accumulates between collections shall be set out for removal with
each collection from premises regularly served by a refuse collection service.
Refuse from other premises shall be removed and disposed of properly at such
intervals as will prevent it from becoming rotten and offensive to smell and as
will prevent a greater accumulation than can be held by the containers used. No
person shall cause or allow any unsanitary or unsightly accumulation of refuse
upon any property owned by, occupied by or in the control of that person. Any
such accumulation is a public nuisance. (1982 Code § 8.415)
4-4A-7: BURYING AND COMPOSTING:
No person shall bury any refuse in the city except in an approved sanitary
landfill, except that leaves, lawn clippings and suitable, easily biodegradable
garbage may be composted on the premises where they have accumulated.
Composting may be done only in a rodentproof container, in a sanitary manner,
with no objectionable odors, and in full compliance with all other applicable
requirements. (1982 Code § 8.416)
4-4A-8: RECYCLABLES:
Recyclables shall be kept in suitable containers or bundled neatly. The
containers or bundles shall be kept in an enclosed building or otherwise
protected from public view. Recyclables shall be taken to a place where they
are collected for recycling whenever necessary to prevent an excessive
accumulation of them. When stored on the premises, they shall be kept in a safe
and sanitary manner. (1982 Code § 8.417)
4-4A-9: JUNKED VEHICLES AND MACHINERY:
No person shall leave upon any property within the city, and no person in
charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow to remain on the property, any
partially dismantled, inoperative, wrecked, junked, unlicensed or discarded
vehicle or machinery for longer than ten (10) days, unless the vehicle or
machinery is in an enclosed building or on the premises of a lawfully operated
business engaged in the repair, storage or junking of such vehicles. (1982 Code
§ 8.419)
ARTICLE B. REFUSE CONTAINERS
SECTION:
4-4B-1: Containers Required
4-4B-2: Specifications
4-4B-3: Bagging
4-4B-4: Bulk Containers
4-4B-5: Proper Disposal; Prohibited Materials
4-4B-6: Maintenance
4-4B-7: Storage And Placement
4-4B-1: CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
Every owner, occupant or other person in control or in possession of any
dwelling or any other building in the city shall provide on the premises one or
more containers to receive and contain all normal refuse which may accumulate
between collections. (1982 Code § 8.431)
4-4B-2: SPECIFICATIONS:
Each container shall have a tight cover, shall not exceed thirty (30) gallons
in capacity, and shall have handles or handholds on the side. Inorganic refuse
and paper, leaves, lawn clippings, twigs, shavings, and similar refuse may be
stored and placed for collection in any suitable, sanitary and litterproof
container. (1982 Code § 8.432)
4-4B-3: BAGGING:
In lieu of using a container meeting the requirements of section
4-4B-2 of this article, any person may place any refuse in an airtight,
waterproof disposable plastic or other bag of sufficient durability to contain
the refuse placed in it without puncturing or bursting open. (1982 Code §
8.433)
4-4B-4: BULK CONTAINERS:
Any apartment building, business or industry may use bulk or box type refuse
containers. When municipal collection services are used, such containers must
be of a type which can be mechanically emptied by the collection vehicle
serving the premises or, including its contents, be of such weight, mobility
and size that one collector can reasonably upturn it and empty its contents
into the collection vehicle. (1982 Code § 8.434)
4-4B-5: PROPER DISPOSAL; PROHIBITED MATERIALS:
Household garbage and similar refuse shall be drained of liquid and wrapped in
paper before being placed in a container. Highly flammable or explosive
material shall not be placed in a container for refuse collection. (1982 Code §
8.435)
4-4B-6: MAINTENANCE:
All containers shall be maintained in good and sanitary condition, shall be
kept rodentproof and shall be kept, as nearly as practicable, insectproof. Any
container which is broken, which has ragged or sharp edges, which has any
defect likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents, or which
fails to meet the requirements of this article shall be promptly replaced.
(1982 Code § 8.436)
4-4B-7: STORAGE AND PLACEMENT:
Containers shall be stored in a suitable place inside the building, at the rear
door, or on the rear or side part of the grounds to the building. Where the
container is not or cannot be stored in a location which is easily accessible
for collection and which is close to where it is emptied, the container shall
be placed in such a location for collection. No container may be placed along
the front property line for collection before eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of the
night before collection or allowed to remain there after six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. of the day of collection. (1982 Code § 8.437)
ARTICLE C. MUNICIPAL REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION:
4-4C-1: System Continued
4-4C-2: Supervision
4-4C-3: Refuse Collector
4-4C-4: Refuse Utility Fund
4-4C-5: Rates
4-4C-6: Billing; Payment
4-4C-7: Unusual Items
4-4C-8: Additional Rules
4-4C-1: SYSTEM CONTINUED:
A municipal refuse collection system is hereby continued for the collection and
disposal of refuse accumulated within the city. The city council shall employ
necessary employees and furnish such tools and equipment as may be necessary
for the efficient and sanitary collection of refuse accumulated within the
city. (1982 Code § 8.451)
4-4C-2: SUPERVISION:
The city manager shall supervise and control the municipal collection and
disposal of refuse. (1982 Code § 8.452)
4-4C-3: REFUSE COLLECTOR:
The city council may, by resolution, designate one or more refuse collectors
licensed by the city as the municipal refuse collector for all refuse to be
collected under the municipal collection system or for such part of it as the
city council deems best. (1982 Code § 8.453)
4-4C-4: REFUSE UTILITY FUND:
   A.   Income: All income from the operation of the municipal refuse
collection system, and all license fees collected from licensed refuse
collectors, shall be paid into a separate fund designated as the refuse utility
fund.
   B.   Expenses: All expenses of operation shall be paid from this fund. In
the event the revenues credited to the fund are insufficient to pay all
expenses, the council may transfer to the fund from the general fund such
amounts as may be necessary.
   C.   Net Revenue: Net revenue from the fund shall be used for improvement
and extension of the refuse collection system, including necessary landfill
facilities, or for such other municipal purposes as may be proper. (1982 Code §
8.458)
4-4C-5: RATES:
   A.   Residential: The charge for the removal and disposal of refuse from
each residence served shall be four dollars ($4.00) per month.
   B.   Other Users:
      1.   System Of Charges: The city council shall establish, by resolution,
a system of service charges for the removal and disposal of refuse from all
other premises served by the municipal refuse collection system.
      2.   Considerations: It may set maximum or minimum charges according to
the type of service provided and required, based on the type of business
conducted, the frequency of collection and such other factors as may be
appropriate.
      3.   Additional Charges: It may also establish such other charges as may
be reasonable and proper, including special charges for special handling or
special collection and hauling of unusual or abnormal quantities of refuse.
(1982 Code § 8.454)
4-4C-6: BILLING; PAYMENT:
The charge for a building or establishment shall be separately entered on the
city water or sewer bill. If the premises are not served by city water or
sewer, the charge shall be separately billed. Charges for refuse collection
services shall be payable at the same time, subject to the same conditions and
may be enforced in the same manner as charges for city water service. (1982
Code § 8.455)
4-4C-7: UNUSUAL ITEMS:
   A.   Appliances, Furniture, Etc.: Appliances, furniture and other refuse of
an unusual nature which require special pick ups, and other refuse which is not
normally incident to the particular class of user involved, shall be collected
by the municipal collection system, subject to such charge as may be imposed
for their collection.
   B.   Flammable Or Explosive Material: No person shall place for collection
any highly flammable or explosive material except by special arrangements made
prior to collection. (1982 Code § 8.456)
4-4C-8: ADDITIONAL RULES:
The city council may, by resolution, provide such additional rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the municipal
refuse collection system. (1982 Code § 8.457)
ARTICLE D. MUNICIPAL DUMP
SECTION:
4-4D-1: Permit Required; Fee
4-4D-2: Noncombustible Refuse
4-4D-3: Further Restriction And Control
4-4D-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
No person, except a licensed refuse collector or except the municipal refuse
collection service, shall dump any refuse at any dumping ground owned, used or
controlled by the city without having first obtained a dumping permit from the
city clerk or without paying such dumping fee as the council may, by
resolution, establish for use of the dump. (1982 Code § 8.491)
4-4D-2: NONCOMBUSTIBLE REFUSE:
No person shall dump any noncombustible refuse at any municipal dump. (1982
Code § 8.491)
4-4D-3: FURTHER RESTRICTION AND CONTROL:
The city council may, by resolution, further restrict and control the use of
any municipal dump. (1982 Code § 8.491)
CHAPTER 5
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
SECTION:
4-5-1: Policy
4-5-2: Program
4-5-3: Tree Inspector
4-5-4: Inspection; Investigation
4-5-5: Nuisance Declared
4-5-6: Procedure For Removal
4-5-7: Spraying
4-5-8: Transporting Wood
4-5-9: Interference
4-5-10: Penalty
4-5-1: POLICY:
The city council has determined that the health of the elm trees within the
municipal limits is threatened by a fatal disease known as Dutch elm disease.
It has further determined that the loss of elm trees growing upon public and
private property would substantially depreciate the value of property within
the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of
the public. It is declared to be the intention of the city council to control
and prevent the spread of this disease and this chapter is enacted for that
purpose. (1982 Code § 8.6102)
4-5-2: PROGRAM:
It is the intention of the city council to conduct a program of plant pest
control pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota Statutes Annotated
sections 18.023 and 18.024. This program is directed specifically at the
control and elimination of Dutch elm disease fungus and elm bark beetles and is
undertaken at the recommendation of the commissioner of agriculture. The tree
inspector shall act as coordinator between the commissioner of agriculture and
the city council in the conduct of this program. (1982 Code § 8.6104)
4-5-3: TREE INSPECTOR:
   A.   Position Created: The tree inspector shall have the powers and duties
set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Appointment: The tree inspector shall be appointed annually by the city
council upon recommendation of the city park board.
   C.   Compensation: The tree inspector's salary shall be fixed by the city
council.
   D.   Duties: It is the duty of the tree inspector to coordinate, under the
direction and control of the council, all activities of the municipality
relating to the control and prevention of Dutch elm disease. He shall recommend
to the council the details of a program for the control of Dutch elm disease,
and perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the city council.
(1982 Code § 8.6103)
4-5-4: INSPECTION; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Annual Inspection: The tree inspector shall inspect all premises and
places within the city as often as practicable to determine whether any
condition described in section
4-5-5 of this chapter exists thereon. He shall investigate all reported
incidents of infestation by Dutch elm disease fungus or elm bark beetles.
   B.   Entry On Private Premises: The tree inspector or his duly authorized
agent may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of
carrying out any of the duties assigned him under this chapter.
   C.   Diagnosis: The tree inspector shall, upon finding conditions indicating
Dutch elm infestation, immediately send appropriate specimens or samples to the
commissioner of agriculture for analysis, or take such other steps for
diagnosis as may be recommended by the commissioner. Except as provided in
section
4-5-6 of this chapter, no action to remove infected trees or wood shall be
taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made. (1982 Code §
8.6106)
4-5-5: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   Public Nuisance: The following things are public nuisances whenever
they may be found within the city:
      1.   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Dutch elm disease fungus Ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) moreau or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistraitus (Eichh.) or
Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh).
      2.   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps,
firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and
burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide.
   B.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance
as defined in subsection A of this section to remain on any premises owned or
controlled by him within the city. Such nuisances may be abated in the manner
prescribed by this chapter. (1982 Code § 8.6105)
   C.   Abatement: In abating the nuisances defined in subsection A of this
section, the tree inspector shall cause the infected tree or wood to be
sprayed, removed, burned or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and
prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease fungus and elm
bark beetles. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with
current technical and expert opinions and plans as may be designated by the
commissioner of agriculture. (1982 Code § 8.6107)
4-5-6: PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL:
   A.   Infestation: Whenever the tree inspector finds, with reasonable
certainty, that the infestation defined in subsection 4-5-5A of this chapter
exists in any tree or wood in any public or private place in the city, he shall
proceed as follows:
      1.   Nonimminent Danger: If the tree inspector finds that the danger of
infestation of other elm trees is not imminent because of elm dormancy, he
shall make a written report of his finding to the city council which shall
proceed by:
         a.   Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under Minnesota
Statutes Annotated section 429.101, or
         b.   Abating the nuisance as provided in subsection B of this section.
      2.   Imminent Danger: If the tree inspector finds that danger of
infestation of other elm trees is imminent, he shall notify the abutting
property owner by certified mail that the nuisance will be abated within a
specified time, not less than twenty (20) days from the date of mailing of such
notice. The tree inspector shall immediately report such action to the city
council, and after the expiration of the time limited by the notice, the
inspector may abate the nuisance.
   B.   Order To Abate:
      1.   Resolution Of City Council: Upon receipt of the tree inspector's
report required by subsection A1 of this section, the city council shall, by
resolution, order the nuisance abated.
      2.   Notice Of Hearing; Publication: Before action is taken on such
resolution, the city council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to
consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to
affected property owners and published once no less than one week prior to such
meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the trees
affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the
proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs.
      3.   Public Hearing: At such hearing or adjournment thereof, the city
council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability
of the proposed project.
      4.   Readoption Of Resolution: The city council shall thereafter adopt a
resolution confirming the original resolution with such modifications as it
considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by
contract.
   C.   Costs; Report: The tree inspector shall keep a record of the costs of
abatement done under this section and shall report monthly to the city council
all work done for which assessments are to be made stating and certifying the
description of the land, lots, or parcels involved and the amount chargeable to
each.
   D.   Special Assessment: On or before September 1 of each year, the city
clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each
separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this chapter. The
city council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the
property involved as a special assessment under Minnesota Statutes Annotated
section 429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the county
auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes. (1982 Code
§ 8.6108)
4-5-7: SPRAYING:
   A.   Fungus Infection: Whenever the tree inspector determines that any elm
tree or elm wood within the city is infected with Dutch elm disease fungus, he
may spray all nearby high value elm trees with an effective elm bark beetle
destroying concentrate.
   B.   Spraying Activities: Spraying activities authorized by this section
shall be conducted in accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans
of the commissioner of agriculture and under the supervision of the
commissioner and his agents whenever possible.
   C.   Notice: The notice provisions of section
4-5-6 of this chapter apply to spraying operations conducted under this
section. (1982 Code § 8.6109)
4-5-8: TRANSPORTING WOOD:
It is unlawful for any person to transport within the city any bark bearing elm
wood without having obtained a permit from the tree inspector. The tree
inspector shall grant such permits only when the purposes of this chapter will
be served thereby. (1982 Code § 8.6110)
4-5-9: INTERFERENCE:
It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the tree
inspector or his agents while they are engaged in the performance of duties
imposed by this chapter. (1982 Code § 8.6111)
4-5-10: PENALTY:
Any person who violates section
4-5-8 or
4-5-9 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine
as provided in the general penalty in subsection 1-4-1B of this code. (1982
Code § 8.6112; amd. 2005 Code)
CHAPTER 6
WEEDS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Certain Weeds Prohibited
4-6-2: Certain Growths Prohibited
4-6-3: Weed Inspector
4-6-4: Notice And Removal By City
4-6-1: CERTAIN WEEDS PROHIBITED:
No person owning, occupying or in control of any property within the city shall
permit any ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac or any other noxious
weed to grow on it. (1982 Code § 8.631)
4-6-2: CERTAIN GROWTHS PROHIBITED:
All property owners, or persons occupying or in charge of any property, within
the city shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or disposal and
elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other uncontrolled plant
growth (generally referred to as plant matter) on their property, which at the
time of notice, is in excess of eight inches (8") in height. In addition, all
property owners, or persons occupying or in charge of any property, within the
city shall not allow clippings to remain on any city street, sidewalk or other
public property.
Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located within
the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant matter or clippings in
violation of this section shall make a complaint with the city clerk.
Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of plant matter or clippings in
violation of this section, the city shall inspect the property. If the property
is found to be in violation of this section, the property owner or the person
occupying the property shall be notified in writing of the violation.
The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of objections with the
city council within forty eight (48) hours of the notice, excluding weekends
and holidays.
In the event that the property owner shall fail to abate the violation within
five (5) regular business days and has not filed notice within forty eight (48)
hours to the city clerk of an intent to appeal, the city may employ the
services of city employees or outside contractors and remove the plant matter
to conform with this section by all lawful means. The property owner shall be
responsible for reimbursing the city for the full cost of abatement by outside
contractor or city employees at a rate established by city council resolution.
The city is not required to provide additional notices if the property owner
fails to abate the violation or otherwise appear on the matter for any
subsequent violations during the year.
All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special assessment
as provided by Minnesota statutes section 429.101, as it may be amended from
time to time. (Ord.
4-6-2, 8-5-2014)
4-6-3: WEED INSPECTOR:
Pursuant to the requirements of Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 18.80, the
mayor is hereby designated as weed inspector. The weed inspector may appoint
one or more assistant weed inspectors who shall have all the powers and
authority of the weed inspector. The weed inspector shall have such powers and
duties as are imposed by law or by this code. (1982 Code § 8.633)
4-6-4: NOTICE AND REMOVAL BY CITY:
Whenever any person fails to cut, destroy or otherwise eradicate any weeds or
other growths prohibited in this chapter, the weed inspector may cause them to
be cut, destroyed or otherwise eradicated. In doing so, the weed inspector
shall give notice to the owner, occupant or person in charge in accordance with
the requirements of Minnesota Statutes Annotated 18.83 and other applicable
laws. The cost and expense of the work done shall become a lien in favor of the
city and may be collected in the manner specified in Minnesota Statutes
Annotated 18.83 and other applicable laws. (1982 Code § 8.634)
CHAPTER 7
HANDBILLS AND NEWSPAPERS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Distribution
4-7-3: Newspapers
4-7-4: Posting Handbills
4-7-5: Merchant Liability
4-7-6: Nuisance Declared
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning given to
them:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any handbill which:
   A.   Advertises for sale any merchandise, produce, commodity or thing;
   B.   Directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial
establishment, or to any other activity, for the purpose of directly or
indirectly promoting the interest of the establishment or activity by
increasing its sales;
   C.   Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, performance, exhibition
or other event for which an admission fee will be charged or collection taken
up for private gain or profit, but not for which the admission fee will be
charged or collection will be taken up for the purpose of defraying the
expenses incident to the event; or
   D.   While containing reading matter other than advertising, is
predominately and essentially an advertisement and is distributed for
advertising purposes or for the gain of any person engaged in advertising in or
distributing it.
HANDBILL: Any printed, written or reproduced bill, announcement, notice,
circular, dodger, leaflet, pamphlet, booklet or similar matter designed or
actually used for distribution to others of the information contained in or on
it by handing it to others, by posting it, or by leaving it upon or at any
property to be seen or picked up and examined, but it does not include any such
item distributed by mail or any newspaper.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by law, any
newspaper duly entered with the United States postal service, any newspaper
filed and recorded with any officer as provided by law, and any periodical or
magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and
sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any handbill not included in the definition of a
commercial handbill.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, building or other structure designed or used
wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes any driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to the structure.
PUBLIC PARK: Any park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley, public way, or any public
park, square, spaces, grounds, or buildings. (1982 Code § 7.341)
4-7-2: DISTRIBUTION:
   A.   Public Places: No person shall place, deposit or otherwise distribute a
handbill into or upon any public place, except by handing or transmitting
without charge a noncommercial handbill to a person willing to accept it. (1982
Code § 7.342)
   B.   Vehicles: No person shall place, deposit or otherwise distribute a
handbill into or upon any vehicle except by handing or transmitting without
charge a noncommercial handbill to an occupant of a vehicle willing to accept
it. (1982 Code § 7.343)
   C.   Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises: No person shall place, deposit or
otherwise distribute any handbill in or upon any private premises which are
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (1982 Code § 7.344)
   D.   Posted Premises: No person shall place, deposit or otherwise distribute
any handbill in or upon any private premises conspicuously posted near the
entrance with a sign stating "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers", "No
Advertisements" or any other message indicating that the occupants do not want
to be disturbed, to have their privacy disturbed or to have any handbills left.
(1982 Code § 7.345)
   E.   Unposted Inhabited Premises: No person shall place, deposit or
otherwise distribute any handbill in or upon any inhabited private premises
which are not posted as provided in subsection 4-7-3D of this section if
requested by any person there not to do so. Otherwise, a handbill shall be
distributed at any unposted inhabited premises only by handing or transmitting
the handbill to a person then present at the premises or by securely placing
the handbill upon the premises so as to prevent it from being blown or carried
about or off the premises by the elements. Mailboxes may not be used if to do
so would violate federal law or regulations. (1982 Code § 7.346)
4-7-3: NEWSPAPERS:
Unless the newspaper is mailed, a newspaper shall be placed, deposited or
otherwise distributed at or to any premises only by handing or transmitting it
to a person then present at the premises or by securely placing it upon the
premises so as to prevent it from being blown or carried about or off the
premises by the elements. (1982 Code § 7.347)
4-7-4: POSTING HANDBILLS:
No person shall post or affix any handbill, notice, poster or other device
calculated to attract the attention of the public upon any public structure or
building, except as may be authorized or required by law; nor upon the property
of another, except by permission of that person. (1982 Code § 7.348)
4-7-5: MERCHANT LIABILITY:
Any merchant who advertises goods, wares or merchandise by causing the
advertising material to be distributed in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of violating this code to the same extent as the
person distributing the material. (1982 Code § 7.349)
4-7-6: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Each of the acts forbidden in this chapter are hereby declared to be a
nuisance. Any duly authorized city officer or employee may take such action as
may be proper to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any such nuisance. (1982
Code § 7.350)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Establishment
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-3: Membership
5-1-4: Duties
5-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There shall be a police department. (1982 Code § 2.411)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The head of the police department shall be known as the chief of police. The
chief shall be appointed by the city council, receive such compensation as the
city council may fix, and serve at the pleasure of the city council subject to
supervisory authority of the city manager. The chief shall supervise the
operation of the police department and shall have such other powers and duties
and keep such records as are prescribed by law, by charter, by this code and as
the city council may determine. (1982 Code § 2.412)
5-1-3: MEMBERSHIP:
The number of additional members of the department, together with their ranks
and titles, shall be determined by the city council. The compensation to be
paid to members of the police department shall be fixed by the city council.
Members of the department shall be appointed by the city council. (1982 Code §
2.413)
5-1-4: DUTIES:
Members of the police department shall enforce the ordinances and laws
applicable to the city, prevent crimes, protect lives and property, maintain
the peace, serve process on behalf of the city, and have such additional powers
and duties as are prescribed by law, by charter, by this code and as the city
council may determine. (1982 Code § 2.414)
CHAPTER 2
WEAPONS 1
SECTION:
5-2-1: Prohibited Use; Exception
5-2-2: Law Enforcement Officers
 
Notes
1 1. MSA §§ 609.66, 624.71 et seq.
5-2-1: PROHIBITED USE; EXCEPTION:
No person shall aim, or threaten to fire or discharge, any rifle, pistol,
shotgun or other firearm, any air or gas rifle or pistol, and slingshot, any
bow and arrow or any other weapon or device for the propelling of missiles or
pellets which are capable of harming persons or property, whether loaded or
not, at any human being or at the property of another. These prohibitions shall
not apply:
   A.   Target Or Shooting Range: To aiming or firing or discharging at a
target located or thrown for such purpose when lawfully at an established
target or shooting range and exercising due regard for the rights and safety of
others and their property; or
   B.   Protection Of Person Or Property: When the aiming, firing or
discharging is reasonably necessary in the defense of one's person or property
or that of others. (1982 Code § 8.231)
5-2-2: LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to law enforcement officers or
other duly authorized persons whenever the lawful duties of their office or
occupation require them to carry loaded firearms or to perform an act which
conflicts with the provisions of this chapter. (1982 Code § 8.232)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Keeper Deemed Owner
5-3A-2: Animals At Large
5-3A-3: Certain Animals Restricted
5-3A-3-1: Chicken Restrictions
5-3A-4: Manner Of Keeping
5-3A-5: Sanitation
5-3A-6: Dead Or Diseased Animals
5-3A-7: Cruelty To Animals
5-3A-1: KEEPER DEEMED OWNER:
Any person who keeps an animal on or about the person's premises shall be
deemed the owner of the animal for purposes of this chapter. This shall not
relieve the actual owner of the animal of any responsibilities or liabilities
imposed by this chapter. (1982 Code § 8.511)
5-3A-2: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
No person who is the owner, keeper or person in charge of any horse, mule,
donkey, cattle, sheep, goat, swine, rabbit, chicken, geese, duck or turkey
shall permit the same to be at large within the city. (1982 Code § 8.512)
5-3A-3: CERTAIN ANIMALS RESTRICTED:
No person shall keep or allow to be kept on premises owned or occupied by such
person, within the platted portion of the city, any horse, mule, donkey,
cattle, sheep, goat, swine, rabbit, chicken, geese, duck or turkey. An
exception shall be made to this section by allowing the keeping of chickens on
premises in the city subject to the provisions set forth in section
5-3A-3-1 of this article. (Ord. 293, 5-17-2011)
5-3A-3-1: CHICKEN RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Chickens Limited: It is unlawful for any person to own, control, keep
or maintain or harbor hen chickens on any residential premises in the city
unless issued a permit to do so as provided herein. In the case of rental
residential property, including multi-family residential property, written
permission must be given by the property owner for a tenant to keep or harbor
chickens on said residential premises. No permit shall be issued for the
keeping or harboring of more than six (6) hen chickens on any premises. The
keeping of roosters is prohibited.
   B.   Definitions:
    AT LARGE: A chicken out of its chicken run, off the premises or not under
the custody and control of the owner.
   CHICKEN: A female chicken or hen.
   CHICKEN COOP: A structure providing housing for chickens made of wood or
other similar materials that provides shelter from the elements.
   CHICKEN RUN: A fenced outside yard for the keeping and exercising of
chickens.
   OWNER: The resident, property owner, custodian or keeper of any chicken.
   PREMISES: Any platted lot or group of contiguous lots, parcels or tracts of
land.
   C.   Permit: No person shall maintain a chicken coop and/or chicken run
unless granted a permit by the city. The permit shall be subject to all terms
and conditions of this section and any additional conditions deemed necessary
by the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The necessary
permit may be obtained from the city manager's office. Included with the
information required prior to issuance of the permit must be a scaled diagram
that indicates the location of any chicken coop and run, and the approximate
size and distance from adjoining structures and property lines. The owner must
also obtain written approval of the keeping of chickens from all abutting
owners. A permit for the keeping of chickens may be revoked or suspended by the
council for any violation of this section following written notice and a public
hearing. An annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be charged for each permit
which shall expire on December 31 of each year.
   D.   Confinement: Every person who owns, controls, keeps, maintains or
harbors hen chickens must keep them confined on the premises at all times in a
chicken coop or chicken run while in the city. Any coop and run shall be
screened with a solid fence or landscaped buffer with a minimum height of four
feet (4'). Any coop and run shall be at least twenty five feet (25') from any
residential structure or any other premises on any adjacent lots.
   E.   Chicken Coops And Chicken Runs:
      1.   All chicken coops and runs must be located within the rear yard
subject to the required setbacks for the principal building and at least twenty
five feet (25') from any dwelling or any other premises on any adjacent lots.
All chicken coops must be a minimum of four (4) square feet per chicken in
size, must not exceed ten (10) square feet per chicken in size and must not
exceed six feet (6') in total height. Attached fenced in chicken runs must not
exceed twenty (20) square feet per chicken and fencing must not exceed six feet
(6') in total height. Chicken runs may be enclosed with wood and/or woven wire
materials, and may allow chickens to contact the ground. Chicken feed must be
kept in metal, predator proof containers. Chicken manure shall not be placed in
yard compost piles.
      2.   Chicken coops must either be:
         a.   Elevated with a clear open space of at least twenty four inches
(24") between the ground surface and framing/floor of the coop; or
         b.   The coop floor, foundation and footings must be constructed using
rodent resistant concrete construction.
      3.   Chicken coops are not allowed to be located in any part of a home
and/or garage.
      4.   Chickens must be secured in a chicken coop from sunset to sunrise
each day.
   F.   Conditions And Inspection: No person who owns, controls, keeps,
maintains or harbors hen chickens shall permit the premises where the hen
chickens are kept to be or remain in an unhealthy, unsanitary or noxious
condition or to permit the premises to be in such condition that noxious odors
are carried to adjacent public or private property. Any chicken coop and
chicken run authorized by permit under this section may be inspected at any
reasonable time by an agent of the city. Slaughter and breeding of chickens on
any premises within the city is prohibited.
   G.   Violations: Any person who owns, controls, keeps, maintains or harbors
hen chickens in the city limits of Dawson without obtaining or maintaining a
current permit or after a permit has been suspended or revoked by council
action shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. (Ord. 293, 5-17-2011)
5-3A-4: MANNER OF KEEPING 1 :
No person shall keep any dog, cat, or any other animal in the city which
constitutes a nuisance or disturbance by reason of barking, crying, howling,
fighting, or other noise, or in such a way as to permit the animal to annoy,
injure or endanger any person or property, or in any other way contrary to law
or the provisions of this chapter. (1982 Code § 8.514)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 5-3C-5 of this chapter.
5-3A-5: SANITATION:
Every structure and yard in which animals are kept shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition and free of all rodents, vermin and objectionable
odors. Manure shall be removed with sufficient frequency to avoid nuisance from
odors or from the breeding of flies. Unless used for fertilizer, manure shall
be removed beyond the city. If used for fertilizer, manure shall be spread upon
the ground evenly and turned under at once or as soon as the frost leaves the
ground. (1982 Code § 8.515)
5-3A-6: DEAD OR DISEASED ANIMALS:
   A.   Disposal Of Dead Animals: Dead animals shall be disposed of in a
sanitary manner as soon as possible after the death of the animal. No person
shall sell, offer for sale, or give away for human consumption the carcass of
any dead animal.
   B.   Contagious Disease: Any animal with a contagious disease shall be
securely confined so that it cannot come within fifty feet (50') of any public
roadway or any place where animals belonging to or kept by another are kept. No
owner or person having charge of any animal, knowing it to have any infectious
or contagious disease, or to have recently been exposed thereto, shall sell,
barter or dispose of the animal to any person without so informing the person.
(1982 Code § 8.516)
5-3A-7: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall unlawfully kill, poison, maim, entice, carry away or otherwise
harm any animal. No person owning or having control over any animal shall treat
the animal in a cruel or inhumane manner, deprive the animal of necessary food
or water, fail to provide the animal with sufficient shelter and care in cold
or inclement weather, or abandon the animal. (1982 Code § 8.517)
ARTICLE B. IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
5-3B-1: City Pound; Poundmaster
5-3B-2: Impoundment
5-3B-3: Notice
5-3B-4: Records
5-3B-5: Redemption
5-3B-6: Unclaimed Cats And Dogs
5-3B-7: Other Unclaimed Animals
5-3B-8: Interference With Impoundment
5-3B-1: CITY POUND; POUNDMASTER:
   A.   Poundmaster:
      1.   Chief Of Police: The chief of police shall be poundmaster.
      2.   Duties: The poundmaster shall maintain or cause to be maintained the
city pound and perform all other duties imposed upon the poundmaster by law or
by this code.
   B.   City Pound:
      1.   Maintenance: The poundmaster shall maintain the city pound at such
location within or outside the city as may be suitable.
      2.   Proper Care And Sustenance: The poundmaster shall provide proper
care and sustenance for every animal impounded.
      3.   Facilities: The poundmaster may, whenever suitable city impounding
facilities are not available, contract with any veterinarian, kennel or other
private person or public facility for the keeping of impounded animals. (1982
Code § 8.531)
5-3B-2: IMPOUNDMENT:
The poundmaster or any police officer may take up and impound in the city pound
any animal running at large, any cat or dog found not wearing a proper cat or
dog license tag, any dog not muzzled when muzzling is required, any animal kept
in violation of law or of this code, or any animal lawfully delivered for
impounding. (Ord. 209, 8-7-1990)
5-3B-3: NOTICE:
   A.   Owner Known: Upon delivery of any animal to the pound, the poundmaster
shall, without delay, notify the owner, personally or through United States
mail, if the owner is known or can be ascertained with reasonable effort.
   B.   Unknown Owner: If the owner is unknown or cannot be ascertained with
reasonable effort, the poundmaster shall post written notice in three (3)
public places in the city, one of them at the pound, describing the animal,
stating where it is impounded and the conditions upon which it will be
released. (1982 Code § 8.533)
5-3B-4: RECORDS:
The poundmaster shall maintain, in a form permitting easy examination by the
public, and keep, for at least such time as may be required, such records as
are required by law and as are otherwise reasonably necessary for proper
operation of the pound. (1982 Code § 8.534)
5-3B-5: REDEMPTION:
   A.   Viewing Impounded Animals: Any person may view the animals impounded at
any time during which the pound is open to the public.
   B.   Redemption By Owner: Except as otherwise provided by law, any animal
may be redeemed from the pound by its owner upon payment of actual costs of
care, including kennel fees, veterinarian fees and all other charges.
   C.   Unlicensed Animal: If any animal for which licensing is required was
unlicensed, the owner shall furnish a receipt showing payment of the required
license fee and any applicable penalties.
   D.   Proof Of Compliance: If the animal was impounded for being kept in
violation of law or of this code, the owner shall show satisfactory proof that
the animal will be kept in accordance with the provisions of law or of this
code previously violated. (1982 Code § 8.535)
5-3B-6: UNCLAIMED CATS AND DOGS:
Any cat or dog which is not redeemed within the time allowed in the notice,
such time shall not be less than five (5) business days for dogs and two (2)
business days for cats, may be sold for not less than the amount required upon
redemption of the cat or dog by the owner, unless the cat or dog is required
for scientific research by a licensed institution under Minnesota Statutes
Annotated section 35.71. All sums received beyond the fees specified in section
5-3B-5 of this article shall be paid to the owner if the owner makes a claim
within sixty (60) days of the sale and furnishes satisfactory proof of
ownership. Any unclaimed cat or dog shall be killed in a proper and humane
manner. (Ord. 209, 8-7-1990; amd. Ord. 249, 5-7-2002)
5-3B-7: OTHER UNCLAIMED ANIMALS:
   A.   Redemption Period: Unclaimed animals, other than dogs, shall be held
for redemption for at least six (6) business days.
   B.   Sale: Any animal which is not redeemed within that time shall be sold
if required by law and proceeds disposed of according to law. If sale is not
governed by law, and if the animal is not requested by a licensed institution
for scientific research pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 35.71,
the animal may be sold in any manner calculated to bring the best price.
   C.   Excess Proceeds: All sums received from the sale of such animal less
the fees specified in section
5-3B-5 of this article shall be paid to the owner, if the owner makes a claim
within sixty (60) days of the sale and furnishes satisfactory proof of
ownership.
   D.   Humane Disposal: Any animal not claimed or sold shall be killed in a
proper and humane manner. (1982 Code § 8.537)
5-3B-8: INTERFERENCE WITH IMPOUNDMENT:
No unauthorized person shall remove from the pound any impounded animal, nor
shall any unauthorized person break open the pound or release any animals from
it. No person shall hinder, delay, or obstruct any duly authorized official or
other person lawfully in the process of impounding any animal. (1982 Code §
8.538)
ARTICLE C. CATS AND DOGS 1
SECTION:
5-3C-1: Running At Large
5-3C-2: Vicious Cats Or Dogs
5-3C-3: Quarantine
5-3C-4: Muzzling
5-3C-5: Creating Nuisance
5-3C-6: Impoundment
5-3C-7: Licenses
5-3C-8: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. MSA ch. 347.
5-3C-1: RUNNING AT LARGE:
No person owning, keeping or having the control of any cat or dog shall permit
it to run at large within the city. A cat or dog shall not be deemed to be
running at large if on a leash, if in a motor vehicle, if within a confinement,
if at all times under the control of an accompanying person, or if upon the
premises of the owner or keeper of the cat or dog. (Ord. 209, 8-7-1990)
5-3C-2: VICIOUS CATS OR DOGS:
No person shall keep within the city any vicious cat or dog. The poundmaster or
any police officer may immediately confine any vicious cat or dog not confined
on its owner's premises or kill any such cat or dog when the cat or dog cannot
be safely taken up and impounded. (Ord. 209, 8-7-1990)
5-3C-3: QUARANTINE:
   A.   Biting Animal: Any cat or dog which bites a person shall be quarantined
for such time as may be directed by the city health officer.
   B.   Confinement: During quarantine the animal shall be securely confined
and kept from contact with any other animal. The owner shall bear all
quarantine costs. At the discretion of the health officer, the quarantine may
be on the premises of the owner.
   C.   Destruction Of Animal: Unless necessary for public safety, no
quarantined cat or dog shall be killed until so ordered by the health officer.
(Ord. 209, 8-7-1990)
5-3C-4: MUZZLING:
   A.   Proclamation: If, upon investigation, it is determined that the
presence of rabies jeopardizes the public health and safety, the mayor or city
health officer, or such other officer as is authorized by law, shall issue a
proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog which is not
confined to muzzle it securely so that it cannot bite any other animal or any
person.
   B.   Violation: No person shall violate the proclamation. Any unmuzzled dog
unrestrained during the time fixed in the proclamation may be impounded as
provided in this chapter or killed as provided by law. (1982 Code § 8.554)
5-3C-5: CREATING NUISANCE 1 :
No person shall:
   A.   Keep any cat or dog which habitually or frequently barks, fights, cries
or howls.
   B.   Keep any cat or dog which chases vehicles or molests or annoys any
person lawfully upon any public way.
   C.   Allow any cat or dog to damage, defile or destroy any public or private
property. (Ord. 209, 8-7-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 5-3A-4 of this chapter.
5-3C-6: IMPOUNDMENT:
Cats or dogs kept or running in violation of this code may be impounded as
otherwise provided in this code 1 . (Ord. 209, 8-7-1990)
 
Notes
1 2. See article B of this chapter.
5-3C-7: LICENSES:
   A.   License Required; Exception: No person shall keep any cat or dog more
than six (6) months old within the city without having licensed the cat or dog
as required in this section. No license shall be required for any cat or dog
owned by a person not a resident of the city and brought temporarily into the
city for not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 209, 8-7-1990)
   B.   Application: Application shall be made in writing in the form
prescribed by the city clerk on or before May 1 for a two (2) year license for
that license year and the next license year. If any person acquires a cat or
dog after May 1, or if any person has a cat or dog which becomes six (6) months
old after May 1, the person shall apply for a license for the cat or dog within
thirty (30) days after the cat or dog is acquired or becomes six (6) months
old. (Ord. 304, 5-22-2013)
   C.   Fees; Costs: The city council shall, by resolution, establish dog
license fees. The city council shall also, by resolution, set a structure for
violations consisting of fees, fine and costs and the council shall also
establish that compliance and enforcement be managed through the police
department. (Ord. 232, 6-2-1998)
   D.   Certificate Of Veterinarian: Every application for a license shall be
accompanied by a certificate from a qualified veterinarian showing that the cat
or dog has been vaccinated for rabies within two (2) years previously. (Ord.
209, 8-7-1990)
   E.   Issuance; Record: Upon proper application and payment of the required
fees, the city clerk shall issue a license and shall issue to the owner a metal
tag for each license. The city clerk shall keep a record of all licenses
issued. (1982 Code § 8.575)
   F.   Term: A license shall be valid for two (2) years or the part of the
license year for which it is issued and shall expire on April 30 of the next
year following its issuance. (Ord. 304, 5-22-2013)
   G.   Transfer: No license or license tag issued for one cat or dog shall be
transferable to another cat or dog. The sale or transfer of any licensed cat or
dog shall transfer the license to the new owner.
   H.   Tags:
      1.   Collar: The licensee shall attach the tag to the collar of the cat
or dog licensed so that the tag may be easily seen. The licensee shall see that
the tag is worn at all times by the cat or dog.
      2.   Removal Of Tag: No person, except the licensee or the licensee's
authorized agent, shall remove any license tag from a cat or dog collar or
remove any collar with a license attached to it from any cat or dog.
      3.   Invalid License: No person shall place on any cat or dog a
fictitious, altered or invalid license tag, or a license tag not issued for
that cat or dog, nor shall any person keep any cat or dog wearing such tag.
(Ord. 209, 8-7-1990)
5-3C-8: PENALTY:
   A.   First Violation: Owner is responsible for all impound fees. If the
animal is not licensed, violators must pay fees and show documentation of
proper vaccinations, or have proper vaccinations administered before animal is
released. Twenty five dollar ($25.00) fine, plus all fees as stated in this
subsection.
   B.   Second Violation: Add a ten dollar ($10.00) fee to the twenty five
dollar ($25.00) fine for each time, plus all fees as stated in this section.
   C.   Enforcement: Compliance and enforcement shall be managed by the police
department. (Ord. 287, 10-5-2010)
CHAPTER 4
FAIR HOUSING 1
SECTION:
5-4-1: Purpose
5-4-2: Policy
5-4-3: Definitions
5-4-4: Prohibited Acts
5-4-5: Enforcement Procedures
5-4-6: Statute Of Limitations
5-4-7: Civil Enforcement Procedure
 
Notes
1 1. MSA ch. 363.
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
The city desires to affirm compliance with federal and state fair housing
legislation; and the city desires to resolve fair housing discrimination
complaints violations locally; therefore, the following is set forth as the
DAWSON FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE. (1982 Code § 8.710)
5-4-2: POLICY:
Status with regard to public assistance and discrimination with regard to
housing on the basis of race, sex, creed, religion, marital status, and
disability adversely affects the health, welfare, peace, and safety of the
community. Persons subject to such discrimination suffer depressed living
conditions, and create conditions which endanger the public peace and order.
The public policy of the city is declared to be to foster equal opportunity for
all to obtain decent, safe and sanitary housing without regard to their race,
creed, color, national origin, marital status, disability status, sex, and
strictly in accord with their individual merits as human beings. It is also the
policy of the city to protect all persons from all unfounded charges of
discrimination. (1982 Code § 8.711)
5-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
deviations, shall have the meaning given herein unless the context otherwise
indicates:
DISABILITY: A mental or physical condition which constitutes a handicap.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any program, service,
facility or privilege afforded to a person with a disability which is intended
to habilitate, rehabilitate or accommodate that person.
DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: Includes segregate or separate.
HRA: Housing redevelopment agency.
MARITAL STATUS: The standing, state or condition of one as single or married
person. (1982 Code § 8.712)
5-4-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice and a misdemeanor offense:
   A.   Sale, Lease Or Rental: For any person to discriminate on the grounds of
race, creed, religion, color, sex, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, national origin, age or disability, in the sale, lease, or rental
of any housing unit or units.
   B.   Broker, Agent, Or Salesman: For any broker, agent, salesperson or other
person acting in behalf of another to so discriminate in the sale, lease, or
rental of any housing unit or units belonging to such other person.
   C.   Financial; Insurance: For any person engaged in the business of
financing the purchase, rehabilitation, remodeling or repair of housing units
or in the business of selling insurance with respect to housing units to refuse
to provide such financing or insurance or to discriminate with regard to the
terms or conditions thereof by reason of the race, color, sex, religion, creed,
national origin, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age
or disability of the applicant or because of the location of the unit or units
in areas of the city occupied by persons of a particular race, color, sex,
religion, creed, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, age or disability; or to discriminate by treating differently any
person or group of persons who desire to purchase, lease, acquire, construct,
rehabilitate, repair or maintain real property in a specific urban area because
of social, economic or environmental conditions of the area in the granting,
withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the rates, terms,
conditions or privileges of any such financial assistance or in the extension
of services in connection therewith. The bona fide programs of federal, state
or local governmental units or agencies, however structured or authorized to
upgrade or improve in any manner a specific urban area, shall not be deemed to
be a violation of this section.
   D.   Facilities, Services Or Privileges Of Occupancy: For any person having
sold, leased, or rented a housing unit or units to any person to discriminate
with respect to facilities, services, or privileges of occupancy by reason of
race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin, age or disability, marital
status or status with regard to public assistance.
   E.   Make Or Publish Statement: For any person to make or publish any
statement evidencing an intent to discriminate, on grounds of race, creed,
religion, color, sex, national origin or ancestry, marital status, status with
regard to public assistance, age or disability, in the sale, lease, or rental
of a housing unit or units.
   F.   Inquiry: For any person to make any inquiry regarding race, color, sex,
creed, religion, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, age or disability, or to keep any record or use any form of
application, designed to elicit such information, in connection with the sale,
lease, rental or financing of a housing unit or units.
   G.   Inducement: For any person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate
transaction from which he may benefit financially:
      1.   To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the
composition of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located, in respect to the race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability of
those living there; or
      2.   To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of
property values, an increase in crime, or antisocial behavior, or a decline in
the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area concerned.
   H.   Interpretation Of Provisions: Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to required any person or group of persons selling, renting or
leasing property to modify the property in any way, or exercise a higher degree
of care for a person having a disability than for a person who does not have a
disability; nor shall this chapter be construed to relieve any person of any
obligation generally imposed on all persons regardless of any disability in a
written lease, rental agreement, or contract or purchase or sale, or to forbid
distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions,
including financial obligations of such lease, agreement or contract.
   I.   Exceptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   The rental of a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for
two (2) families, one of which is occupied by the owner; or
      2.   The rental by an owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation in
which he resides of a room or rooms in such accommodation to another person or
persons if the discrimination is by sex, marital status, status with regard to
public assistance or disability. Nothing in the chapter shall be construed to
require any person or group of persons selling, renting or leasing property to
modify the property in any way, or exercise a higher degree of care for a
person having a disability than for a person who does not have a disability;
nor shall this chapter be construed to relieve any person of any obligation
generally imposed on all persons regardless of any disability in a written
lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, or to forbid
distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions,
including financial obligations, of such lease, agreement or contract. (1982
Code § 8.713)
5-4-5: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Designation Of Authority: The housing and redevelopment authority in
and for the city is designated as the enforcement agency for this chapter and
shall have the power to receive, hear and determine complaints as provided
herein.
   B.   Investigation Of Complaints: The city manager or HRA shall promptly
investigate, upon complaint or upon his own motion, any violations of this
chapter.
   C.   Referral To City Attorney: If after investigation, he shall have reason
to believe a violation has occurred, he may refer the matter to the city
attorney for criminal prosecution, initiate civil enforcement procedures as
herein provided, or enter into a settlement agreement which, when approved by
the HRA, shall have the same force as the city order. (1982 Code § 8.714.)
5-4-6: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
No action may be brought for civil enforcement or criminal prosecution unless
the charge of alleged discriminatory practice was filed with the city within
one hundred eighty (180) days from the occurrence of the practice. (1982 Code §
8.715)
5-4-7: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
Civil enforcement procedures shall be prosecuted by the city attorney before
the HRA in the following manner:
   A.   Complaint: The city manager shall serve upon the respondent by
certified mail a complaint, signed by him, which shall set forth a clear and
concise statement of the facts constituting the violation, set a time and place
for hearing, and advise the respondent of his right to file an answer to appear
in person or by an attorney and to examine and cross examine witnesses.
   B.   Answer: The hearing shall not be less than twenty (20) days after
service of the complaint. At any time prior to the hearing, the respondent may
file an answer. Facts not denied by answer shall be deemed admitted. If the
answer sets out new matter, it shall be deemed denied by the HRA.
   C.   Amendment Of Pleadings: The complaint or answer may be amended at any
given time prior to the hearing, with the consent of the opposing party.
   D.   Hearing: Hearings shall be before the HRA.
   E.   Subpoenas: The HRA may obtain subpoenas from the district court to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at any
hearing.
   F.   Findings; Order: If, after hearing, the panel shall conclude that a
violation has occurred, it shall prepare an order which may contain any
provision deemed desirable to do justice to the complainant or to prevent
further violations. It may include provisions which require the respondent to
rent, sell, or lease particular housing to the complainant or to do any other
thing as may be just. The panel's findings of fact and order shall be served on
the respondent and each member of the housing and redevelopment authority by
mail and shall become the findings and order of the HRA, unless, within ten
(10) days after mailing of the findings and order, the HRA shall revoke or
amend the order, but any order of a panel may be modified by the HRA at any
time. (1982 Code § 8.716)
CHAPTER 5
MINORS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Curfew
5-5-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age Limitations:
      1.   Under Fifteen Years:
         a.   School Nights: Minors under fifteen (15) years of age shall not
be on or present at any public street, alley, park, playground or any other
public place, or place of business open to the public or any vacant property or
unsupervised place in the city between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day, Sunday through Thursday
during the scheduled public school year.
         b.   Nonschool Nights: When the public school is not in session on the
following day such as summer vacation, holiday vacations, teacher workshops,
weekends, or any other days on which students are not required to be in school
attendance, the hours shall be between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day.
      2.   Fifteen To Eighteen:
         a.   School Nights: No person between fifteen (15) years of age and
under eighteen (18) years of age shall be on or present on any street, alley,
park, playground, or any other public place, or in any place of business open
to the public, or any vacant property or unsupervised place in the city between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the
following day, Sunday through Thursday during the scheduled public school year.
         b.   Nonschool Nights: When the public school is not in session on the
following day such as summer vacation, holiday vacations, teacher workshops,
weekends, or any other days on which students are not required to be in school
attendance, the hours shall be between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day. (Ord. 206, 3-7-1989)
   B.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not
apply when the person under eighteen (18) years of age is accompanied by his or
her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor, or if the minor is upon an errand for which there exists a reasonable
necessity, or if the presence of the minor in the place or places is connected
with and required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation
in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged. (1982 Code § 8.913)
   C.   Responsible Persons:
      1.   Parents: No parent, guardian or other person having the lawful care
and custody of any person under eighteen (18) years of age shall allow or
permit that person to violate the provisions of subsection A of this section.
(1982 Code § 8.914)
      2.   Person In Charge Of Premises: No person in charge of any place of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment, or any other place of business, shall
permit any minor to be on or in such place in violation of subsection A of this
section. Whenever the person in charge of any such place finds a minor there in
violation of said subsection A of this section, the person in charge shall
immediately order the minor to leave. If the minor refuses to leave, the person
in charge shall immediately notify the police department. (1982 Code § 8.915)
   D.   Designated Nights: The chief of police, upon request of school
officials or other persons in charge of organizing and supervising educational,
athletic, musical, dramatic, religious, recreational or social activities of
minors, may designate certain nights and hours thereof as designated nights at
such time as the schools or other groups shall be engaged in educational,
athletic, musical, dramatic, religious, recreational or social activities for
the benefit or entertainment of persons under eighteen (18) years of age. In
that case, the provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to
any person under eighteen (18) years of age who is lawfully going to, attending
or returning from any function during the duly designated hours on a designated
night, but only for such period of time as is reasonably necessary for the
minor to go to, attend, and return from the function. In all other respects,
the provisions of subsection A of this section shall apply on a designated
night. (1982 Code § 8.916)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC USE OF CANNABIS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Purpose And Intent
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Prohibited Acts
5-6-4: Penalty
5-6-5: Severability
5-6-1:PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This chapter is adopted by the City of Dawson for the purpose of protecting
public health and safety by regulating/prohibiting the use of cannabis and
cannabis derived products in public places and places of public accommodation
within the City.
Minnesota Session Law 2023, Chapter 63, effective in relevant part August 1,
2023, establishes that the adult use, possession and personal growing of
cannabis is legal subject to the requirements and restrictions of Minnesota
Statutes.
Minnesota Session Law 2023, Chapter 63, Art. 4, section 19, codified as Minn.
Stat. 342.0263, subd. 5 authorizes the adoption of a local ordinance
establishing a petty misdemeanor offense for public use of cannabis.
The City intends to be proactive in protecting public health and safety by
enacting an ordinance that will mitigate threats presented to the public and
public health by the public use of cannabis.
The City of Dawson (hereinafter "the City") recognizes the risks that
unintended access and use of cannabis products and exposure to cannabis and its
effects present to the health, welfare, and safety of members of the public and
in particular the youth of the City. (Ord. 324, 10-3-2023)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The following words, terms,
and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS FLOWER: A cannabis flower that is approved for sale by the
Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management or is substantially similar to a
product approved by the office. Adult-use cannabis flower does not include
medical cannabis flower, hemp plant parts, or hemp-derived consumer products.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PRODUCTS: A cannabis product that is approved for sale by
the office or is substantially similar to a product approved by the office.
Adult-use cannabis product includes edible cannabis products but does not
include medical cannabinoid products or lower-potency hemp edibles.
CANNABIS FLOWER: The harvested flower, bud, leaves, and stems of a cannabis
plant. Cannabis flower includes adult-use cannabis flower and medical cannabis
flower. Cannabis flower does not include cannabis seed, hemp plant parts, or
hemp-derived consumer products.
CANNABIS PRODUCT: Any of the following:
   (1)   Cannabis concentrate;
   (2)   A product infused with cannabinoids, including but not limited to
tetrahydrocannabinol, extracted or derived from cannabis plants or cannabis
flower; or
   (3)   Any other product that contains cannabis concentrate.
HEMP DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS:
   (1)   A product intended for human or animal consumption, does not contain
cannabis flower or cannabis concentrate, and:
      (a)   Contains or consists of hemp plant parts; or
      (b)   Contains hemp concentrate or artificially derived cannabinoids in
combination with other ingredients.
   (2)   Hemp-derived consumer products does not include artificially derived
cannabinoids, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived topical products, hemp
fiber products, or hemp grain.
LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE:Any product that:
   (1)   Is intended to be eaten or consumed as a beverage by humans;
   (2)   Contains hemp concentrate or an artificially derived cannabinoid; in
combination with food ingredients;
   (3)   Is not a drug;
   (4)   Consists of servings that contain no more than five milligrams of
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, 25 milligrams of cannabinol, 25 milligrams of
cannabinol, or any combination of those cannabinoids that does not exceed the
identified amounts;
   (5)   Does not contain more than a combined total of 0.5 milligrams of all
other cannabinoids per serving;
   (6)   Does not contain an artificially derived cannabinoid other than delta-
9 tetrahydrocannabinol;
   (7)   Does not contain a cannabinoid derived from cannabis plants or
cannabis flower; and
   (8)   Is a type of product approved for sale by the office or is
substantially similar to a product approved by the office, including but not
limited to products that resemble nonalcoholic beverages, candy, and baked
goods.
PUBLIC PLACE: A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk, any enclosed,
indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited to,
theaters, restaurants, bars, food establishments, places licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, wine, or malt beverages, retail businesses, gyms, common
areas in buildings, public shopping areas, auditoriums, arenas, or other places
of public accommodation.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A business, refreshment, entertainment,
recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whose goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered,
sold, or otherwise made available to the public.Exceptions to the definition of
public place or place of public accommodation: "A public place" or "a place of
public accommodation" does not include the following:
   (1)   A private residence, including the individual's curtilage or yard.
   (2)   A private property, not generally accessible by the public, unless the
individual is explicitly prohibited from consuming cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products on the
property by the owner of the property; or
   (3)   On the premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit on-
site consumption.
SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar,
cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated product containing cannabis
flower, cannabis products, artificially derived cannabinoids, or hemp-derived
consumer products. Smoking includes carrying or using an activated electronic
delivery device for human consumption through inhalation of aerosol or vapor
from the product. (Ord. 324, 10-3-2023)
5-6-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation unless the premises is an establishment or event licensed
to permit on-site consumption of adult-use cannabis flower and adult use
cannabis products. See Minnesota Session Law 2023, Chpt. 63, Art. I, Sec. 9
codified as Minn. Stat. 342.09, subd. 1(2) and 342.09, subd. 1 (7)(iii) and
Art. 4, Sec. 19 codified as Minn. Stat. Sec. 152.0263, subd. 5.
   B.   No person shall vaporize or smoke cannabis flower, cannabis products,
artificially derived cannabinoids, or hemp-derived consumer products in any
location where the smoke, aerosol, or vapor would be inhaled by a minor.
Minnesota Session Law 2023, Ch pt. 63, Art. 1, Sec. 9 codified as Minn. Stat.
Sec. 342.09, subd. 1 (7)(b)(9). (Ord. 324, 10-3-2023)
5-6-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Criminal Penalty: A violation of this chapter shall be a petty
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00), as
set by City Council. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the United States,
the State of Minnesota, or the City from investigating or prosecuting any other
activity that is a crime under any other federal or state statute or City
ordinance.
   B.   An alleged violation or violation of this chapter may be investigated
by a peace officer as defined in Minn. Stat. 626.84, Subd. 1. (Ord. 324, 10-3-
2023)
5-6-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any section or provision of this chapter is held invalid, such invalidity
will not affect any other section or provision that can be given force and
effect without the invalidated section or provision. (Ord. 324, 10-3-2023)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 1
SECTION:
6-1-1: Power To Adopt; Compliance Required
6-1-2: Power Of Chief Of Police
6-1-3: Enforcement
6-1-4: Emergency Vehicles
6-1-5: Prima Facie Violation
6-1-6: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.211, subd. 6.
6-1-1: POWER TO ADOPT; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
The city council may, within the limits allowed by law, adopt additional
regulations over vehicles and traffic not in conflict with the provisions of
this code. No person shall fail to obey any sign, making, barricade or traffic
device erected pursuant to law. (1982 Code § 5.112; amd. 2005 Code)
6-1-2: POWER OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Power To Regulate: To assist in the direction and control of traffic,
for orderly and safe use of city streets and other public ways for vehicular or
pedestrian travel, for the protection of city streets and other public ways and
for the convenience of the street department in maintaining the city streets
and other public ways, the chief of police may establish lanes of traffic,
establish stop or yield intersections, establish parking stalls and establish
other traffic regulations, to the extent that such regulations are not in
conflict with law, this code or provisions of the city council adopted pursuant
to this code. (1982 Code § 5.113; amd. 2005 Code)
   B.   Traffic Control Devices: To this end, the chief of police may cause the
installation of suitable signs, traffic control signals, markings, barricades
and other devices.
   C.   Compliance Required: No person shall fail to obey any sign, marking,
barricade or traffic device erected pursuant to such authority. (1982 Code §
5.113)
6-1-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Police Department: The police department shall enforce the provisions
of this title, police officers are authorized to direct all traffic within the
city, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal, in conformity
with this title and state traffic laws.
   B.   Emergency: During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or
safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions
require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title and state traffic laws.
   C.   Fire Department: Officers of the fire department may direct traffic or
assist the police in directing traffic at the scene of a fire or in the
immediate vicinity of a fire. (1982 Code § 5.114)
6-1-4: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title shall not apply to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when at the scene of
a reported emergency. However, the driver shall operate and park the emergency
vehicle with due regard for the safety of others and in accordance with state
laws applicable to authorized emergency vehicles. (1982 Code § 5.115)
6-1-5: PRIMA FACIE VIOLATION:
The presence of a vehicle in or upon any public street, alley or highway, or
any other place in the city stopped, standing or parked in violation of any
part of this title regulating or prohibiting parking or traffic shall be prima
facie evidence that the person in whose name the vehicle is registered as owner
committed or authorized the commission of the violation. (1982 Code § 5.116)
6-1-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this title shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor, except when another penalty is expressly provided in the
provision. (1982 Code § 5.111)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Exhibition Driving
6-2-2: U-Turns
6-2-3: Inattentive Driving
6-2-4: Vehicle Noise
6-2-1: EXHIBITION DRIVING:
No person shall start, turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a
motor vehicle on any public or private way or property within the city in any
manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing of tires,
skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or gravel, or in a manner
simulating a race. Squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the
throwing of sand or gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section. (1982 Code § 5.211)
6-2-2: U-TURNS:
No person shall turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction on
Oak Street, nor at any intersection designated by the city council and at which
a "No U-Turn" sign has been erected. (1982 Code § 5.212; amd. 2005 Code)
6-2-3: INATTENTIVE DRIVING:
No person shall operate or halt any motor vehicle upon any public or private
property within the city inattentively or imprudently in light of circumstances
then existing, or without reasonable care for the rights of others or the
safety of persons or property. Any person who violates this section shall be
guilty of the offense of inattentive driving. Inattentive driving shall be a
lesser offense than the offense of careless driving under state law. (1982 Code
§ 5.213)
6-2-4: VEHICLE NOISE:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following phrases
are defined as follows:
    ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE: 1. Distinct and loudly audible noise that
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort and repose of
any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property's
value,
      2.   Noise in excess of that permitted by Minnesota statutes section
169.69, as it may be amended from time to time, which requires every motor
vehicle to be equipped with a muffler in good working order, or
      3.   Noise in excess of that permitted by Minnesota statutes section
169.693 and Minnesota rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute
and these rules may be amended from time to time, which establish motor vehicle
noise standards.
   ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE: A dynamic brake, jake brake, jacobs brake, C-brake,
Paccar brake, transmission brake or other similar engine retarding brake system
which alters the normal compression of the engine and subsequently releases
that compression.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or
permit the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a
muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies with
all applicable state laws and regulations.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally
use an engine retarding brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or
alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise from the engine
because of an illegally modified or defective exhaust system, except in an
emergency.
   C.   Statutes Adopted: Minnesota statutes sections 169.69 and 169.693 (motor
vehicle noise limits) and Minnesota rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as
these statutes and rules may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted
by reference.
   D.   Signs: Signs stating "Vehicle Noise Laws Enforced" may be installed at
locations deemed appropriate by the city council to advise motorists of the
prohibitions contained in this section, except that no sign stating "Vehicle
Noise Laws Enforced" shall be installed on a state highway without a permit
from the Minnesota department of transportation. The provisions of this section
are in full force and effect even if no signs are installed.
   E.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and
punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 299,
3-20-2012)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: General Parking Restrictions
6-3-2: Angle Parking
6-3-3: Time Limitations
6-3-4: Trucks And Other Vehicles
6-3-5: Unauthorized Parking
6-3-6: Disabled Vehicles
6-3-7: Abandoned Vehicles
6-3-8: Impoundment
6-3-9: Citations
6-3-1: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS 1 :
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
   A.   In violation of the provisions of any law regulating the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles.
   B.   When directed or ordered to proceed by any police officer, member of
the fire department or other authorized person.
   C.   Upon the paved, improved or traveled part of any public way when it is
practical to park the vehicle off such part of the public way.
   D.   Upon any public way so as to constitute a hazard to public safety or to
interfere with the free passage of other vehicles.
   E.   Upon any sidewalk or crosswalk.
   F.   In front of any public or private driveway or so close to it as to
prevent vehicles from entering or exiting the driveway.
   G.   Within an intersection.
   H.   Within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant.
   I.   Within thirty feet (30') of any flashing beacon, traffic control
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or sign indicating the direction of travel.
   J.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and, if so posted by proper authority, on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance.
   K.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of any public way.
   L.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within a highway tunnel,
or upon the approach to any such structures.
   M.   Upon any boulevard.
   N.   Upon any public way to display any vehicle for sale or exchange. A
vehicle shall be deemed so displayed when bearing a sign indicating that it is
for sale or exchange.
   O.   Upon any public way for purposes of washing, cleaning or repairing a
vehicle, other than making emergency repairs necessary before removal of the
vehicle from the public way.
   P.   In such a manner that a vehicle is parked straddling two (2) or more
parking spaces when parking spaces have been duly marked.
   Q.   Contrary to any duly erected signs or contrary to any duly placed stall
marks, box marks, or other legend or device restricting parking.
   R.   In any duly designated and posted no parking zone. (1982 Code § 5.222)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 169.34.
6-3-2: ANGLE PARKING:
   A.   All vehicles parked within the city shall be parked according the
markings or signs, as may directed by city officials, or otherwise in
accordance with law. (Ord. 233, 9-1-1998; amd. Ord. 233, 5-16-2023)
6-3-3: TIME LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Specific Limits: No vehicle shall be parked in the following areas for
a continuous period exceeding the time specified:
   Sixth Street between Walnut Street and Oak Street   3 hours
   All other streets   24 hours
   B.   Restricted Parking: No person shall leave a vehicle standing on any
portion of Sixth Street between Walnut Street and Spruce Street between two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. (1982 Code § 5.225)
6-3-4: TRUCKS AND OTHER VEHICLES:
   A.   Vehicles Exceeding Eighteen Feet: No truck, bus or other vehicle
exceeding eighteen feet (18') in length shall park on Sixth Street between Oak
Street and Hickory Street except for such time as is reasonably necessary in
taking on or discharging loads or passengers.
   B.   Two Hour Limit: In no event shall any such truck, bus or other vehicle,
nor shall any heavy or loaded industrial, commercial or farming vehicle or
equipment be parked or left standing, whether attended or unattended, upon the
paved, improved or main traveled portion of any street, alley or other public
way in the city for a continuous period of time exceeding two (2) hours, or for
such longer time as is actually necessary in loading or unloading such vehicle.
(1982 Code § 5.226)
6-3-5: UNAUTHORIZED PARKING:
   A.   Private Property: No person shall park or stand any vehicle upon the
private property of any other person without the consent of the owner,
occupant, lessee or other person in charge of the property.
   B.   Public Property: No person shall park or stand any vehicle upon any
public park or other public property, except along any roadway where parking is
permitted or in an area set aside for parking of vehicles. (1982 Code § 5.227)
6-3-6: DISABLED VEHICLES:
   A.   Parking Specifications: The driver of any vehicle which becomes
disabled while traveling on any street or alley such that it is impossible to
avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle on the street or alley shall
move the vehicle as close to the curb or edge of the roadway as may be done.
   B.   Report To Police: If the vehicle cannot be immediately moved or towed
away, the driver shall immediately report the disability to the police
department.
   C.   Time Limitation: No owner or driver of a vehicle which is disabled
shall allow it to remain upon the traveled portion of any street or alley, or
allow a disabled vehicle to be parked along any street or alley even though
parking of it would otherwise be lawful, for any longer than reasonably
necessary to cause the vehicle to be moved or towed away. (1982 Code § 5.223)
6-3-7: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
No driver or owner shall abandon any vehicle upon any street, alley or public
property within the city. The leaving of any vehicle not reasonably capable of
being driven for transportation, or which cannot be driven without being
repaired, upon any street, alley or public property for more than five (5) days
is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. (1982 Code § 5.224)
6-3-8: IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Authority To Remove: Any police officer may remove an unattended
vehicle from a street, alley or other public property to a garage or other
place of safety when the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic,
endangers others, or is parked in violation of law or this code and thereby
hinders snow removal or street improvement or maintenance operations.
   B.   Redemption: The vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing
and storage are paid.
   C.   Citation: The officer may also issue a ticket for time violation. (1982
Code § 5.281)
6-3-9: CITATIONS:
   A.   Parking Citation: A parking citation shall be issued to the owner or
operator of any vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
The citation shall indicate the nature of the violation, the amount of the
fine, the method by which the fine shall be paid, and the procedure by which
the person receiving the citation may obtain a hearing to contest the issuance
of the citation. (1982 Code § 5.291)
   B.   Administration: The city clerk, or a designated agent of the city
clerk, shall receive, process and make records of all parking citations issued
and fines paid. The city clerk shall submit summarized monthly reports to the
city council of all fines collected and the nature of the violations. All
monies obtained from the fines shall be deposited with the city treasurer and
shall be a part of the general fund. (1982 Code § 5.292)
   C.   Hearing:
      1.   Request For Hearing: Any person who desires to contest a parking
citation shall, within seven (7) days of its issuance, submit to the city clerk
a written request for a formal hearing.
      2.   Schedule Of Hearing; Notice: The request shall be forwarded to the
proper court, at which time a court hearing shall be scheduled and notification
of it sent to the alleged violator.
      3.   Court Costs: If the court determines that the alleged violator was
in violation of a provision of this chapter, the court may assess the violator
reasonable court costs in addition to any penalty imposed. (1982 Code § 5.293)
   D.   Nonpayment Of Fine: Any violator who fails to pay the fine indicated or
submit a written request for hearing within seven (7) days from the date of
issuance of the citation shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, except that
when preceded by two (2) or more violations within the preceding twelve (12)
months, a violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1982 Code § 5.294)
CHAPTER 4
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definition
6-4-2: Entry On Private Property
6-4-3: Operation On Sidewalks
6-4-4: Parental Responsibility
6-4-5: Owner Responsibility
6-4-1: DEFINITION:
"Recreational motor vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes,
including, but not limited to, a snowmobile, trail bike or other all terrain
vehicle, hovercraft or motor vehicle licensed for highway operation which is
being used for off road recreational purposes. (1982 Code § 5.311)
6-4-2: ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall enter on any private property within the city for the purpose
of operating a recreational motor vehicle without the consent of the owner,
occupant, lessee or other person in charge of the property to do so. (1982 Code
§ 5.312)
6-4-3: OPERATION ON SIDEWALKS:
No person shall operate a recreational motor vehicle upon a public sidewalk nor
upon any trail or other public way set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians. (1982 Code § 5.313)
6-4-4: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
No parent of any minor child, nor the guardian of any ward, shall authorize or
knowingly permit the child or ward to violate any provision of this code
relating to the operation of a snowmobile or other recreational motor vehicle.
(1982 Code § 5.314)
6-4-5: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
No owner of a snowmobile or any other recreational motor vehicle shall permit
the vehicle to be operated contrary to the provisions of this code, or of any
law or regulation regarding snowmobiles or other recreational motor vehicles.
(1982 Code § 5.315)
ARTICLE A. SNOWMOBILES 1
SECTION:
6-4A-1: Operation Restricted
6-4A-2: Emergency Travel
6-4A-3: Snowmobile Recreation Areas
6-4A-4: Speed Limits
6-4A-5: Careless Operation
6-4A-6: Unreasonable Operation
6-4A-7: Hours
6-4A-8: Age Restriction; Certification Requirement
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 84.81 et seq.
6-4A-1: OPERATION RESTRICTED:
No person shall operate any snowmobile on any public street, alley or other
roadway, or on any river or other public place, in the city, except for the
purpose of travel between the place of storage of the snowmobile and a place
outside of the city or a snowmobile recreation area, or for the purpose of
traveling between recreation areas, by means of a direct, reasonably convenient
route, or except in such areas or places as may be designated as snowmobile
recreation areas. (1982 Code § 5.321)
6-4A-2: EMERGENCY TRAVEL:
A snowmobile may be operated on a public street, alley, river or other public
place within the city during any time that snow upon the roadways of the city
renders travel by automobile impractical. Snowmobiles may be operated by police
officers and firefighters in the performance of their official duties and by
physicians and veterinarians making professional calls when other means of
transportation are impractical or less efficient. (1982 Code § 5.322)
6-4A-3: SNOWMOBILE RECREATION AREAS:
   A.   Designation: The following areas within the city are hereby designated
as snowmobile recreation areas:
Lac Qui Parle River at and including its intersection with Sixth Street and
downstream from there.
Lac Qui Parle River at and including its intersection with Eleventh Street and
upstream from there. (1982 Code § 5.323)
   B.   Additional Areas: The city council may designate additional areas as
snowmobile recreation areas. (1982 Code § 5.323; amd. 2005 Code)
6-4A-4: SPEED LIMITS:
No person shall operate any snowmobile within the following designated places
within the city at speeds greater than that indicated:
   A.   Five (5) miles per hour, while traversing any ice rink in travel
between snowmobile recreation areas;
   B.   Fifteen (15) miles per hour in a snowmobile recreation area;
   C.   Ten (10) miles per hour, in any other place within the city. (1982 Code
§ 5.324)
6-4A-5: CARELESS OPERATION:
No person shall operate any snowmobile within the city carelessly or heedlessly
in disregard of the rights or the safety of others. In no event shall any
person operate a snowmobile in a manner so as to endanger or harass others or
any animal or so as to interfere with skaters on any ice rink. (1982 Code §
5.325)
6-4A-6: UNREASONABLE OPERATION:
No person shall start, turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a
snowmobile within the city in a manner that causes unnecessary engine noise or
backfire, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of snow or dirt or in a manner
simulating a race. (1982 Code § 5.326)
6-4A-7: HOURS:
Except when using a snowmobile in accordance with the provisions of section
6-4A-2 of this article, or except when returning to the place of storage of a
snowmobile by the most direct route from recreational use outside the city, no
person shall operate any snowmobile within the city before twelve o'clock (12:
00) noon on Sunday or before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on any other day, nor
after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any day. (1982 Code § 5.327)
6-4A-8: AGE RESTRICTION; CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT:
No person under fourteen (14) years of age shall operate a snowmobile on any
street, alley, river or other public way or public property within the city. A
person at least fourteen (14) years of age but less than eighteen (18) years of
age may operate a snowmobile within the city only while having actual
possession of a valid Minnesota snowmobile safety certificate while operating
the snowmobile. (1982 Code § 5.328)
ARTICLE B. BICYCLES 1
SECTION:
6-4B-1: Definition
6-4B-2: Traffic Regulations
6-4B-3: Operation Restricted
6-4B-4: Parking
6-4B-5: Motorized Bicycles
6-4B-6: Prohibited Acts
6-4B-7: Parental Responsibility
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 169.222.
6-4B-1: DEFINITION:
"Bicycle" means every device propelled solely by human power upon which a
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is over fourteen
inches (14") in diameter, or any device generally recognized as a bicycle
though equipped with two (2) front or two (2) rear wheels, or a unicycle, but
excluding scooters and similar devices. (1982 Code § 5.411)
6-4B-2: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
Every person operating a bicycle shall have all the rights and duties
applicable by law or this title to the driver of any other vehicle, except in
respect to those provisions relating expressly to bicycles and in respect to
those provisions which by their nature cannot reasonably be applied to
bicycles. (1982 Code § 5.421)
6-4B-3: OPERATION RESTRICTED:
No person shall operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk on Sixth Street between
Lincoln and Spruce Street. In any other area of the city, a person may operate
a bicycle upon a sidewalk or within a crosswalk, but only in compliance with
law and only with due regard for the safety of pedestrians upon the sidewalk or
within the crosswalk. (1982 Code § 6.422)
6-4B-4: PARKING:
No person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk so as to interfere with access to or
from any building or so as to block the sidewalk or otherwise impede the normal
reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic, nor shall any person park a
bicycle on a roadway in a manner that obstructs the movement of any legally
parked motor vehicle. (1982 Code § 5.423)
6-4B-5: MOTORIZED BICYCLES:
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this title, and except as such are
inapplicable, the provisions of this article relating to the operation of
bicycles within the city are applicable to the operation of motorize bicycles
within the city. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any bicycleway
or bicycle lane. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk at
any time, except when necessary for the most direct access to the roadway from
a driveway, alley or building. (1982 Code § 5.511)
6-4B-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
Any person who violates the following provisions shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor:
   A.   Unauthorized Use And Sale: No person shall take, use, sell or offer for
sale another's bicycle without the consent of the owner. (1982 Code § 5.412)
   B.   Tampering: No person not the owner of the bicycle shall remove any
license plate, serial number or other identification from the bicycle, nor
shall any person tamper with any bicycle which has been locked or placed in a
rack or otherwise secured. (1982 Code § 5.413)
6-4B-7: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
No parent of any minor child, nor the guardian of any ward, shall authorize or
knowingly permit the child or ward to violate any provision of this article
regarding bicycles. (1982 Code § 5.414)
ARTICLE C. SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLERBLADES, SKATES AND SKIS
SECTION:
6-4C-1: Purpose
6-4C-2: Interpretation
6-4C-3: Definitions
6-4C-4: Restricted Areas
6-4C-5: Rules Of The Road
6-4C-6: Future Prohibited Areas
6-4C-7: Penalty
6-4C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health and safety arising
out of the use of skateboards, rollerblades, roller skates and roller skis
within the city. The city council finds that there are certain public streets,
sidewalks and public property wherein the operation and use of skateboards,
rollerblades, roller skates and roller skis create an unnecessary potential
danger to either the use of such devices or the general public and that the use
of such devices in an improper manner may cause destruction of property. (Ord.
222, 9-5-1995)
6-4C-2: INTERPRETATION:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of a wheelchair
or any other wheeled device designed to assist a disabled person on any of the
places mentioned in this article. (Ord. 222, 9-5-1995)
6-4C-3: DEFINITIONS:
"Roller device" shall mean any one of the following devices:
ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLERBLADES: A shoe with wheels attached or a device with
wheels which is designed to be attached to a shoe.
ROLLER SKIS: A pair of skis platformed with wheels attached which is intended
to simulate skiing.
SKATEBOARD: A wheeled self-propelled and manually propelled device to transport
a rider which device is not otherwise secured to the rider's feet or shoes.
(Ord. 222, 9-5-1995)
6-4C-4: RESTRICTED AREAS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel himself upon a "roller
device" as defined herein in or on the following areas in the city:
   A.   Downtown Business Area: On any public street, alley, sidewalk or other
public property within the following area, same being the downtown business
area: Sixth Street and its adjoining sidewalks between Walnut Street and Spruce
Street in the city, between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday.
   B.   Public Building/Area: In any public building/area owned by the city,
the same being the library, city building and on any tennis and basketball
courts at the city parks.
   C.   While Being Propelled: In any area within the city while being pushed,
pulled or in any way propelled by any motorized vehicle or by a person on a
bicycle. (Ord. 222, 9-5-1995)
6-4C-5: RULES OF THE ROAD:
Any person who is using any roller device on any of the streets or roadways
within the city which are not specified above as prohibited must observe the
same rules of the road as required of bicycles pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
Annotated section 169.222. (Ord. 222, 9-5-1995)
6-4C-6: FUTURE PROHIBITED AREAS:
In the future, the city council may prohibit the use of "roller devices"
defined in section
6-4C-3 of this article in areas of the city in addition to those prohibited in
section
6-4C-4 of this article upon recommendation of the chief of police or the parks
and recreation director. (Ord. 222, 9-5-1995; amd. 2005 Code)
6-4C-7: PENALTY:
   A.   First Offense: The skateboard, roller skates or rollerblades will be
confiscated immediately for a period of five (5) days. After the five (5) day
period, the skateboard, rollerblades or roller skates shall be picked up by a
parent or guardian.
   B.   Second Offense: The skateboard, roller skates or rollerblades will be
confiscated immediately for a period of ten (10) days. At the end of the ten
(10) day period, the skateboard, rollerblades or roller skates shall be picked
up by a parent or guardian.
   C.   Third Offense: The skateboard, roller skates or rollerblades will be
confiscated immediately and the party shall be charged with a petty
misdemeanor, as provided in the general penalty in subsection 1-4-1A of this
code. (Ord. 222, 9-5-1995; amd. 2005 Code)
ARTICLE D. MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-4D-1: Purpose; Intent; Definitions
6-4D-2: Use Of Recreational Vehicles
6-4D-3: Penalty
6-4D-1: PURPOSE; INTENT; DEFINITIONS:
   A.   1.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations
for the use of recreational motor vehicles on public property in the city.
      2.   This chapter is not intended to allow what the Minnesota Statutes
prohibit or to prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes expressly allow.
   B.   It is intended to ensure the public safety and prevent a public
nuisance.
   C.   For purposes of this Ordinance, a recreational vehicle is defined as
follows:
 
                      Any motorized flotation-tired vehicles with at least
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE:  three but no more than six low pressure tires that have
                      an engine displacement of less than 960 cubic centimeters
                      and total dry weight of less than 1,000 pounds.
                      Any passenger conveyance being driven with three or four
MOTORIZED GOLF CART:  wheels with three or four low-pressure tires that is
                      limited in engine displacement of less than 800 cubic
                      centimeters and total dry weight less than 800 pounds.
                      A side-by-side, four-wheel drive, off-road vehicle that
                      has four wheels, is propelled by an internal combustion
UTILITY TASK VEHICLE: engine with a piston displacement capacity of 1,200 cubic
                      centimeters or less, and has a total dry weight of 1,800
                      but less than 2,600 pounds. (Ord. 309, 9-16-2014; amd.
                      Ord. 309, 6-3-2025)
 
6-4D-2: USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   1.   No person shall operate a recreational vehicle on streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public property without obtaining a permit as provided
herein.
      2.   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by
the city and shall contain all of the following information:
         a.   The name and address of the applicant; Add names of all household
members who will be driving the recreational vehicle.
         b.   Model name, make, color, and year and number of the recreational
vehicle;
         c.   Current driver’s license and copy of all driver’s licenses for
those who share the same household that will be operating the vehicle; and
         d.   Other information as the city may require.
      3.   The permit fee shall be paid on an annual basis at the rate
established by The City Council, in accordance with Minn. Stat § 169.045. The
City Council shall have the authority to adjust the fee by resolution from time
to time.
      4.   No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following
conditions are met:
         a.   The applicant must demonstrate that he or she currently holds a
valid Minnesota driver’s license; or
         b.   The applicant may submit a certificate signed by a physician that
the applicant is able to safely operate a recreational vehicle on the roadways
designated. If a valid driver’s license is not obtainable, this certificate
will be required annually.
         c.   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance
with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes concerning insurance coverage for the
recreational vehicle. A copy of insurance must be submitted with each
application.
         d.   The applicant has not had his or her driver’s license revoked as
the result of criminal proceedings.
      5.   Recreational vehicles are permitted to operate only on city streets,
not state or federal highways, from sunrise to sunset. Recreational vehicles
shall not be operated on county roads. They shall not be operated in inclement
weather, except during emergency conditions as provided in the ordinance, or
when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at
any time when there is insufficient light visibility to clearly see persons and
vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
      6.   All recreational vehicles must be equipped with functioning
headlights and taillights and all golf carts shall display the slow-moving
vehicle emblem per Minn. Stat. § 169.045 and shall be equipped with a rear-view
mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind as required by
Minn. Stat. § 169.70
      7.   Every person operating a recreational vehicle under permit on
designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of
any other vehicle under the provisions of Minn. Stat., ch. 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be
applied to recreational vehicles and except as otherwise specifically provided
in Minn. Stat. § 169.045(7), as it may be amended from time to time.
      8.   The Police Chief and officers may suspend or revoke a permit granted
hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the
provisions of this section or Minn. Stat. ch. 169, as it may be amended from
time to time, investigation of report of incident, or if there is evidence that
the permit holder cannot safely operate the recreational vehicle on the
designated roadways. Repercussions may include verbal/ written warning,
ordinance violation, State Administrative Ticket, or revocation.
      9.   Recreational vehicles may not operate with a greater number of
passengers than the vehicle is designed to carry, and all passengers must be in
the seated position while the vehicle is moving. Children must be properly
secured in vehicle as would be required by Minn. Statutes. All lap riding is
prohibited.
   B.   Authorized city staff may operate city owned recreational vehicles
without obtaining a permit within the city, on city streets, sidewalks, trails,
rights-of-way, and public property when conducting city business. (Ord. 309, 9-
16-2014; amd. Ord. 309, 8-1-2023; Ord.309, 6-3-2025)
6-4D-3: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be subject to a fine as established by the city council.
(Ord. 309, 9-16-2014)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS 1
SECTION:
7-1-1: Permit Requirements
7-1-2: Obstructions
7-1-3: Flaggers
7-1-4: Traffic Closure
7-1-5: Parking
7-1-6: Derricks And Hoists
7-1-7: Enclosed Pedestrian Walkway Required
7-1-8: Overhanging Devices
7-1-9: Sidewalks
7-1-10: Street Snow Removal Operations
7-1-11: Weight Restrictions, Truck Routes, Truck Parking And Truck Traffic
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 6.
7-1-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   Application: Any person desiring to use public property shall apply
for a permit or renewal of a permit a minimum of two (2) working days before
starting work and must submit detailed plans for street or sidewalk use and
pedestrian safety on major projects.
      2.   Waiver: This provision or portions thereof may be waived by the
director of public works in the event of an emergency.
   B.   Insurance:
      1.   Insurance Required: The permittee shall obtain liability insurance
for both personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
      2.   Additional Insured: The city shall be named as an additional insured
under that insurance for the services provided under the permit. The
permittee's insurance will be the primary insurance for the city.
      3.   Certificate Of Insurance: Permittee shall provide a certificate of
insurance on the city's approved form which verifies the existence of the
required liability insurance coverage as well as workers' compensation
coverage.
   C.   Display Of Permit: Permits issued under this section by the department
of public works shall be conspicuously displayed at all times for ease of
inspection on the indicated work site.
   D.   Double Fee: Should any person begin work of any kind without having
first secured the necessary permit therefor, such person shall be required to
pay double the fee provided for such permit.
   E.   Revocation: Any permit issued by the director of public works under
this section may be revoked when he finds revocation in the best interests of
the city. (Ord. 225, 9-5-1995)
7-1-2: OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   Barricades; Guards: Any permittee obstructing any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public property shall keep such obstruction properly guarded
at all times;
   B.   Warning Lights: From sunset to sunrise, all obstructions must be
guarded by a sufficient number of warning lights placed in such manner that
they will give proper warning of said obstruction.
   C.   Fencing: The director of public works may require any permittee
obstructing a sidewalk to build adjacent to such obstruction a tight board
fence at least six feet (6') high, except at street intersections where a six
foot (6') open board fence shall be built and maintained.
   D.   Walkway:
      1.   Required: Adjacent to each such fence shall be built and maintained
a temporary walk at least four feet (4') in width for the use of the public
with a railing along the outside edge of the walk at least thirty six inches
(36") high.
      2.   Waiver: The director of public works may waive the requirement for a
temporary walk when it is determined that a temporary walk is not necessary and
that pedestrians can more properly be protected by rerouting them to a walk
across the street. (Ord. 225, 9-5-1995)
7-1-3: FLAGGERS:
The director of public works may direct that flaggers, as described in section
6F of the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways,
state of Minnesota, be used to control traffic. (Ord. 225, 9-5-1995)
7-1-4: TRAFFIC CLOSURE:
The permittee shall notify the director of public works when the permit area is
closed to pedestrian and vehicular traffic and again when it is open to such
traffic. (Ord. 225, 9-5-1995)
7-1-5: PARKING:
The parking of private vehicles within or adjacent to the permit area is
prohibited. The loading or unloading of trucks adjacent to the permit area is
prohibited unless specifically authorized by the permit. (Ord. 225, 9-5-1995)
7-1-6: DERRICKS AND HOISTS:
No person shall place or use derricks or hoists of any kind or any portion
thereof, including outriggers and pads, upon any sidewalk unless the permit
specifically permits such action. (Ord. 225, 9-5-1995)
7-1-7: ENCLOSED PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY REQUIRED:
Whenever any person applies for a permit for the use of a street or sidewalk or
portion thereof for the purpose of hoisting or lifting equipment or material
over, across and above such street or sidewalk, he shall provide for closing
off those portions of the street and/or sidewalk encompassed within the lifting
area with suitable barricades, signs, and warning lights and shall provide a
four foot (4') pedestrian walkway around such lifting area, such walkway to be
suitably enclosed on the street side with barricades and warning lights. (Ord.
225, 9-5-1995)
7-1-8: OVERHANGING DEVICES:
No person shall place or maintain any wire, cable, rope, arch, strut, or other
artificial device or structure, or any thing or device carried thereon or
suspended therefrom, over or across any street or alley at a height of less
than fourteen feet (14') above the traveled portion of the street or alley.
(1982 Code § 4.211)
7-1-9: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Width: All cement sidewalks hereafter constructed on the following
streets shall be of at least the following indicated width:
 
Chestnut Street between Sixth           6 feet wide
and Ninth Streets
Pine Street between Sixth and
Seventh Streets
West half of block 51                   5 feet wide
East half of block 51                   8 feet wide
Sixth Street between the intersection
with the Minneapolis St. Louis Railroad 10 feet wide, including
right of way and the bridge on Sixth    curb
Street over the Lac Qui Parle River.
Seventh Street, east side, between      6 feet wide
Pine and Chestnut Streets
All other sidewalks                     5 feet wide
 
   (Ord. 229, 10-7-1997)
   B.   Cleaning And Repair:
      1.   By Owner/Occupant: The owner and the occupant or other person in
control of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to
keep the walk in good repair, clear of all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish, and
otherwise safe for pedestrians. No such person shall allow snow, ice, dirt or
rubbish to remain on a sidewalk longer than twenty four (24) hours after its
deposit thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. Owners and occupants or
other persons in control of residential property adjacent to a public sidewalk
shall use diligence to keep the walk in good repair, clear of all snow, ice,
dirt and rubbish and otherwise safe for pedestrians. (Ord. 258, 4-19-2005)
      2.   By City:
         a.   Notice To Clear Or Repair: Whenever any sidewalk has not been
cleared or repaired as required by subsection B1 of this section the Dawson
chief of police may give written notice to the owner, occupant or other person
in control of the property that the sidewalk must be cleared or repaired within
such time as the Dawson chief of police determines is necessary for protection
of the public health, safety and welfare.
         b.   Failure To Comply: No notice shall be required respecting the
clearing of snow, ice, dirt or rubbish which has remained on the walk beyond
the time specified in subsection B1 of this section. If the sidewalk is not
cleared or repaired within the time required, the Dawson chief of police may
have the sidewalk cleared or repaired.
         c.   Costs: The owner of the property shall be responsible for all
costs and expenses of clearing or repairing the sidewalk. The Dawson chief of
police shall keep a record showing the cost of the work adjacent to each
separate lot and parcel and shall deliver the information to the city clerk.
(Ord. 305, 6-4-2013)
         d.   Failure To Pay: If the owner fails to make payment or
satisfactory payment arrangements within ten (10) days of billing, the cost
shall be taxed against the property as provided by law. (1982 Code § 4.223)
   C.   Liability: The owner, the occupant and the lessee of any property
adjacent to a public sidewalk shall indemnify the city for any liability
including the cost of defending against any claim incurred by the city by
reason of improper maintenance of the sidewalk or by reason of failure to keep
the sidewalk clear of snow, ice, dirt and rubbish. (1982 Code § 4.224)
   D.   Removal Of Sidewalk: No existing sidewalk may be removed unless allowed
by permit granted by the Dawson city council. If a sidewalk is removed without
a permit, the landowner may be required to replace the sidewalk.
   E.   Emergency Permit For The Removal Of Sidewalk: The city maintenance
superintendent or his designee is authorized to issue an emergency permit to
remove a sidewalk or a portion thereof. The landowner must either replace the
sidewalk or obtain a permit under subsection D of this section to remove the
sidewalk permanently.
   F.   Permit Fee: A permit fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) is
required for permit under subsections D and E of this section. (Ord. 305, 6-4-
2013)
7-1-10: STREET SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS:
   A.   Streets To Be Cleared:
      1.   Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M., any vehicle, trailer, camper, trailer home, dumpster or like
property parked on all city streets or any city parking lot after one inch (1")
or more of snowfall shall be removed until the street or city parking lot has
been completely plowed from curb to curb. Any establishment normally open for
business during the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. shall be excluded from the requirements of this section until the
establishment's closing time.
      2.   Any vehicle, trailer, camper, trailer home, dumpster or like
property which shall be left parked or standing in violation of this section
may be summarily removed, without notice to the owner or operator, by officers
of the police department, or persons employed or designated by them, and stored
in any appropriate place. All necessary costs and expenses of towing, removing
and storage of such property shall be first paid to the person, or person
designated by the person, claiming the property before release of same.
      3.   The city shall not be responsible for any damage to such vehicle,
trailer, camper, trailer home, dumpster or like property removed in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to cause, allow, suffer or permit any vehicle, trailer, camper,
trailer home, dumpster or like property operated by or registered in the name
of such person, firm or corporation to be parked contrary to the provisions of
this section. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. (Ord. 256, 12-16-2004)
7-1-11: WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS, TRUCK ROUTES, TRUCK PARKING AND TRUCK TRAFFIC:
   A.   In accordance with the powers granted in Minnesota statutes chapters
169.87 and 169.34, the city of Dawson hereby restricts truck traffic to an
improved route within the city. This action is to prevent the continued
deterioration of streets not designed for such traffic, the potential safety
hazards, and the abatement of noise, odors, and other nuisances associated with
truck traffic in residential areas and other areas where such traffic may be in
conflict with the existing land use.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms will be defined as
follows:
    TRUCK: Any motor vehicle that weighs in excess of ten (10) tons (20,000
gross vehicle weight rating - GVWR) but does not include the following
vehicles:
      1.   Sanitation/garbage trucks.
      2.   Emergency vehicles.
      3.   Public maintenance vehicles.
      4.   Moving vans or vehicles at such times as the same is used to move an
individual, family, or business and their possessions to or from a residence or
business.
      5.   Delivery and construction vehicles that are in route to or from a
place of delivery of goods and services or the construction site (but such
delivery and construction vehicles must use truck routes when the same are
available).
      6.   Recreation vehicles, motor homes, camping trailers, travel trailers,
fifth wheel camping trailers.
      7.   Tree trimming service vehicles.
      8.   Buses.
   C.   No person, firm or corporation shall operate, drive, tow or park any
vehicle, or combination of vehicles, with a gross vehicle weight rating of over
twenty thousand (20,000) pounds on any city street which has not been
classified as a truck route.
   D.   All tractors and tractor trailer combinations are prohibited from
parking on any residential street except in designated truck routes. All
tractor trailer combinations must remain hooked together at all times when
parked. No vehicle or combinations shall remain parked for more than six (6)
hours. Seasonal parking restrictions will apply.
   E.   The chief of police or his designated person may authorize an
overweight vehicle to use a street or roadway other than a truck route in an
emergency situation.
   F.   The city streets or roadways designated as truck routes are:
Alley between 8th Street and 9th Street between Walnut and Locust
Chestnut Street between 5th Street and 7th Street
County State A #37 runs from 5th Street SE to city limits
Diagonal Street
Johnson Street between 5th Street and 7th Street
Lincoln Place between 6th Street and 8th Street
Lincoln Place from Highway 212 to 12th Street
Locust Street between 5th and 6th Street
Locust Street between 8th Street and Memorial Place
North Park Street and Northeast 1st Street
Pine Street between 5th Street and 7th Street
Spruce Street between 6th Street and 7th Street
Walnut Street between 7th Street and 9th Street
North 3rd Street
Southeast 3rd Street and East Linden Street
5th Street between Pine Street and Johnson Street
6th Street
North 6th Street East
North 6th Street West
7th Street between Spruce Street and Walnut Street
North 7th Street
12th Street between Highway 212 and Locust Street
   G.   Any person or entity violating any provisions of this section may
either be levied an administrative fee or issued a state citation at the
discretion of the officer. A violation shall be considered a misdemeanor with a
maximum penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or ninety (90) days'
jail. (Ord. 317, 7-5-2016)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS 1
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permit Required; Fee
7-2-2: Procedures; Applicable Requirements
7-2-3: Conditions Of Permit
7-2-4: Street Restoration Fee
7-2-5: Subsurface Installation
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 6.
7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
No person shall make any excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or on any
public property without first obtaining from the city clerk a permit to do so.
The fee for an excavation permit shall be the same as that required for a water
or sewer construction permit. No separate excavation permit shall be required
for excavation incidental to water or sewer construction for which a water or
sewer construction permit is required. (1982 Code § 4.131)
7-2-2: PROCEDURES; APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All procedures for obtaining and all conditions of water and sewer
construction permits, insofar as they can be made applicable, apply to
excavation permits, including all insurance requirements.
   B.   A public utility corporation shall not be required to carry insurance.
(1982 Code § 4.132)
7-2-3: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
The following conditions shall be deemed to be incorporated in each permit
granted whenever any excavation is made in or along any public street, alley,
sidewalk or other public property:
   A.   Inconvenience To Public: The work shall be done so as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the public.
   B.   Passage Of Water: Provision shall be made for the passage of water
along the gutters.
   C.   Vehicular Traffic: Unless closing of the street is authorized, at least
one-half (1/2) of the street shall be left clear for vehicles.
   D.   Pedestrian Traffic: Safe bridgeways on sidewalks shall be provided for
foot passengers.
   E.   Barricades; Lights: All excavations and piles of dirt or other
materials shall be adequately guarded with barriers and lights so as to protect
others from hazards.
   F.   Pipes And Mains: Pipes and mains shall be protected from freezing.
   G.   Filling Excavations: Excavations shall be refilled as soon as
reasonably possible.
   H.   Restoration: Streets, sidewalks and other property disturbed shall be
restored as nearly as practicable to their condition prior to the work.
   I.   Rubbish; Dirt: All rubbish and dirt shall be promptly removed. (1982
Code § 4.133)
7-2-4: STREET RESTORATION FEE:
The city council may, by resolution, establish a reasonable fee which must be
paid by the person doing the work to cover the cost of road restoration
whenever pavement or other hard surfacing on any street or alley is damaged by
any excavation. (1982 Code § 4.134)
7-2-5: SUBSURFACE INSTALLATION:
   A.   Map:
      1.   Required: The applicant for any excavation permit, or for any water
or sewer construction permit involving excavation in or along any public
street, alley, sidewalk or other public property shall submit a detailed map
showing the location and depth of any subsurface installation to be installed
altered, repaired or removed.
      2.   Corrective Information: If upon completion of the work the actual
location and depth varies from that proposed, the person to whom the permit is
issued shall file such corrective information as may be necessary with the city
clerk. (1982 Code § 4.135)
   B.   Records:
      1.   Maintenance Of Records: The city clerk shall maintain a map or other
record showing the location of all utility and other installations made beneath
the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property.
      2.   Completeness And Accuracy Of Information: The information shall be
sufficiently complete and accurate as to permit anyone making an excavation to
avoid damage to any existing underground installation and to properly locate
any new installation.
      3.   Recording Of Information: New information shall be recorded as soon
as practicable upon the issuance of a permit or the completion of an
underground installation. (1982 Code § 4.136)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING NUMBERS 1
SECTION:
7-3-1: Assignment Of Numbers
7-3-2: Base Streets
7-3-3: Numbering System
7-3-4: Unusual Situations
7-3-5: New Buildings
7-3-6: Record
7-3-7: Use Of Numbers
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 18.
7-3-1: ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS:
The city clerk shall assign a building number to each residence, public
building, commercial building, industrial building and other building within
the city except outbuildings and accessory buildings. (1982 Code § 4.111)
7-3-2: BASE STREETS:
For the purpose of assigning building numbers and street directional
designations, Oak Street and First Street are hereby designated as base
streets. Streets lying south of Oak Street and west of First Street shall not
bear any directional designation. Streets running north and south and lying
north of Oak Street shall bear the directional designation "North" followed by
the street name or number. Streets running east and west and lying east of
First Street shall bear the directional designation "East" followed by the
street name or number. (1982 Code § 4.112)
7-3-3: NUMBERING SYSTEM:
   A.   Block Designations: The building numbering system shall be such that
each block along a street is allocated a hundred number designation beginning
in the block adjacent to the base street and running progressively, in one
hundred (100) number intervals per block, away from the base street.
   B.   Odd/Even Numbers: Odd numbers shall be used on one side of all streets,
and even numbers on the opposite side.
   C.   Numbers Assigned In Block: The numbers assigned in a block shall be
allocated in equal units of frontage as nearly as practical.
   D.   Building Numbers: Numbers for buildings shall coincide as nearly as
possible to the location of the main entrance to the building upon the lot.
(1982 Code § 4.113)
7-3-4: UNUSUAL SITUATIONS:
When a block is of unusual size, when any street does not run in a generally
east-west or generally north-south direction, or when for any other reason the
usual numbering requirements cannot be followed, the city clerk shall assign
block and building numbers in a manner corresponding as nearly as practical to
the numbering provided for in this code, or such other numbering as is most
practical and convenient. (1982 Code § 4.114)
7-3-5: NEW BUILDINGS:
Whenever a building permit is issued for the construction of a principal
building on any property within the city, the city clerk shall assign the
appropriate building number and street address to the building. (1982 Code §
4.115)
7-3-6: RECORD:
The city clerk shall keep and maintain a permanent record of building numbers
and street addresses assigned. All assignments shall be final except that the
city clerk may correct any erroneous assignment and may change any assignment
which, though correct, is impractical. (1982 Code § 4.116)
7-3-7: USE OF NUMBERS:
Each property owner shall obtain from the city clerk the correct building
number for the property and cause the number to be placed upon the building, in
a suitable location at the main entrance, in figures not less than two and one-
half inches (21/2") high. (1982 Code § 4.117)
CHAPTER 4
TREES AND VEGETATION
SECTION:
7-4-1: Interference Prohibited
7-4-2: Authority Over Vegetation
7-4-1: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
No person shall plant or remove any trees, plants, shrubs or flowers growing or
planted in or on or overhanging any park, street, alley, sidewalk or boulevard
of the city except by permission of the road and bridge department. (1982 Code
§ 4.151)
7-4-2: AUTHORITY OVER VEGETATION:
   A.   Care And Maintenance: The road and bridge department shall have full
power to maintain, trim, prune, remove and otherwise care for all trees,
plants, shrubs, flowers and other vegetation growing in all parks, and on,
adjacent to or overhanging all streets, alleys, sidewalks and boulevards of the
city.
   B.   Formulation Of General Plan: The road and bridge department shall
formulate general plans for the trimming, maintenance and pruning of trees,
plants, shrubs, flowers and other vegetation in such places and for the removal
of any trees, plants, shrubs, flowers or other vegetation which has become
diseased, damaged, noxious or dangerous.
   C.   Entry Upon Private Premises: The road and bridge department shall have
the power to enter upon private property for the purpose of inspection and for
carrying out the provisions of this section. (1982 Code § 4.152)
CHAPTER 5
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Permit Procedure
7-5-3: Security
7-5-4: Inspection
7-5-5: Conditions Of Use
7-5-6: Restoration; Relocation
7-5-7: Indemnification
7-5-8: Company Default
7-5-9: Existing Facilities
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms defined in this section have the meanings given them:
COMPANY: A natural or corporate person, business association, political
subdivision, public or private agency of any kind, its successors and assigns,
who or which seeks or is required to construct, install, operate, repair,
maintain, remove or relocate facilities in the city.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works, or equivalent position at the city, or
designated representative.
FACILITIES: Telecommunications equipment of any kind, including but not limited
to audio, video, paging, facsimile or similar service, not governed by
Minnesota Statutes Annotated chapter 238, including all trunks, lines,
circuits, physical connections, switching equipment, wireless communication
equipment of all kinds, and any necessary appurtenances owned, leased or
operated by a company on, over, in, under, across or along public ground.
PUBLIC GROUND: Highways, roads, streets, alleys, public ways, utility easements
and public grounds in the city. (Ord. 223, 9-5-1995)
7-5-2: PERMIT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Permit Required: A company may not construct, install, repair, remove
or relocate facilities, or any part thereof, in, on, over, under or along
public ground without first obtaining a permit from the city.
   B.   Application: Application for a permit is made to the director.
   C.   Permit Fee: The application must be accompanied by the permit fee set
by the city council by resolution.
   D.   Acceptance Of Requirements: By receiving a permit pursuant to this
chapter, the company accepts and agrees to comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter.
   E.   Issuance:
      1.   Permit Approval: If the director determines that the applicant has
satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the director may issue a permit to
the company.
      2.   Hearing:
         a.   Request For Hearing: An applicant may contest a permit denial or
the conditions of approval by written notice to the city clerk requesting a
city council review within fourteen (14) days of the director's action.
         b.   Time For Hearing: The city council shall hear any contest of the
director's actions under this chapter within forty five (45) days of the city
clerk's receipt of the contest notice.
      3.   Franchise Agreement: Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in
addition to the issuance of a permit set forth herein. (Ord. 223, 9-5-1995)
7-5-3: SECURITY:
   A.   Security Required: Prior to commencement of work, the company must
deposit with the city security in the form of certified check, letter of credit
or construction bond, in a sufficient amount as determined by the director for
the completion of the work.
   B.   Term: The security will be held until the work is completed plus a
period of two (2) months thereafter to guarantee that restoration work has been
satisfactorily completed.
   C.   Multiple Projects: Upon application of the company, providing such
information as the director may require, if two (2) or more work projects are
to be constructed during a calendar year, the director may accept, in lieu of
separate security for each project, a single security for multiple projects in
such form and amount as determined, in the discretion of the director, to be
sufficient to assure completion of all projects which may be in progress at any
one time during that calendar year and to guarantee that restoration work will
be satisfactorily completed. The security will then be returned to the company
with interest if required by law and then interest at the applicable statutory
rate. (Ord. 223, 9-5-1995)
7-5-4: INSPECTION:
When the work is completed, the company must request an inspection by the
director. The director will determine if the work has been satisfactorily
completed and provide the company with a written report of the inspection and
approval. (Ord. 223, 9-5-1995)
7-5-5: CONDITIONS OF USE:
   A.   Regulation; Permit Schedule: The director is authorized and directed to
prepare suitable regulations and schedules for the administration of permits
issued under this chapter.
   B.   Use Of Public Ground: Facilities must be located, constructed,
installed, maintained or relocated so as not to endanger or unnecessarily
interfere with the usual and customary traffic, travel, and use of public
ground. The facilities are subject to additional conditions of the permit as
established by the director including, but not limited to:
      1.   The right of inspection by the city at reasonable times and places;
      2.   The obligation to relocate the facilities pursuant to subsections 7-
5-6C and D of this chapter; and
      3.   Compliance with all applicable regulations imposed by the Minnesota
public utilities commission and other state and federal law, including prompt
compliance with the requirements of the gopher state one call program,
Minnesota Statutes Annotated chapter 216D.
   C.   Location: The facilities must be placed in a location agreed to by the
city. The company shall give the city forty five (45) days' advanced written
notice of the company's proposed location of facilities within the public
ground. No later than forty five (45) days after the city's receipt of the
company's written notice, the city will notify the company in writing of the
city's acceptance or rejection of the proposed location. If the city rejects
the company's proposed location, the city shall propose alternative locations.
The city does not waive or forfeit its right to reject the location of
facilities by failure to respond within the forty five (45) days.
   D.   Emergency Work: A company may open and disturb the surface of public
ground without a permit where an emergency exists requiring the immediate
repair of its facilities. In such event the company must request a permit not
later than the second working day thereafter and comply with the applicable
conditions of the permit. In no event, may the company undertake such an
activity which will result in the closing of a street or alley without prior
notification to the city.
   E.   Street Improvements: The city will give the company written notice of
plans for street improvements where permanent paving or resurfacing is
involved. The notice must contain:
      1.   The nature and character of the improvements;
      2.   The streets upon which the improvements are to be made;
      3.   The extent of the improvements, the time when the city will start
the work; and
      4.   If more than one street is involved, the sequence in which the work
is to proceed.
   F.   Protection Of Facilities: The company must take reasonable measures to
prevent the facilities from causing damage to persons or property. The company
must take reasonable measures to protect its facilities from damage that could
be inflicted on the facilities by persons, property, or the elements. The
company must take specific protective measures when the city performs work near
the facilities.
   G.   Prior Service Connections: In cases where the city is undertaking the
paving or resurfacing of streets and the facilities are located under such
street, the company may be required to install service connections prior to the
paving or resurfacing if it is apparent that service will be required during
the five (5) year period following the paving or resurfacing.
   H.   Nonright Of Way Public Ground: Nothing in this chapter is intended to
grant to the company authority beyond that given by Minnesota Statutes
Annotated section 222.37 for use of the public right of ways for construction
and operation of facilities. If the city allows the company to use its nonright
of way public ground, the terms of this chapter apply to the extent they are
consistent with the contract, statutory and common law rights the city owns in
such property. (Ord. 223, 9-5-1995)
7-5-6: RESTORATION; RELOCATION:
   A.   Restoration:
      1.   Required: Upon completion of the work, the company must restore the
general area of the work, including paving and its foundations, to the same
condition that existed prior to commencement of the work and must exercise
reasonable care to maintain the same condition for two (2) years thereafter.
The work must be completed as promptly as weather permits.
      2.   Noncompliance:
         a.   Work Performed By City: If the company does not promptly perform
and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and
restore the public ground to the same condition, the city may put it in the
same condition at the expense of the company.
         b.   Reimbursement Of Costs: The company must, upon demand, pay to the
city the direct and indirect cost of the work done for or performed by the
city, including, but not limited to, the city's administrative costs. To
recover its costs, the city will first draw on the security posted by the
company and then recover the balance of the costs incurred from the company
directly by written demand. This remedy is in addition to any other remedies
available to the city.
   B.   Company Initiated Relocation: The company must give the city written
notice prior to a company initiated relocation of facilities. A company
initiated relocation must be at the company's expense and must be approved by
the city, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
   C.   City Initiated Relocation: The company must promptly and at its own
expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently relocate
its facilities whenever the city requires such relocation.
   D.   Vacation Of Public Ground: The vacation of public ground does not
deprive the company of the right to operate and maintain its facilities in the
city. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the company, the company
must pay the relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the
city or other persons, the company must pay the relocation costs unless
otherwise agreed to by the city, company and other persons. (Ord. 223, 9-5-
1995)
7-5-7: INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Scope: The company will indemnify, keep and hold the city, its elected
officials, officers, employees, and agents free and harmless from any and all
claims and actions on account of injury or death of persons or damage to
property occasioned by the construction, installation, maintenance, repair,
removal, relocation or operation of the facilities affecting public ground,
unless such injury or damage is the result of the negligence of the city, its
elected officials, employees, officers, or agents. The city will notify the
company of claims or actions and provide a reasonable opportunity for the
company to accept and undertake the defense.
   B.   Claim Defense:
      1.   Notice Of Claim: If a claim or action is brought against the city
under circumstances where indemnification applies, the company, at its sole
expense, shall defend the city if written notice of the claim or action is
given to the company within a period wherein the company is not prejudiced in
the defense of such claim or action by lack of such notice.
      2.   Control Of Litigation: If the company undertakes the defense, the
company shall have complete control of such claim or action, but it may not
settle without the consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
      3.   Third Party Claim: This subsection is not, as to third parties, a
waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the city. In defending
any action on behalf of the city, the company is entitled to assert every
defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf. (Ord. 223, 9-
5-1995)
7-5-8: COMPANY DEFAULT:
   A.   Notice: If the company is in default in the performance of the work
authorized by the permit, including, but not limited to, restoration
requirements, for more than thirty (30) days after receiving written notice
from the city of the default, the city may terminate the rights of the company
under the permit. The notice of default must be in writing and specify the
provisions of the permit under which the default is claimed and state the
grounds of the claim. The notice must be served on the company by personally
delivering it to an officer thereof at its principal place of business in
Minnesota or by certified mail to that address.
   B.   City Action On Default: If the company is in default in the performance
of the work authorized by the permit, the city may, after the above notice to
the company and failure of the company to cure the default, take such action as
may be reasonably necessary to abate the condition caused by the default. The
company must reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including
costs of collection and attorney fees incurred as a result of the company
default. The security posted under section
7-5-3 of this chapter will be applied by the city first toward payment for such
reimbursement. (Ord. 223, 9-5-1995)
7-5-9: EXISTING FACILITIES:
Companies with facilities, in, on, over, under or along public ground on the
effective date hereof must take prompt action to comply with this chapter and
the permits authorized for this chapter. A company, however, is not required to
reapply for a permit obtained from the city prior to the effective date hereof.
A company is not required to pay the difference between the permit fee of a
previously obtained permit and the equivalent newly obtained permit under this
chapter. All other provisions of this chapter apply to existing facilities.
(Ord. 223, 9-5-1995)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
8-1-1: Purpose; Objectives
8-1-2: Definitions
8-1-3: Administration
8-1-3-1: Terms Of Service
8-1-3-2: Application For Installation And Service
8-1-3-3: Required Information
8-1-3-4: Access To Premises
8-1-3-5: Additional Requirements
8-1-3-6: Enforcement
8-1-4: Connection Requirements
8-1-4-1: Connection Required
8-1-4-2: Exception To Requirement
8-1-4-3: Connection Costs
8-1-4-4: Time Limitation For Connection
8-1-4-5: Notice To Connect
8-1-4-6: Connection By City
8-1-4-7: Installation Prior To Street Surfacing
8-1-4-8: Private Systems Prohibited; Exception
8-1-5: Water And Sewer Construction Permits
8-1-5-1: Permit Required
8-1-5-2: Application
8-1-5-3: Issuance
8-1-5-4: Insurance
8-1-5-5: Indemnification
8-1-5-6: Excavations
8-1-5-7: Supervision; Approval
8-1-6: Billing And Collection
8-1-6-1: Statements
8-1-6-2: Payment
8-1-6-3: Discontinuance Of Service
8-1-6-4: Procedure For Discontinuance Of Service
8-1-6-5: Liability For Charges
8-1-6-6: Collection
8-1-7: Damages; Violations
8-1-7-1: Prohibited Acts
8-1-7-2: Liability For Damages
8-1-7-3: Correction Of Violations
 
Notes
  1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 31. See also sections
1 13-1-8 and
  13-1-9 of this code.
8-1-1: PURPOSE; OBJECTIVES:
   A.   Purpose: Ordinance 198 codified in various sections throughout chapters
1, 3 and 4 of this title sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into
the city wastewater disposal system and enables the city to comply with all
state and federal laws.
   B.   Objectives: The objectives of ordinance 198 are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
disposal system which will interfere with the operation of the system or the
use or disposal of the sludge;
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
disposal system which will pass through the system inadequately treated into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system; and
      3.   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system.
   C.   Provisions: Ordinance 198 provides for the regulation of discharges
into the city's wastewater disposal system through the issuance of permits to
certain users and through enforcement of the general requirements for the other
users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user
reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution
of costs relating from the program established herein. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACT: The federal water pollution control act also known as the clean water act,
as amended, 33 USC 125 et seq.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) expressed in terms of weight
and concentration (milligrams per liter, mg/l).
CITY: The city of Dawson or the city council of Dawson.
DIRECTOR/SUPERINTENDENT: The director/superintendent of wastewater disposal
system/of water pollution control/of public works of the city or its authorized
representative.
EPA: Environmental protection agency.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A person who discharges wastewater disposal system liquid
wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial, manufacturing,
trade, or business establishments or from the development of any natural
resource.
NPDES PERMIT: National pollutant discharge elimination systems permit regulates
the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other waste.
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: A system owned and operated by a person for
collection and delivery of piped water for human consumption into commercial,
industrial, or residential buildings or structures.
USER: Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater
into the city's wastewater disposal system. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987; amd. Ord. 261,
3-21-2006)
8-1-3: ADMINISTRATION:
8-1-3-1: TERMS OF SERVICE:
All provisions of this code respecting municipal utility service, including
amendments which may from time to time be enacted, shall be considered a part
of the terms of service for every service customer and for every owner, lessee,
occupant and person in charge of the premises served. Every customer served and
every owner, lessee, occupant and person in charge of the premises served shall
be considered to express consent to and to be bound by all such requirements.
(1982 Code § 3.111)
8-1-3-2: APPLICATION FOR INSTALLATION AND SERVICE:
Applications for water, sewer and other municipal utility services shall be
made to the city clerk. When a water service connection has been installed, the
application may be made by the owner or the agent of the owner, or by the
lessee, occupant or person in charge of the premises. (1982 Code § 3.112)
8-1-3-3: REQUIRED INFORMATION:
   A.   General Utility Services; Information Required: The owner, lessee,
occupant or other person in charge of any premises, and the applicant for any
municipal utility service, shall provide the city with such information as may
reasonably be required related to the provision of or use of municipal utility
services upon the premises. No person shall wilfully fail to provide such
information or wilfully falsify such information. (1982 Code § 3.113)
   B.   Wastewater Disposal System; Confidential Information:
      1.   Availability Of Information: Information and data on a user obtained
from applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be
available to the public or other government agencies without restriction unless
the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the director that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of
the user.
      2.   Trade Secrets Or Processes: When requested by the person furnishing
a report, and until such time as the information is determined not to be
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but
shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to ordinance 198, the NPDES permit, state disposal system permit and/or
the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report
shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review
or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
      3.   Wastewater: Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
      4.   Notice Of Transmittal: Information accepted by the director as
confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the
general public by the director until and unless a ten (10) day notification is
given to the user. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-1-3-4: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
   A.   Access For Reading And Inspection: The customer and any other person in
control of any premises connected to the city water supply system or served by
the city sewer system shall permit:
      1.   Reading Meters: Authorized meter readers to read meters at
reasonable hours of any day;
      2.   Repairs, Inspection, Testing: Authorized employees or agents of the
city to have access to all parts of any building on premises connected with the
city water supply system or the city storm or sanitary sewer systems at such
times as may reasonably be necessary for repairs and at reasonable hours of any
day for the purpose of inspection, observation, measuring, sampling and
testing.
   B.   Unobtained Access: If access cannot be obtained to read a meter, the
customer's bill may be estimated.
   C.   Refused Access: Refusal to permit access or continued inability to
obtain access to the premises shall be grounds for discontinuance of service.
In such cases, service shall be discontinued in the same manner as service is
discontinued for failure to pay amounts owed. (1982 Code § 3.114)
8-1-3-5: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The water superintendent and the wastewater superintendent, as appropriate, may
establish and enforce any additional requirements not contained in this title
as may be necessary or convenient for the adequate, safe, efficient and
healthful provision of municipal utility services and of private sewage
disposal and for protection of the municipal utility service facilities. No
person shall violate any such requirement, or any requirements of law or of any
agency, respecting municipal utility service or private sewage disposal
systems. (1982 Code § 3.115)
8-1-3-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Water And Sewer: The water superintendent, or the wastewater
superintendent, as appropriate, shall enforce all provisions of this title
relating to the city water and sewer systems and private sewage disposal
systems, subject to the direction of the council and the supervision of the
city manager. Any powers and duties conferred in this title upon them may be
exercised by any other employee of the city when authorized by them. In
addition, the board of health shall also have the power and duty to enforce any
provisions of this title with respect to which the public health may be
affected. (1982 Code § 3.116)
   B.   Wastewater Disposal System:
      1.   Slug Or Accidental Discharges:
         a.   Suspension Of Service: The director may suspend the wastewater
treatment service of a user and/or a wastewater discharge permit (after
informal notice to the discharger) when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the director, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or to the wastewater disposal
system, or would cause the city to violate any condition of its NPDES or state
disposal system permit.
         b.   Notice Of Suspension: Any user notified of a suspension of the
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall
immediately stop the discharge.
         c.   Failure To Comply: In the event of the failure of the user to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater disposal system or
endangerment to any individual.
         d.   Reinstatement: The director shall reinstate the wastewater
discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the noncomplying discharge.
         e.   Written Statement: A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the causes of the slug or accidental discharge and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the director
within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence.
      2.   Revocation Of Permit: In accordance with the procedures of this
section, the director may revoke the permit of any user who:
         a.   Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
         b.   Fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or
characteristics; or
         c.   Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring or for violation of conditions of its permit,
ordinance 198, or applicable state and federal regulations.
      3.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the director finds that any person has
violated or is violating ordinance 198, wastewater discharge permit, or any
prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the director may serve
upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within
thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, unless a shorter time frame is
necessary due to the nature of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory
correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user.
      4.   Hearing Procedure:
         a.   Notice Of Hearing:
            (1)   Order To Show Cause: If the violation is not corrected by
timely compliance, the director may order any user who causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to show cause before the city council why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.
            (2)   Contents Of Notice: A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council
regarding the violation, the reason why the action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city
council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
            (3)   Service Of Notice: Notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a corporation.
         b.   Hearing Officials: The city council may itself conduct the
hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any
officer or employee of the assigned department to:
            (1)   Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the protection of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
            (2)   Take the evidence; and
            (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearings, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city
council for action thereon.
         c.   Transcripts: At any hearing held pursuant to ordinance 198,
testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
         d.   Issuance Of Orders: After the city council has reviewed the
evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders
and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
      5.   Legal Action: If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the
provisions of ordinance 198, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any
order of the city, the city attorney may, following the authorization of such
action by the city council, commence an action for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief.
      6.   Annual Publication: A list of the users which were significantly
violating applicable pretreatment requirements or national categorical
pretreatment standards during the twelve (12) previous months shall be annually
published by the city in a local newspaper. The notification shall also
summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same twelve
(12) months. For the purposes of this section, significant violations would be
those violations which remain uncorrected: a) forty five (45) days after
notification of noncompliance; b) which are part of a pattern of noncompliance
over a twelve (12) month period; or c) which involve a failure to accurately
report noncompliance.
      7.   Appeal To City Council:
         a.   Written Ruling: Any interested party shall have the right to a
written interpretation or ruling on any matter covered by ordinance 198 and
shall be entitled to a written reply from the city.
         b.   Petition To Appeal: Any decision of the director in the
enforcement of ordinance 198 may be appealed to the city council by filing a
written petition with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the director's
ruling.
         c.   Contents Of Petition: Such petition shall specify in detail the
matter or matters involved and every ground or basis on which objections are
made. Such petition shall show the names, addresses and telephone numbers of
all objectors and their attorney at law or spokesman.
         d.   Stay Of Proceedings: The filing of a petition in accordance with
the requirements herein shall stay all proceedings unless the director shall
file, within seventy two (72) hours after the filing of a petition, a
certificate stating that a stay would cause peril to life or property or
specifying other good reason.
         e.   Hearing; Notice: The city council shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing of the petition or appeal and give due notice of the time and place of
said hearing to parties named in the petition as attorney or spokesman. The
hearing shall be open to the public.
         f.   Evidence: Petitioners shall be given full opportunity to present
evidence in support of their petition after which the director may present
evidence in support of his decision.
         g.   Decision: The city council shall decide the appeal within a
reasonable time and notify the attorney or spokesman.
         h.   Official Record: The minutes of the city council shall constitute
the official record of the petition, hearing, and decision. Any party desiring
a transcript of the proceedings shall furnish a qualified court reporter at
their own expense. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-1-4: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
8-1-4-1: CONNECTION REQUIRED:
When property abuts upon any public street, alley or other place along which
water and sewer lines have been constructed and/or is within the city limits,
the owner of any dwelling or commercial or industrial establishment on the
property shall install suitable facilities therein and connect them with the
sanitary sewer and water mains in accordance with the provisions of this title.
This shall not, however, prevent the use on the premises of distilled or
specially bottled water meeting all requirements of law and of health
regulations. (Ord. 261, 3-21-2006)
8-1-4-2: EXCEPTION TO REQUIREMENT:
The city engineer may waive the requirement that a property be connected to
city water or the sanitary sewer upon a finding that requiring the connection
would result in substantial hardship to the owner or occupant; that the public
health, safety and welfare would not be harmed if the property were not
connected; and that the property has another water supply or another means of
sewage disposal which complies with all applicable local, state and federal
requirements. (1982 Code § 3.153)
8-1-4-3: CONNECTION COSTS:
The cost of connection to the city water and sanitary sewer systems, including
the cost of any necessary excavations, connections, taps, installation of pipe,
appurtenances and street repairs, shall be borne by the owner or other
applicant for service. (1982 Code § 3.151)
8-1-4-4: TIME LIMITATION FOR CONNECTION:
Except as allowed in section
8-1-4-2 of this chapter, the owner of any property required to be connected
with the city water line or with the city sanitary sewer system shall connect
the property: a) within ninety (90) days after service first becomes available
to the property; b) within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof if the
requirement did not previously apply but service is presently available; and c)
immediately if the requirement previously applied and service is available. The
owner shall discontinue at that time the use of any other water supply or means
of sewage disposal. (1982 Code § 3.154)
8-1-4-5: NOTICE TO CONNECT:
Whenever service for which a connection required under section
8-1-4-1 of this chapter becomes available or is about to become available to a
property, the city clerk may notify the owner of the connection requirement. If
that notice has not been given and the owner has failed to make the required
connection within the time allowed for making connection, the city clerk shall
give notice that connection must be made within a specified time of the mailing
or delivery of the notice, and that if not done, connection will be made by the
city at the owner's expense. (1982 Code § 3.155)
8-1-4-6: CONNECTION BY CITY:
Whenever, after notice to do so, any owner fails to make connection as
required, the city council may cause the connection to be made, including
installation of adequate toilet facilities. All costs of connection and
installation shall be paid by the owner. If not paid or payment arrangements
made within ten (10) days of billing for payment, the costs may be charged
against the property as a special assessment. The city council may, by
resolution, provide for spreading the assessment over two (2) or more
installments at the legal rate of interest. (1982 Code § 3.156)
8-1-4-7: INSTALLATION PRIOR TO STREET SURFACING:
The city council may, by resolution, require that water and sewer lines be
installed from the main to the property line of property to be served before
any permanent street surfacing is completed. The city clerk shall give each
owner notice to do so within a specified time of the mailing or delivery of the
notice. If the owner fails to install the line, the city council may cause the
line to be installed and charge the costs against the property as a special
assessment in the same manner as for connecting premises to the city water or
sanitary sewer lines. (1982 Code § 3.157)
8-1-4-8: PRIVATE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall build, establish, expand or maintain a
private water supply system within the city unless there shall be no municipal
water supply system as stated in section
8-1-4-1 of this chapter.
   B.   Variance: No person shall replace, or add a private sewer system within
the city unless a variance has been granted.
   C.   Exception: Any private water supply system which is in place and
operational as of January 1, 2006, shall not be subject to this section,
provided the system is not used for human consumption and/or use and is not
cross connected to the municipal water system. (Ord. 261, 3-21-2006)
8-1-5: WATER AND SEWER CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
8-1-5-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person other than an authorized city employee or person hired to do so by
the city shall do any of the following without first having obtained a permit
to do so:
   A.   Construct or repair a building sewer between the building drain and the
sewer main stub;
   B.   Connect the building sewer with the sewer main stub;
   C.   Connect any water service line with the city water main; or
   D.   Otherwise make any connection with or opening into, alter or disturb
any part of the city water system, or the city sanitary sewer system, or of the
city storm sewer system. (1982 Code § 3.161)
8-1-5-2: APPLICATION:
   A.   Application Required: All applications for water or sewer construction
permits shall be made to the city clerk by the person employed to do the work
before beginning the work involved.
   B.   Form: The application shall be made in the form prescribed by the city
clerk.
   C.   Required Information: The applicant shall give the legal description of
the premises and shall state whether an assessment on the subject premises has
been made for water service and for sewer service, and, if so, the amount so
assessed.
   D.   Plan: The applicant shall submit with the application a plan showing
the course of the service pipe or drain between the connection with the city
water or sewer line and the buildings to be served by it.
   E.   Additional Plans And Drawings: The applicant shall submit such other
drawings and plans of the proposed construction as may be required. (1982 Code
§ 3.162)
8-1-5-3: ISSUANCE:
   A.   Issuance Authorized: If the proposed construction complies with all
requirements of this code and with all other applicable requirements, the water
superintendent shall authorize issuance of the permit.
   B.   Rejection Of Application: If any applicable requirements are not met,
the superintendent shall reject the application and give to the applicant a
statement of reasons for the rejection.
   C.   Approval; Fees: After the application has been approved by the
superintendent and the applicant has paid to the city clerk all required fees,
the city clerk shall grant the permit.
   D.   Assessments: No permit shall be issued unless all assessments against
the property for water main or sewer construction, or all installments then
due, are paid. (1982 Code § 3.163)
8-1-5-4: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required: Before undertaking any construction work, and before a permit
may be issued, the applicant shall secure from a reputable, established
insurance company and maintain a policy of insurance against damage to property
and injury or death to persons.
   B.   Policy Limits: The property damage coverage shall be in the amount of
at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and the public liability damage
coverage for injury or death shall be in the amount of at least fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) per person and three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) per occurrence.
   C.   Notice Of Termination: The policy shall provide that the city clerk
shall be notified prior to any termination or modification of the insurance.
   D.   Proof Of Insurance: Proof of the insurance shall be filed with the city
clerk. (1982 Code § 3.165)
8-1-5-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
If the bond or insurance required is inadequate with respect to any damages
occurring to the city or claim against the city or its personnel, the applicant
shall indemnify and save harmless the city and its personnel for the amount by
which the insurance or bond is inadequate. In addition, the owner and the
person causing the installation to be made shall both be equally liable with
the applicant for indemnifying and saving harmless the city. (1982 Code §
3.166)
8-1-5-6: EXCAVATIONS:
All excavations upon any street, alley, sidewalk or boulevard, or on any other
public property, for water or sewer construction shall meet all requirements
for excavations contained in title 7, chapter 2 of this code, except that no
separate excavation permit shall be required. (1982 Code § 3.167)
8-1-5-7: SUPERVISION; APPROVAL:
   A.   Inspection Prior To Backfill: All construction shall be subject to the
supervision of the water superintendent or wastewater superintendent, as
appropriate. No part of the work done shall be covered by backfill until it has
been inspected and approved by the superintendent.
   B.   Notice To Superintendent: The person doing the work shall notify the
superintendent when the work is ready for inspection.
   C.   Substandard Work: If the superintendent discovers that any part of the
work is not done in accordance with applicable requirements, the person doing
the work shall correct the defects and have the work reinspected.
   D.   Notice Of Defects; Correction: Upon request, the superintendent shall
give written notice describing the defects. No system shall be placed or
replaced in service until all defects have been corrected.
   E.   Connection To Water System: All connections with any water main, all
tapping of mains, and the installation, opening and closing of stopcocks shall
be made by authorized city employees or done under the supervision of the
superintendent.
   F.   Connection To Sewer System: All connections with the sanitary sewer
system shall be made by authorized city employees or done under the supervision
of the superintendent.
   G.   Pipes: All pipes laid in the streets, alleys, or on public property
shall be laid by authorized city employees or under the supervision of the
superintendent. (1982 Code § 3.168)
8-1-6: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
8-1-6-1: STATEMENTS:
   A.   Computation By City Clerk: The city clerk shall compute the amount due
to the city from each customer for city water and sewer service and for any
other municipal utility charges.
   B.   Mailing Of Statements: The city clerk shall mail a statement of charges
to the customer as soon as practicable after the end of each period of service
to the customer.
   C.   Service Period: The city clerk shall establish such quarterly or other
service period for a customer, whether or not it corresponds to a calendar
quarter, as the city clerk deems best.
   D.   Due Date: The city clerk shall establish and specify in the statement a
due date, to be uniform as to time allowed for payment for all customers, and
to be not less than fifteen (15) days after mailing of the statement, upon
which all charges then due for municipal utility services are to be paid. (1982
Code § 3.141)
8-1-6-2: PAYMENT:
Amounts owed for municipal utility service shall be due and payable to the
treasurer on or before the due date specified in the statement. (1982 Code §
3.142)
8-1-6-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Nonpayment: In any case where charges for municipal utility service
have not been paid within ten (10) days after the date due, and where
satisfactory payment arrangements have not been made, water and other municipal
utility services to the premises may be discontinued in accordance with the
requirements of section
8-1-6-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Discontinuance For Other Reason: Discontinuance of service for any
other reason shall be made in accordance with requirements set forth in other
parts of this code which deal with discontinuance of service for those reasons.
   C.   Restoration: When service has been discontinued, service shall not be
restored until all delinquent charges, including reconnection charges, are
paid, or arrangements, satisfactory to the city clerk, are made for their
payment. (1982 Code § 3.143)
8-1-6-4: PROCEDURE FOR DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Notice To Customer: The city manager shall cause written notice of
intention to discontinue service for nonpayment of amounts owed to be served
upon the customer.
   B.   Notice To Owner: Mailed notice shall also be given to the owner, if the
owner is not the customer served.
   C.   Contents Of Notice: The notice shall state that if payment is not
received on or before a date stated in the notice, services specified in the
notice shall be discontinued.
   D.   Date Of Discontinuance: The date shall be not less than three (3)
calendar days after the date upon which the notice is given.
   E.   Demand For Hearing: The notice shall also state that the person may,
before that date, file with the city manager a demand for hearing on the
matter, in which case the service shall not be discontinued until the hearing
has been held.
   F.   Hearing: If a hearing is demanded by the date specified, a hearing, at
which the customer and owner shall have opportunity to be heard, shall be held
by the city council at least three (3) days after the date of the request.
   G.   Immediate Discontinuance: If, as a result of the hearing, the city
council finds that there is an unpaid charge for service and that there is no
legal reason why service should not be discontinued, the city council may order
that service be immediately discontinued. (1982 Code § 3.144)
8-1-6-5: LIABILITY FOR CHARGES:
In addition to being enforceable against the customer in whose name the account
is carried, charges for municipal utility services, including regular service
charges, connection charges, reconnection charges and all other charges, may be
enforced against the owner, lessee or occupant, or any of them, of the property
benefited by the service. In addition, the charges shall be a lien on the
property benefited by the service. (1982 Code § 3.145)
8-1-6-6: COLLECTION:
If not paid when due, any amounts due for municipal utility services may be
collected in an action brought for that purpose in the name of the city. The
city clerk may certify to the county auditor the amount due, together with the
legal description of the premises served, for collection with other taxes upon
the property served as provided by law. The city may take any other action or
any combination of actions permitted by law or this code to collect the amount
owed. (1982 Code § 3.146)
8-1-7: DAMAGES; VIOLATIONS:
8-1-7-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person shall make any municipal utility service connection, fail to make any
required connection, or use, damage or interfere with any municipal utility
installation, contrary to the requirements of this title. Nor shall any person
install or use any private sewage disposal facilities contrary to the
requirements of this title. (1982 Code § 3.121)
8-1-7-2: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
   A.   Water And Sewer: Any person violating any provision of this code
relating to the water system, the sewer system or any other municipal utility,
and any person who negligently or intentionally causes damage to any municipal
utility, shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
thereby. In addition, the customer, owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge
of the premises may each also be held liable if the expense, loss or damage
could have been avoided by due care on their part. (1982 Code § 3.122)
   B.   Wastewater Disposal System:
      1.   Civil Penalties:
         a.   Violation; Penalty: Any user who is found to have violated and
order of the city council or who has failed to comply with any provision of
ordinance 198, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in subsection 1-4-1B of this
code. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987; amd. 2005 Code)
         b.   Continuing Violation: Each day on which a violation shall occur
or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
         c.   Court Costs: In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
city may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter fees and
other expenses of litigation by an appropriate action against the person found
to have violated ordinance 198 or the order, rules, regulations, and permits
issued hereunder.
      2.   Cost Of Damage: Any user violating any of the provisions of
ordinance 198 who has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage
or other impairment to the city's wastewater disposal system shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violation or
discharge. Any refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation
of ordinance 198. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
      3.   Falsifying Information: Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to ordinance
198 or a wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
ordinance 198, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as provided in the
general penalty in subsection 1-4-1B of this code. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987; amd.
2005 Code)
8-1-7-3: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Report Of Violation: Upon finding any violation of any provision of
this code relating to municipal utility services or private sewage disposal
facilities, the water superintendent or the wastewater superintendent, as
appropriate, or any member of the board of health if the violation affects
public health, shall notify the city manager.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: The city manager shall serve notice upon the
customer, lessee, occupant or other person in charge of the premises, and upon
the owner if not occupying the premises, specifying the nature of each
violation and the work which is required to be done. The notice shall also
specify the reasonable time, considering the nature and amount of work to be
done and the nature of the violation, within which each violation or all of the
violations must be remedied.
   C.   Noncompliance: If each violation is not corrected within the time
specified, the city manager may cause the violation to be corrected at the
expense of the customer, owner, lessee, occupant or other person in charge of
the premises, or of any or all of them. Any person who fails to correct any
violation when required to do so shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   D.   Power Of Other Agencies: The provisions of this section shall not limit
the power of the board of health, or of any other officer or agency, to act
pursuant to authority given elsewhere by law, by city charter or by this code.
   E.   Lien: The cost of correction of any violation shall also be a lien
against the property and may be collected as a special assessment if not
promptly paid. (1982 Code § 3.123)
CHAPTER 2
WATER SYSTEM 1
SECTION:
8-2-1: Standards And Requirements
8-2-2: Separate Water Service Connection; Exception
8-2-3: Responsibility For Service Lines
8-2-4: Unauthorized Use Of Water
8-2-5: Cross Connections With Private Water Supply
8-2-6: Restricted Use Periods
8-2-7: Interruption Of Service
8-2-8: Water Meters
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 31.
8-2-1: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The city engineer shall establish such service requirements regarding the size,
nature and laying of water service pipes and making connection with the public
water system, as may be reasonable or necessary for the safe, efficient and
healthful provision of water service within the city. (1982 Code § 3.231)
8-2-2: SEPARATE WATER SERVICE CONNECTION; EXCEPTION:
No more than one house or building shall be supplied from one service
connection. The city council or the water superintendent, when authorized to do
so by the city council, may waive this requirement upon a finding that a
separate service connection to any house or building is impracticable. Whenever
two (2) or more houses or buildings are supplied from one pipe connecting with
a service main, each house, building or part thereof separately supplied shall
have a separate stopbox and a separate meter. (1982 Code § 3.211)
8-2-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR SERVICE LINES:
   A.   Owner Responsibility: All water service lines connecting the building
served to the city water main, including the portion of the line in the public
right of way between the main and the curb box, shall be owned by and all
expenses of maintaining, repairing and replacing them shall be borne by the
owner of the property served.
   B.   Leaks: If any leak in any service pipe is not repaired within the time
allowed in the notice after notice to the owner, to the customer, lessee or
other person in control of the premises, after notice to any of them to repair
the leak, including notice left at the premises, the water superintendent may
shut the water off. When the waste of water is great or damage is likely to
occur from the leak, the water superintendent may turn the water off
immediately and thereafter give notice to repair. (1982 Code § 3.212)
8-2-4: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER:
No person other than an authorized city employee shall take water from a fire
hydrant, city well, city water tank filling station or any other part of the
water system without first obtaining authority to do so from the city manager
or water superintendent. (1982 Code § 3.213)
8-2-5: CROSS CONNECTIONS WITH PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall connect any water pipe of the city water
supply system with any pump, well or tank that is connected to any other source
of water supply, nor shall any person permit any such connection to continue on
property owned, leased or occupied by that person. If any such connection
exists, it shall be severed.
   B.   Severance Of Connection: When any such connection is found, the water
superintendent may notify the customer, owner, lessee or other person in charge
of the premises to sever the connection. If this is not done immediately, the
superintendent may turn off the water supply. All cross connections shall be
eliminated before water service is restored to the premises. (1982 Code §
3.214)
8-2-6: RESTRICTED USE PERIODS:
   A.   Passage Of Resolution: Whenever the city council determines that a
shortage of water threatens the city water supply, it may, by resolution, limit
the times and hours during which city water may be used for sprinkling, air
conditioning, irrigation, car washing and other specified uses.
   B.   Notice: After publication of the resolution or after delivery of the
resolution to the affected premises, or three (3) days after mailing the
resolution to each affected customer, no person shall use or permit water to be
used in violation of the restrictions imposed in the resolution.
   C.   Excess Use Charge: Any person who does so may be charged an excess use
charge as the city council may specify in the resolution.
   D.   Discontinuance Of Service: Violation shall also be cause for
discontinuance of water service in accordance with the procedures for
discontinuance of service for a leak. (1982 Code § 3.215)
8-2-7: INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE:
The city may interrupt water service to any customer without notice, or with
such notice as the water superintendent determines to be appropriate, for
necessary repairs or when any fire or other emergency reasonably requires that
service be interrupted. (1982 Code § 3.216)
8-2-8: WATER METERS:
   A.   Meter Required: Except for the extinguishment of fires and such other
uses as may be provided in this code or authorized by the city council, no
person other than an authorized city employee shall use water from the city
water supply system or permit water to be drawn from it unless the water passes
through a meter supplied or approved by the city. (1982 Code § 3.221)
   B.   Installation: Water meters shall be furnished and installed by the city
at its expense and shall remain the property of the city. If a customer
requires a meter of unusual design or size, the city shall purchase and
maintain the meter at the city's expense. A quarterly fee shall be set to cover
the cost and maintenance of the meter. Meters shall be installed, disconnected,
taken apart or in any other manner changed only by authorized city employees or
upon written authorization to do so from the water superintendent. (Ord. 231,
3-2-1998)
   C.   Maintenance: The city shall maintain and repair at its expense any
meter furnished by it that has become unserviceable or inaccurate through
ordinary wear and tear and shall replace it if necessary. Water meters may be
removed or replaced at any time. When repair or replacement of a meter is made
necessary by any act or neglect of the owner, lessee or occupant of the
premises it serves, or by any other person, the city may add any expense
occasioned thereby to the customer's water bill. The superintendent may also
discontinue water service until the cause is corrected. (1982 Code § 3.223)
   D.   Rereading Of Meter: When a customer complains that the bill for the
immediate past service period is excessive and requests that the meter be
reread, the water superintendent shall have the meter reread. (1982 Code §
3.224)
   E.   Meter Testing 1 : The city may test a meter for accuracy at any time.
When a customer feels that a bill is excessive, the customer may demand in
writing that the meter be tested. If the test shows a meter to be inaccurate,
it shall be repaired or replaced. (1982 Code § 3.225)
   F.   Adjustment Of Bill: If a test shows a meter to be inaccurate by more
than five percent (5%), the bill for the immediate past service period and for
the elapsed portion of the current service period shall be adjusted
accordingly. If by reason of stoppage of the meter or any other reason it is
not possible to determine with reasonable accuracy the amount of water actually
used, the city may estimate by any reasonable means the amount of water which
was used. In no event shall any adjustment be made for any service periods
prior to the immediate past service period. (1982 Code § 3.226)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 8-4-2A of this title.
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SYSTEM 1
SECTION:
8-3-1: General Rules And Regulations
8-3-1-1: Storm And Drainage Water
8-3-1-2: Cooling And Process Water
8-3-1-3: Roof Water
8-3-1-4: Discharges Into Storm Sewer Or Watercourse
8-3-2: Connections
8-3-2-1: Separate Sewer Service Connection; Exception
8-3-2-2: Use Of Old Building Sewers
8-3-3: Standards And Requirements
8-3-4: Discharges Into Sanitary Sewer
8-3-4-1: General Discharge Prohibitions
8-3-4-2: Pretreatment
8-3-4-3: Interceptors
8-3-4-4: Accidental Discharges
8-3-4-5: Special Agreement
8-3-4-6: Sludges Generated
8-3-5: Industrial Wastes
8-3-5-1: Policy
8-3-5-2: Admissible Wastes
8-3-5-3: Wastewater Discharge Permit
8-3-5-4: Inspection And Sampling
8-3-5-5: Monitoring Facilities
8-3-5-6: Limitations On Wastewater Strength
8-3-6: Private Sewage Disposal Facilities
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.221, subd. 31.
8-3-1: GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
8-3-1-1: STORM AND DRAINAGE WATER:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer any
storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or
any other unpolluted drainage. (1982 Code § 3.311)
8-3-1-2: COOLING AND PROCESS WATER:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer any
industrial or commercial cooling water or unpolluted industrial or commercial
process water. Such waters may be discharged, upon approval by the city council
or such official as the city council may designate, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet. (1982 Code § 3.312)
8-3-1-3: ROOF WATER:
No roof drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. Every building
without a yard adequate to absorb the roof water drained from the building
shall be equipped with proper leaders for conducting water from its roof in
such manner as will protect the walls and foundation of the building from
damage, and shall be connected with a storm sewer wherever there is a storm
sewer within fifty feet (50') of the building. The leaders shall be so placed
and the connection shall be so made that no water flows upon any public
sidewalk or damages any public street. (1982 Code § 3.313)
8-3-1-4: DISCHARGES INTO STORM SEWER OR WATERCOURSE:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any natural outlet
within the city, or any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary
sewage, industrial waste, inflammable liquids or other polluted waters except
where suitable treatment has been provided. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged any such wastes into any public storm sewer. (1982 Code §
3.314)
8-3-2: CONNECTIONS:
8-3-2-1: SEPARATE SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION; EXCEPTION:
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building
connected to the sanitary sewer system, except that the city council may waive
this requirement upon finding that the provision of a separate sewer for a
building is impractical. (1982 Code § 3.321)
8-3-2-2: USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS:
An old building sewer or portion of it may be used to connect a new building
only when found, on examination and test by the city engineer or other
authorized agent of the city, to meet all requirements of this title and all
other applicable requirements. (1982 Code § 3.322)
8-3-3: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The city engineer shall establish such standards and requirements regarding the
size, nature and laying of building sewers, and making connection with the
public sewer as may be reasonable or necessary for the safe, efficient and
healthful disposal of wastes into the sanitary sewage system. (1982 Code §
3.331)
8-3-4: DISCHARGES INTO SANITARY SEWER:
8-3-4-1: GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Unacceptable Wastes: No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged,
directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances into the
wastewater disposal system or to any public sewer:
      1.   Flammable Or Explosive Materials:
         a.   Nature, Quantity: Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of
their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by
interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the
system.
         b.   Explosion Hazard Meter Readings: At no time, shall two (2)
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge
into the system or at any point in the system, be more than five percent (5%)
nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter.
         c.   Prohibited Materials: Prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
      2.   Solid, Viscous Substances: Solid or viscous substances which will or
may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the
operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, gas tar, asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud
or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
      3.   pH: Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the wastewater disposal system.
      4.   Toxic Pollutant: Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
inhibit or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
wastewater disposal system. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited
to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the act 1 .
      5.   Noxious, Malodorous Substances: Any noxious or malodorous liquids,
gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewer for their maintenance and repair.
      6.   Color: Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solution.
      7.   Violation Of Any Rule Or Regulation: Any wastewater which creates
conditions at or near the wastewater disposal system which violate any statute
or any rule, regulation or ordinance of any public agency or state or federal
regulatory body.
      8.   Temperature: Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65.6°C), or causing, individually or
in combination with other wastewater, the influent at the wastewater treatment
plant to have a temperature exceeding one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit
(104°F) (40°C).
      9.   Slug Load:
         a.   Definition: "Slug load" shall mean any pollutant, including
oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge of such volume
or strength as to cause inhibition or disruption in the wastewater disposal
system.
         b.   Flow Rate: In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or
contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time
period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average
twenty four (24) hour concentrations, quantities, or flow of the user during
normal operation.
      10.   Noncontracted Liquids: Noncontract cooling water or unpolluted
storm or ground water.
      11.   Fats, Wax, Grease, Oils: Any wastewater containing fats, wax,
grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (150 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) and
one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0°C and 65.6°C); and any
wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral origin of
greater than one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) whether emulsified or
not.
      12.   Suspended Solids: Wastewater containing inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues)
or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate) in such quantities that they would cause disruption with the
wastewater disposal system.
   B.   Discharge Causing Interference:
      1.   Prohibited: In addition to these prohibitions, no user shall
discharge to any public sewer any discharge with causes interference, as
defined, with the wastewater disposal system.
      2.   Exception: Pollutants in the effluent from an industrial user shall
not be considered to cause interference where the industrial user is in
compliance with specific prohibitions or standards developed by federal, state,
or local governments. Where the industrial user is in compliance with such
specific prohibitions or standards, and pollutants in the effluent from the
industrial user's facility nevertheless are determined to have caused or
significantly contributed to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES
or state disposal system permit, and are likely to cause such a violation in
the future, the city must take appropriate action to develop and enforce
specific effluent limits for that industrial user to ensure renewed and
continued compliance with the city's NPDES or state disposal system permit.
(Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-1-2 of this title.
8-3-4-2: PRETREATMENT:
   A.   Compliance With National Standards: Users shall provide necessary
wastewater treatment as required to comply with ordinance 198 and shall achieve
compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards within the time
limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations.
   B.   Facilities:
      1.   Cost: Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense.
      2.   Plans:
         a.   Approval Required: Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for
review, and shall be acceptable to the director before construction of the
facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the director under
the provisions of ordinance 198.
         b.   Subsequent Changes: Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the
director prior to the user's initiation of the charges.
   C.   Records: All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available by the director to officials of the EPA or MPCA upon
request.
   D.   Semiannual Reports:
      1.   Nature And Concentration Of Pollutants: Any user subject to a
national categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance data of such
pretreatment standard, or, in the case of the commencement of new discharge to
the wastewater disposal system, shall submit to the director during the months
of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment
standard or by the director, a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards.
      2.   Daily Flows: In addition, this report shall include a record of all
daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow
reported in section
8-3-5-4 of this chapter.
The director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are
to be submitted.
   E.   Final Compliance Date Reporting Requirements: Within ninety (90) days
following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
or, in the case of the commencement of a new discharge to the wastewater
disposal system, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements
shall submit to the director a report indicating the nature and concentration
of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited
by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily
flow for these process units in the user's facility, which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and requirements, are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is
necessary to bring the facility into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. This statement shall be signed by the
user, and certified to by a qualified professional. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-3-4-3: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when necessary for proper
handling of any liquid waste containing grease in excessive amounts, any
flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredient. Interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the city engineer and shall be located so as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors
shall be installed and maintained by the customer at the customer's expense and
kept in continuously efficient operation at all times. Interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. (1982 Code § 3.353)
8-3-4-4: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
   A.   Protection Required: Each user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by ordinance
198.
   B.   Facilities:
      1.   Cost: Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's
own cost and expense.
      2.   Plans: Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review, and
shall be approved by the director before construction of the facility. Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of ordinance 198.
   C.   Notice Of Accidental Discharge: Users shall notify the director
immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances or
wastewater in violation of ordinance 198 in order to enable countermeasures to
be taken by the director to minimize damage to the wastewater disposal system
and the receiving waters.
   D.   Liability: Such notification will not relieve users of liability for
any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater disposal system or treatment
process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any
state or federal law.
   E.   Posted Instructions: A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the
emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-3-4-5: SPECIAL AGREEMENT:
The city council by special agreement with any customer, and subject to such
conditions as it deems proper for protection of public health, safety and
welfare and protection of the sewer system from damage, may allow any waste of
otherwise prohibited strength or character to be admitted into the city
sanitary sewer for treatment by the city, subject to payment by the customer of
the cost of any special treatment necessitated thereby. (1982 Code § 3.354)
8-3-4-6: SLUDGES GENERATED:
Sludges, floats, skimmings, etc., generated by an industrial or commercial
pretreatment system shall not be placed into the city's wastewater disposal
system. Such sludges shall be contained, transported, and disposed of in
accordance with all federal, state, and local regulations. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-3-5: INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
8-3-5-1: POLICY:
The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of industrial wastes and
sanitary sewage is recognized; however, not all types and quantities of
industrial waste can be so treated. It is the policy of the city to admit to
the sanitary sewer system only those types and quantities of industrial waste
that are not harmful or damaging to the structures, process and operation of
the city sanitary sewer system and that are not specifically prohibited by this
title. To provide treatment for industrial waste may require additional
facilities, the cost of which should be borne by the industries which
necessitate the additional facilities for their waste and therefore receive its
benefits. (1982 Code § 3.371)
8-3-5-2: ADMISSIBLE WASTES:
The types and quantities of industrial wastes which may be admitted into the
public sewer system without pretreatment shall be established by the city
engineer and approved by the city council. (1982 Code § 3.372)
8-3-5-3: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT:
   A.   Application; Fee: Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit shall complete and file with the director, an application in the form
prescribed by the director, and accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   B.   Time For Filing: Existing users shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, and proposed
new users shall apply at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to
connecting or discharging to the wastewater disposal system.
   C.   Required Information: In support of the application, the user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
      1.   Name, address, and location (if different from the address);
      2.   SIC number according to the standard industrial classification
manual, bureau of the budget, 1972, as amended;
      3.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those governed by ordinance 198 as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act
and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as amended;
      4.   Time and duration of discharge;
      5.   Average daily and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
      6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location
and elevation;
      7.   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be discharged, including
sludges, floats, skimmings, etc.;
      8.   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any city, state or national categorical
pretreatment standards, (for an existing discharge) and a statement regarding
whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. If additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment will be
required, a proposed schedule by which the changes will be completed shall be
submitted. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standard. No increment shall exceed nine (9) months in
length, and progress reports concerning each increment shall be submitted
within fourteen (14) days following each increment date;
      9.   Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production;
      10.   Type and amount of raw material processed (average and maximum per
day);
      11.   Number of full and part time employees, and hours of work; and
      12.   Any other information as may be deemed by the director to be
necessary to evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.
   D.   Issuance: After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
director may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and
conditions provided herein. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-3-5-4: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
   A.   Inspection By Director: The director shall inspect the facilities of
any user to ascertain whether the purpose of ordinance 198 is being met and all
requirements are being complied with.
   B.   Access: Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the director ready access at all reasonable times to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination or in the performance of any of their duties.
   C.   Testing Devices: The director, MPCA and EPA shall have the right to set
up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
   D.   Security Measures: Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with any security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, the director, MPCA and
EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing
their specific responsibilities. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-3-5-5: MONITORING FACILITIES:
   A.   Required: Monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems shall be
provided and operated by all industrial users.
   B.   Location: The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the
user's premises, but the director may, when such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
   C.   Sampling Manhole: There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for
analysis.
   D.   Maintenance: The facility and sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense
of the user.
   E.   Construction Standards: Whether constructed on public or private
property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the director's requirements and all applicable local
construction standards and specifications.
   F.   Completion Deadline: Construction shall be completed within ninety (90)
days following written notification by the director, unless a time extension is
otherwise granted by the director. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-3-5-6: LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH:
   A.   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards:
      1.   Compliance Required: National categorical pretreatment standards
promulgated by the U.S. environmental protection agency (EPA) pursuant to the
act shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any
instance where they are more stringent than the limitations in ordinance 198
unless the director has applied for and obtained from the MPCA approval to
modify the specific limits in the national categorical pretreatment standards.
      2.   Application For Modification: When requested, an application for
modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards will be
considered for submittal by the director when the city's wastewater treatment
system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants. "Consistent removal"
shall be defined as in 40 CFR 403.7(a)(1) of the general pretreatment
regulations for existing and new sources of pollution.
      3.   Conditional Revisions: Conditional revisions of national categorical
pretreatment standards may be made by the city in accordance with 403.7(b)(2)
(i-iv) of the general pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of
pollution, if requested by the industry in accordance with requirements of
403.7(b)(1)(i).
   B.   State Requirements: State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance
in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this or any other applicable ordinance.
   C.   Right Of Revision: The city reserves the right to establish by
ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives
presented in section
8-3-4-1 of this chapter.
   D.   Dilution: No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any
way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained herein,
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or contained in
any state requirements. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-3-6: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES:
   A.   Prohibited: Except as otherwise allowed in this title, no person shall
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
private sewage disposal facility. (1982 Code § 3.391)
   B.   Requirements: All buildings which would have to be connected to a
public sanitary sewer pursuant to section
8-1-4-1 of this title, but for the unavailability of a public sanitary sewer or
the impracticability of making connection, shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal facility. The private sewage disposal facility shall comply
with and be operated in compliance with all federal, state and local
requirements. The owner shall operate and maintain the facility in a sanitary
manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (1982 Code § 3.392)
CHAPTER 4
RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Use And Connection Rates
8-4-2: Meter Charges
8-4-3: Charges Based On Water Entering System
8-4-4: Unusual Discharges, Supplemental Charges
8-4-5: Other Charges
8-4-6: Permit Fees
8-4-7: Recovery Of Costs
8-4-1: USE AND CONNECTION RATES:
   A.   Water Rates:
 
Monthly base charge $59.13 each meter
Use charge:          
 Residential       $1.14/100 gallons
 Commercial        $1.14/100 gallons
Rural water charge  $1.26/100 gallons
 
      Dawson recognizes domestic strength waste as 250 mg/I for BOD and 250 mg/
1 for TSS.
   B.   Sewer Rates:
 
Monthly base charge    $45.66 each meter
Use charge             $1.26/100 gallons
Rural use charge       $1.42/100 gallons
Industrial flow charge $1.26/100 gallons
Industrial BOD charge  $1.26/pound of BOD
Industrial TSS charge  $1.37/pound of TSS
 
      Residential sewer rates shall be based on the first quarter of the year's
water usage. Residential sewer rate for those residents not residing in their
homes during a full first quarter, City will prorate their water usage based on
the portion of time spent in their home during the first quarter. If they spend
no time at home during the first quarter, then City will prorate their usage.
   C.   System Connect Charges:
 
Water $250.00
Sewer $250.00
 
      New water and sewer connections must be made within City limits. Any
existing connections must pay one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the current
rates. If there is a requested permanent disconnect, reconnection may not be
approved.
   D.   Billing: The City shall bill monthly. Effective April 1, 2005, all
bills for water and sewer usage will be to the fee owner of the property.
Agriculture Stormwater bills may, at the request of the parcel owner, be billed
yearly.
   E.   Capital Improvement Fee: Monthly stormwater fee schedule per parcel:
 
Agriculture - non developed land, bare lot $18.21
Residential                                $43.70
Commercial                                 $54.62
Multi-Family Units 4+                      $72.83
Institutional - non taxed entities         $80.11
Industrial                                 $101.96
 
(Ord. 320, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 321, 9-15-2020; Ord. 322, 1-4-2022; Ord. 323, 5-
2-2023; Ord. 325, 1-2-2024; Ord. 327, 12-17-2024; Ord. 329, 12-16-2025)
8-4-2: METER CHARGES:
   A.   Testing 1 : If any meter is tested at the demand of a customer and is
not inaccurate by more than five percent (5%), a charge of ten dollars ($10.00)
shall be added to the customer's next bill. (1982 Code § 3.412)
   B.   Flow Charges: Where charges are based upon the metered use of water,
the quarterly charge shall be an amount equal to the charge for water for the
quarter of service, except that the charge against private residences shall be
based upon the use of water for the quarter that includes the month of January.
(1982 Code § 3.424)
   C.   Installation And Maintenance: Whenever charges are required to be based
upon the use of water, and a City water meter is not used for that purpose, the
user shall install and maintain a meter without expense to the city. The meter
shall be approved by the water superintendent, and installed and maintained by
or under the supervision of the superintendent. The meter shall be maintained
so as to accurately measure the water upon which the sewer charge is based.
(1982 Code § 3.425)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 8-2-8E of this title.
8-4-3: CHARGES BASED ON WATER ENTERING SYSTEM:
   A.   Additional Meter: Upon demonstration, to the satisfaction of the city
council, by any user that a portion of the water received on the premises does
not and cannot enter the sanitary sewer system, the city council may permit or
require the installation of other or additional meters that measure the amount
of water entering the sewer system, or, if appropriate, the amount of water
which does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewer system.
   B.   Other Determination: In lieu of requiring installation of such a meter,
the city council may instead determine, from such information as it may require
and deem necessary, the quantity or proportion of water which actually enters
the sewer system.
   C.   Charge Based On Water Entering System: In either case, the charges
shall then be based on the water which enters the sanitary sewer system. (1982
Code § 3.426)
8-4-4: UNUSUAL DISCHARGES, SUPPLEMENTAL CHARGES:
If any user or class of users discharge into the sanitary sewer system any
waste which is unusual in either character or amount such that the charges
specified in this title are inequitable or insufficient due to the character or
amount of the discharge, the city council may, by resolution, impose such
additional or supplemental charges as are reasonable and warranted in view of
the character and amount of the discharge. (1982 Code § 3.427)
8-4-5: OTHER CHARGES:
   A.   Surcharge: Whenever it appears to the satisfaction of the city council
that net revenues from the water and sewer systems, together with any other
funds available for that purpose, will be insufficient to pay principal and
interest on bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued from time to time for
the construction and maintenance of the water and sewer systems, the city
council may, by resolution, increase water and sewer rates by not more than
twenty percent (20%) and may charge and collect the increased rates for as long
as may by necessary in their judgment to pay the indebtedness as it becomes
due. (1982 Code § 3.431)
   B.   Late Payment Charge: A late payment charge of ten percent (10%) of the
bill shall be added to bills not paid upon the due date. This shall include the
amount owed for other services, such as garbage removal, billed with the bill.
The minimum late payment charge shall be fifty cents ($0.50). (1982 Code §
3.433)
   C.   Charges For Water From Well: Individuals may, at the discretion of the
city, purchase water from a city well. The charge for water shall be as
follows:
 
0 -
2,000      $5.00
gallons
Over       5.00    plus $1.20/1,000 gallons or fraction thereof over 2,000
2,000   gallons
gallons
 
This rate shall be based per trip to the well.
   D.   Miscellaneous Water Service Charges: The following miscellaneous water
service charges shall apply:
 
Connect fee                $20.00
Replacing frost bottoms    40.00
Shut off for nonpayment    40.0(20.00 disconnect)
                                  (20.00 reconnect)
 
   (Ord. 204, 7-5-1988)
8-4-6: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Mandatory Permits: All industries proposing to connect or to commence a
new discharge to the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater
discharge permit before connecting to or discharging into the wastewater
disposal system if the discharge would result in the industry being classified
as a significant industrial user. All existing significant industrial users or
industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards under
section 307(b) and (c) of the act connected to or discharging into the
wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date hereof.
   B.   Permit Conditions: Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of ordinance 198 and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain
the following:
      1.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater disposal system;
      2.   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
      3.   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      4.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      5.   Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities;
      6.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards for
test and reporting schedule;
      7.   Compliance schedules;
      8.   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
      9.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the director, but in no case less than
three (3) years, and affording director access thereto;
      10.   Requirements for notification to and acceptance by the director of
any new introduction of wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in
the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system;
      11.   Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharges as
provided in subsection 8-1-3-6B of this title, and reporting of permit
violations;
      12.   Requirements for disposal of sludges, floats, skimmings, etc; and
      13.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with ordinance 198.
   C.   Permit Duration: Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the director during the term of the permit as limitations or
requirements as identified in ordinance 198 are modified or other just cause
exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at
least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or
new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
   D.   Permit Modification: Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a
national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of
users subject to such standard shall be revised to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
ordinance 198, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable national
categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsection 8-3-5-
3C8 of this title. If the information previously submitted in an application is
still current and adequate, only a letter from the user certifying such is
required.
   E.   Permit Transfer: Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises,
or a new or changed operation without the approval of the director. Any
succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
8-4-7: RECOVERY OF COSTS:
   A.   Adoption Of Schedule Of Charges And Fees: It is the purpose of this
chapter to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's
wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established
herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's
schedule of charges and fees, to be prepared from time to time, by the director
and approved by the city council.
   B.   Charges And Fee: The city council shall adopt charges and fees which
may include:
      1.   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedure;
      2.   Fees for permit applications;
      3.   Appeal fees; and
      4.   Other fees as the director may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained in ordinance 198. (Ord. 198, 2-3-1987)
TITLE 9
FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 1
ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER 1
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-2: Adoption Of Franchise
9-1-3: Location, Other Regulations
9-1-4: Facilities Relocation
9-1-5: Tree Trimming
9-1-6: Indemnification
9-1-7: Vacation Of Public Ways
9-1-8: Abandoned Facilities
9-1-9: Change In Form Of Government
9-1-10: Franchise Fee
9-1-11: Provisions Of Chapter
9-1-12: Amendment Procedure
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 10 of city charter.
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following capitalized terms listed in
alphabetical order shall have the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Dawson, county of Lac qui Parle, state of Minnesota.
CITY UTILITY SYSTEM: Facilities used for providing public utility service owned
or operated by city or agency thereof, including sewer, storm sewer, water
service, street lighting and traffic signals, but excluding facilities for
providing heating, lighting, or other forms of energy.
COMMISSION: The Minnesota public utilities commission, or any successor agency
or agencies, including an agency of the federal government, which preempts all
or part of the authority to regulate electric retail rates now vested in the
Minnesota public utilities commission.
COMPANY: Otter Tail Power Company, a Minnesota corporation, its successors and
assigns including all successors or assignees that own or operate any part or
parts of the electric facilities subject to this franchise.
ELECTRIC FACILITIES: Electric transmission and distribution towers, poles,
lines, guys, anchors, conduits, fixtures, and necessary appurtenances owned or
operated by company for the purpose of providing electric energy for public or
private use.
NOTICE: A writing served by any party or parties on any other party or parties.
Notice to company shall be mailed to Otter Tail Power, 216 S. Cascade Street,
Fergus Falls, MN 56537. Notice to the city shall be mailed to city of Dawson,
P.O. Box 552, Dawson, MN 56232-0552. Any party may change its respective
address for the purpose of this chapter by written notice to the other parties.
PUBLIC GROUND: Land owned or otherwise controlled by the city for park, open
space or similar public purpose, which is held for use in common by the public.
PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley or other public right of way within the city.
(Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-2: ADOPTION OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Grant Of Franchise: City hereby grants company, for a period of twenty
(20) years from the date this chapter is passed and approved by the city, the
right to transmit and furnish electric energy for light, heat and power for
public and private use within and through the limits of the city as its
boundaries now exist or as they may be extended in the future. For these
purposes, company may construct, operate, repair and maintain electric
facilities in, on, over, under and across the public ways and public grounds,
subject to the provisions of this chapter. Company may do all reasonable things
necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes, subject however, to such
reasonable regulations as may be imposed by the city pursuant to ordinance or
permit requirements and to the further provisions of this franchise agreement.
   B.   Effective Date; Written Acceptance: This franchise shall be in force
and effect from and after the passage of this chapter and publication as
required by law and its acceptance by company. If company does not file a
written acceptance with the city within sixty (60) days after the date the city
council adopts this chapter, the city council by resolution may revoke this
franchise or seek its enforcement in a competent jurisdiction.
   C.   Service, Rates And Area: The service to be provided and the rates to be
charged by company for electric service in city are subject to the jurisdiction
of the commission. The area within the city in which company may provide
electric service is subject to the provisions of Minnesota statutes section
216B.37-.40.
   D.   Publication Expense: Company shall pay the expense of publication of
this chapter.
   E.   Dispute Resolution: If either party asserts that the other party is in
default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the complaining party
shall notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. The
notification shall be written. Representatives of the parties must promptly
meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the dispute. If the
dispute is not resolved within thirty (30) days of the date of written notice,
the parties may jointly select a mediator to facilitate further discussion. The
parties will equally share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a
mediator is not used or if the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within
thirty (30) days after first meeting with the selected mediator, either party
may commence an action in district court to interpret and enforce this
franchise or for such other relief as may be permitted by law or equity.
   F.   Continuation Of Franchise: If the city and the company are unable to
agree on the terms of a new franchise by the time this franchise expires, this
franchise will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon, or until
ninety (90) days after the city or the company serves written notice to the
other party of its intention to allow the franchise to expire. However, in no
event shall this franchise continue for more than one year after expiration of
the twenty (20) year term set forth in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 301,
12-18-2012)
9-1-3: LOCATION, OTHER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Location Of Facilities: Electric facilities shall be located,
constructed, and maintained so as not to interfere with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel along and over public ways and so as not to
disrupt or interfere with the normal operation of any city utility system.
Electric facilities may be located on public grounds as determined by the city.
Company's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance,
location and relocation of electric facilities shall be subject to other
reasonable regulations of the city consistent with authority granted the city
to manage its public ways and public grounds under state law, to the extent not
inconsistent with a specific term of this franchise agreement.
   B.   Street Openings: Company shall not open or disturb the surface of any
public way or public ground for any purpose without first having obtained a
permit from the city, if required by a separate ordinance for which the city
may impose a reasonable fee. Permit conditions imposed on company shall not be
more burdensome than those imposed on other utilities for similar facilities or
work. Company may, however, open and disturb the surface of any public way or
public ground without a permit if: 1) an emergency exists requiring the
immediate repair of electric facilities and 2) company gives telephone notice
to the city before, if reasonably possible, commencement of the emergency
repair. Within two (2) business days after commencing the repair, company shall
apply for any required permits and pay any required fees.
   C.   Restoration: After undertaking any work requiring the opening of any
public way, the company shall restore the public way in accordance with
Minnesota rules part 7819.1100 and applicable city ordinances consistent with
law. Company shall restore public ground to as good a condition as formerly
existed. All work shall be completed as promptly as weather permits, and if
company shall not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt,
rubbish, equipment and material, and put the public ground in the said
condition, the city shall have, after demand to company to cure and the passage
of a reasonable period of time following the demand, but not to exceed five (5)
days, the right to make the restoration of the public ground at the expense of
company. Company shall pay to the city the cost of such work done for or
performed by the city. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy
available to the city for noncompliance with this subsection C.
   D.   Shared Use Of Poles: Company shall make space available on its poles or
towers for city fire, water utility, police or other city facilities whenever
such use will not interfere with use of such poles or towers by company, by
another electric utility, by a telephone utility, or by any cable television
company or other form of communication company. In addition, the city shall pay
for any added cost incurred by company because of such use by city.
   E.   Avoid Damage To Electric Facilities: The company must take reasonable
measures to prevent the electric facilities from causing damage to persons or
property. The company must take reasonable measures to protect the electric
facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities by persons,
property, or the elements. The company must take protective measures when the
city performs work near the electric facilities, if given reasonable notice by
the city of such work prior to its commencement.
   F.   Notice Of Improvements To Streets: The city must give company
reasonable written notice of plans for improvements to public ways where the
city has reason to believe that electric facilities may affect or be affected
by the improvement. The notice must contain: 1) the nature and character of the
improvements, 2) the public ways upon which the improvements are to be made, 3)
the extent of the improvements, 4) the time when the city will start the work,
and 5) if more than one public way is involved, the order in which the work is
to proceed. The notice must be given to company a sufficient length of time,
considering seasonal working conditions, in advance of the actual commencement
of the work to permit company to make any additions, alterations or repairs to
its electric facilities the company deems necessary.
   G.   Mapping Information: The company must promptly provide mapping
information for any of its underground electric facilities in accordance with
Minnesota rules parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. (Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-4: FACILITIES RELOCATION:
   A.   Relocation In Public Ways: The company shall comply with Minnesota
rules part 7819.3100 and applicable city ordinances consistent with law.
   B.   Relocation In Public Grounds: City may require company at company's
expense to relocate or remove its electric facilities from public ground upon a
finding by city that the electric facilities have become or will become a
substantial impairment to the existing or proposed public use of the public
ground. Such relocation shall comply with applicable ordinances consistent with
law.
   C.   Projects With Federal Funding: Relocation, removal, or rearrangement of
any electric facilities made necessary because of the extension into or through
city of a federally aided highway project shall be governed by the provisions
of Minnesota statutes section 161.46. (Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-5: TREE TRIMMING:
Unless otherwise provided in any permit or other reasonable regulation required
by the city under separate ordinance, company may trim all trees and shrubs in
the public ways and public grounds of city to the extent company finds
necessary to avoid interference with the proper construction, operation, repair
and maintenance of any electric facilities installed hereunder, provided that
company shall hold the city harmless from any liability arising therefrom.
(Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-6: INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Indemnity Of City: Company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless
from any and all liability, on account of injury to persons or damage to
property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, the
issuance of permits, or the operation of the electric facilities located in the
public ways and public grounds. The city shall not be indemnified for losses or
claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or claims
arising out of or alleging the city's negligence as to the issuance of permits
for, or inspection of, company's plans or work.
   B.   Defense Of City: In the event a suit is brought against the city under
circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, company at its sole
cost and expense shall defend the city in such suit if written notice thereof
is promptly given to company within a period wherein company is not prejudiced
by lack of such notice. If company is required to indemnify and defend, it will
thereafter have control of such litigation, but company may not settle such
litigation without the consent of the city, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of
any defense or immunity otherwise available to the city; and company, in
defending any action on behalf of the city shall be entitled to assert in any
action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf.
This franchise agreement shall not be interpreted to constitute a waiver by the
city of any of its defenses of immunity or limitations on liability under
Minnesota statutes chapter 466. (Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-7: VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS:
The city shall give company at least two (2) weeks' prior written notice of a
proposed vacation of a public way. The city and the company shall comply with
Minnesota rules 7819.3200 and applicable ordinances consistent with law. (Ord.
301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-8: ABANDONED FACILITIES:
The company shall comply with city ordinances, Minnesota statutes section
216D.01 et seq., and Minnesota rules part 7819.3300, as they may be amended
from time to time. The company shall maintain records describing the exact
location of all abandoned and retired facilities within the city, produce such
records at the city's request and comply with the location requirements of
section 216D.04 with respect to all facilities, including abandoned and retired
facilities. (Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-9: CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
Any change in the form of government of the city shall not affect the validity
of this chapter. Any governmental unit succeeding the city shall, without the
consent of company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of the city
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-10: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   Form: During the term of the franchise hereby granted, and in addition
to permit fees being imposed or that the city has a right to impose, the city
may charge the company a franchise fee. The fee may be: 1) a percentage of
gross revenues received by the company for its operations within the city, or
2) a flat fee per customer based on a metered service to retail customers
within the city or on some other similar basis, or 3) a fee based on units of
energy delivered to any class of retail customers within the corporate limits
of the city. The method of imposing the franchise fee, the percentage of
revenue rate, or the flat rate based on metered service may differ for each
customer class or combined the methods described in items 1) through 3) of this
subsection in assessing the fee. The city shall seek to use a formula that
provides a stable and predictable amount of fees, without placing the company
at a competitive disadvantage. If the company claims that the city required fee
formula is discriminatory or otherwise places the company at a competitive
disadvantage, the company shall provide a formula that will produce a
substantially similar fee amount to the city and reimburse the city's
reasonable fees and costs in reviewing and implementing the formula. The city
will attempt to accommodate the company but is under no franchise obligation to
adopt the company proposed franchise fee formula and each review will not delay
the implementation of the city imposed fee.
   B.   Separate Ordinance: The franchise fee shall be imposed by separate
ordinance duly adopted by the city council, which ordinance shall not be
adopted until at least one hundred twenty (120) days after written notice
enclosing such proposed ordinance has been served upon the company. The fee
shall become effective with the first billing cycle of the next month following
the month the city adopts such ordinance.
   C.   Condition Of Fee: The separate ordinance imposing the fee shall not be
effective against the company unless it lawfully imposes a fee of the same or
substantially similar amount on the sale of electric energy within the city by
any other electric energy supplier, provided that, as to such supplier, the
city has the authority or contractual right to require a franchise fee or
similar fee through a previously agreed upon franchise.
   D.   Collection Of Fee: The franchise fee shall be payable not less than
quarterly during complete billing months of the period for which payment is to
be made. The franchise fee formula may be changed from time to time, however
the change shall meet the same notice requirements and the fee may not be
changed more often than annually. Such fee shall not exceed any amount that the
company may legally charge to its customers prior to payment to the city. Such
fee is subject to substantial reductions to account for uncollectibles and
customer refunds incurred by the company. The company agrees to make available
for inspection by the city at reasonable times all records necessary to audit
the company's determination of the franchise fee payments.
   E.   Continuation Of Franchise Fee: If this franchise expires and the city
and the company are unable to agree upon terms of a new franchise, the
franchise fee, if any being imposed by the city at the time this franchise
expires, will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon. (Ord. 301,
12-18-2012)
9-1-11: PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER:
   A.   Severability: Every section, provision, or part of this chapter is
declared separate from every other section, provision, or part; and if any
section, provision, or part shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any
other section, provision, or part; provided, however, that if the city is
unable to enforce its franchise fee provisions for any reason the city will be
allowed to amend the franchise agreement to impose a franchise fee pursuant to
statute. Where a provision of any other city ordinance conflicts with the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
   B.   Limitation On Applicability: This chapter constitutes a franchise
agreement between the city and company as the only parties and no provision of
this franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any third person
(including the public at large) so as to constitute any such person as a third
party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof,
or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person not a party hereto.
(Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
9-1-12: AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
Either party to this franchise agreement may at any time propose that the
agreement be amended. This chapter may be amended at any time by the city
passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provisions of the amendment, which
amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the filing of company's
written consent thereto with the city clerk after city council adoption of the
amendatory ordinance. (Ord. 301, 12-18-2012)
CHAPTER 2
NATURAL GAS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Definitions
9-2-2: Franchise
9-2-3: Conditions Of Use
9-2-4: Relocations
9-2-5: Defense And Indemnification
9-2-6: Successors In Interest
9-2-7: Change In Form Of Government
9-2-8: Franchise Fee
9-2-9: Additions To City And Area Development Zones
9-2-10: Abandoned Facilities
9-2-11: Previous Franchises Superseded
9-2-12: Amendments
9-2-13: Severability
9-2-14: Limitation On Applicability
9-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CITY: The city of Dawson, county of Lac Qui Parle, state of Minnesota.
CITY UTILITY SYSTEM: Facilities used for providing public utility service owned
or operated by city or agency thereof, including, but not necessarily limited
to, sewer, storm sewer, water service, street lighting, traffic signals and
telecommunications, but excluding facilities for providing heating, lighting,
or other forms of energy.
COMMISSION: The Minnesota public utilities commission, or any successor agency
or agencies, including an agency of the federal government that preempts all or
part of the authority to regulate gas retail rates now vested in the
commission.
COMPANY: Great Plains Natural Gas Co., a division of MDU Resources Group, Inc.,
a Delaware corporation, its successors and assigns, including all successors or
assigns that own or operate any part or parts of the gas facilities subject to
this franchise.
EFFECTIVE DATE: The date on which this chapter becomes effective under
subsection 9-2-2B of this chapter.
ENGINEER: The Dawson city engineer, or his or her designee.
GAS: Natural gas, manufactured gas, mixture of natural gas and manufactured gas
or other forms of gas energy.
GAS FACILITIES: Gas transmission and distribution pipes, mains, lines, ducts,
fixtures and all necessary facilities, equipment and appurtenances owned or
operated by the company or its agents for the purpose of providing gas energy
for public or private use.
NOTICE: A writing served by a party or parties on another party or parties.
Notice to company, when required, must be mailed to 705 West Fir Avenue, P.O.
Box 176, Fergus Falls, MN 56538-0176. Notice to city, when required, must be
mailed to Box 552, 675 Chestnut, Dawson, MN 56232. Any party may change its
respective address for the purpose of this chapter by written notice to the
other party.
PUBLIC GROUND: Land owned or otherwise controlled by the city for parks, open
space or similar public purpose which is held for use in common by the public.
PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley or other public right of way within the city.
RIGHT OF WAY PERMIT: The permit required by this chapter and issued pursuant to
city's permit ordinance. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-2: FRANCHISE:
   A.   Grant Of Franchise: The city hereby grants company for a period of
twenty (20) years from the date this chapter is passed and approved by the
city, the right to import, manufacture, distribute and sell gas for public and
private use within and through the limits of the city as its boundaries now
exist or as they may be extended in the future. For these purposes, company may
construct, operate, repair and maintain gas facilities, in, on, over, under and
across the public ways and public grounds, subject to the provisions of this
chapter. Company may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to
accomplish these purposes, subject, however, to such reasonable regulations as
may be imposed by the city pursuant to ordinance or permit requirements and to
the further provisions of this franchise agreement.
   B.   Effective Date, Written Acceptance: This franchise shall be in force
and effect from and after the passage of this chapter and publication as
required by law and its acceptance by company. If company does not file a
written acceptance with the city within sixty (60) days after the date the city
council adopts this chapter, or otherwise informs the city, at any time, that
the company does not accept this franchise, the city council by resolution may
revoke this franchise or seek its enforcement in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   C.   Service And Gas Rates: The service to be provided and the rates to be
charged by company for gas service in the city are subject to the jurisdiction
of the commission.
   D.   Nonexclusive Franchise: This chapter does not grant an exclusive
franchise.
   E.   Publication Expense: Company shall pay the expense of publication of
this chapter.
   F.   Dispute Resolution: If either party asserts that the other party is in
default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the complaining party
must notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. Notification
shall be written. Representatives of the parties must promptly meet and attempt
in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the dispute. If the dispute is not
resolved within thirty (30) days of the written notice, the parties may jointly
seek a mediator to facilitate further discussion. The parties will equally
share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a mediator is not used or if
the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within thirty (30) days after
first meeting with the selected mediator, either party may commence an action
in district court to interpret and enforce this franchise or for such other
relief as may be permitted by law or equity.
   G.   Continuation Of Franchise: If the city and the company are unable to
agree on the terms of a new franchise by the time this franchise expires, this
franchise will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon, or until
ninety (90) days after the city or the company serves written notice to the
other party of its intention to allow the franchise to expire. However, in no
event shall this franchise continue for more than one year after expiration of
the twenty (20) year term set forth in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 298,
3-6-2012)
9-2-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
   A.   Location Of Facilities: Gas facilities must be located, constructed,
installed and maintained so as not to interfere with the city utility system or
the safety and convenience of ordinary travel along, over and under public
ways. The company's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair,
maintenance, location, and relocation of gas facilities is subject to other
reasonable ordinances and regulations of the city consistent with authority
granted to the city to manage its public ways and public grounds under state
law and to the extent not inconsistent with a specific term of this franchise.
   B.   Field Location: Field locations for their respective facilities will be
provided by the company and city in accordance with Minnesota statutes 216D,
under the Gopher State One Call system.
   C.   Right Of Way Permit Required: Except for the verification of field
location, the company may not open or disturb the surface of any public way or
public ground without first having obtained a right of way permit from the city
if required by a separate ordinance, for which the city may impose a reasonable
fee. The permit conditions imposed on the company may not be more burdensome
than those imposed on other entities for similar facilities or work. The
company may, however, open and disturb the surface of any public way or public
ground without a right of way permit if: 1) an emergency exists requiring the
immediate repair of gas facilities and 2) the company gives notice to the city
before, if possible, commencement of the emergency repair. Within two (2)
business days after commencing the repair, the company must apply for any
required permits and pay the required fees.
   D.   Restoration: After undertaking any work requiring the opening of any
public way, the company shall restore the public way in accordance with
Minnesota administrative rules, part 7819.1100 and applicable city ordinances
consistent with law. Company shall restore a public ground to as good a
condition as formerly existed. All work shall be completed as promptly as
weather permits, and if company shall not promptly perform and complete the
work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and put the public way
or public ground in the said condition, the city shall have, after demand to
company to cure and the passage of a reasonable period of time following the
demand, but not to exceed five (5) days, the right to make the restoration of
the public way or public ground at the expense of company.
This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available to the city for
noncompliance with this section, including, but not limited to, adherence to
the requirements of the right of way permit.
   E.   Avoid Damage To Gas Facilities: The company must take reasonable
measures to prevent the gas facilities from causing damage to persons or
property. The company must take reasonable measures to protect the gas
facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the gas facilities by
persons, property or the elements. The company must take protective measures
when the city performs work near the gas facilities, if given reasonable notice
by the city of such work prior to its commencement.
   F.   Notice Of Improvements: The city must give the company reasonable
written notice of plans for improvements to public ways or public grounds where
the city has reason to believe that gas facilities may affect or be affected by
the improvement. The notice will contain: 1) the nature and character of the
improvements, 2) the public ways or public grounds upon which the improvements
are to be made, 3) the extent of the improvements, 4) the time when the city
will start the work, and 5) if more than one public way or public ground is
involved, the order in which the work is to proceed. The notice will be given
to company a sufficient length of time, considering seasonal working
conditions, in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit company
to make any additions, alterations or repairs to its gas facilities the company
deems necessary. The company shall have the right to request additional time in
advance of the actual commencement of the work if required to make any
necessary additions, alterations or repairs to its gas facilities.
   G.   Mapping Information: The city may require the company to provide
complete and accurate mapping information for any of its gas facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Minnesota rules 7819.4100. At the request
of company, any information requested by the engineer which qualifies as a
"trade secret" under Minnesota statutes section 13.37(b) shall be treated as
trade secret information as detailed therein. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-4: RELOCATIONS:
   A.   Relocation Of Gas Facilities In Public Ways: The company shall comply
with Minnesota rules, part 7819.3100 and applicable city ordinances consistent
with law. The city must give reasonable written notice to the company that a
possible relocation of gas facilities is required. The engineer and company
representatives will meet in an attempt to resolve facilities conflict. To the
extent that an alternative to relocation of gas facilities which is reasonably
acceptable to city cannot be developed, the company must relocate its gas
facilities at its own expense. The city must give the company reasonable
written notice of plans to vacate for a city improvement project, or to grade,
regrade or change the alignment of any public way, or to construct or
reconstruct any city utility system.
   B.   Relocation Of Gas Facilities In Public Ground: The city may require the
company to relocate gas facilities from public ground upon a finding by the
city that the gas facilities have become or will become a substantial
impairment of the public use to which the public ground is or will be put. The
relocation or removal will be at the company's expense and shall comply with
applicable city ordinances consistent with law. The provision of this
subsection applies only to gas facilities constructed in reliance on this
franchise and the company does not waive its rights under an easement or
prescriptive right in the public ground.
   C.   Vacation Of Public Ways: The city must give the company at least two
(2) weeks' notice of a proposed vacation of a public way. The city and the
company shall comply with Minnesota rules 7819.3200 and applicable ordinances
consistent with law. Except where required for a city street or other
improvement project or as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section,
the vacation of a public way, after the installation of gas facilities, does
not deprive the company of its rights to operate and maintain the gas
facilities until the reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and
expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to the company by the
city or the party requesting the vacation. The city is not liable to the
company for failure to specifically preserve a right of way in the manner
permitted by law.
   D.   Projects With Federal Funding: Relocation, removal or rearrangement of
any gas facilities made necessary because of the extension into or through the
city of a federally aided highway project will be governed by the provisions of
Minnesota statutes section 161.46. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-5: DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Indemnification Of City: Company shall indemnify and hold harmless the
city from any and all liability on account of injury to persons or damage to
property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection of,
the issuance of permits, or the operation of the gas facilities located in the
public ways and public grounds. The city shall not be indemnified or held
harmless for liability, losses, claims, proceedings or causes of action caused
through its own negligence except for liability, losses, claims, proceedings or
actions arising out of or alleging the city's negligence as to the issuance of
permits for, or inspection of, the gas facilities or company's plans.
   B.   Defense Of City: In the event a suit, action, claim or proceeding is
brought against the city under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify
applies, the company shall, at its sole cost and expense, defend the city in
such suit, action, claim or proceeding if written notice thereof is promptly
given to the company within a period of time wherein the company is not
prejudiced by lack of such notice. If the company is required to indemnify and
defend the city, the company shall have control of the defense. Company may not
settle such suit, action, claim or proceeding without the consent of the city,
which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, and
shall not be interpreted or shall not constitute as to third parties, a waiver
of any defense or immunity available to the city. The company, in defending any
suit, action, claim or proceeding on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to
assert in such suit, action, claim or proceeding every defense or immunity the
city could assert on its own behalf. This franchise agreement shall not be
interpreted to constitute a waiver by the city of any of its defenses of
immunity or limitations on liability pursuant to Minnesota law or statute.
(Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-6: SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST:
This chapter and the rights and obligations conferred hereby, is binding on and
inures to the benefit of the city and its successors and on the company and its
successors and permitted assigns. This chapter and the franchise it confers may
not be assigned by the company without the written consent of the city, said
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-7: CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
Any change in the form of government of the city shall not affect the validity
of this chapter. Any governmental unit succeeding the city shall, without the
consent of company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of the city
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-8: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   Separate Ordinance: The city hereby reserves the right to implement, by
passage of a separate ordinance, a franchise fee to be collected and remitted
by the company to the city. Said franchise fee will be in accordance with state
law and regulations. In the event such a franchise fee is implemented, the
company agrees to make available for inspection by the city at reasonable times
all records necessary to audit the company's determination of the franchise fee
payments. The separate ordinance shall not be adopted until at least thirty
(30) days after written notice enclosing such proposed ordinance has been
served upon the company. The fee shall become effective ten (10) days after
written notice enclosing such adopted ordinance has been served upon the
company by certified mail.
   B.   Condition Of Fee: The separate ordinance imposing the fee shall not be
effective against the company unless it lawfully imposes a fee of the same or
substantially similar amount on the sale of gas energy within the city by any
other gas energy supplier, provided that, as to such supplier, the city has the
authority or contractual right to require a franchise fee or similar fee
through a previously agreed upon franchise.
   C.   Collection Of Fee: The franchise fee shall be payable not less than
quarterly during complete billing months of the period for which payment is to
be made. The franchise fee formula may be changed from time to time, however,
the change shall meet the same notice requirements and the fee may not be
changed more often than annually. Such fee shall not exceed any amount that the
company may legally charge to its customers prior to payment to the city. Such
fee is subject to subsequent reductions to account for uncollectibles and
customer refunds incurred by the company. The company agrees to make available
for inspection by the city at reasonable times all records necessary to audit
the company's determination of the franchise fee payments.
   D.   Continuation Of Franchise Fee: The franchise fee, if any, being imposed
by the city at the time the most recent of any previous franchise granted to
the company by the city expired remains in effect until it is changed in the
manner provided for implementation of such fee. If this franchise expires and
city and the company are unable to agree upon terms of a new franchise, the
franchise fee, if any, being imposed by the city at the time this franchise
expires, will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon. (Ord. 298,
3-6-2012)
9-2-9: ADDITIONS TO CITY AND AREA DEVELOPMENT ZONES:
   A.   Additions Of Territory: In case any additions of territory are made to
the city, company shall serve all inhabitants of such additional territory in
the same manner and on the same terms as those of the territory now within its
limits. In the event that such additional service requires extension of the gas
facilities, such extensions shall be subject to the provisions of the
applicable rate schedules and general terms attached to the rate schedules as
filed by the company with the Minnesota public utilities commission, all of
which are by reference made part of this franchise. Should said extension of
gas facilities be deemed by the company as not economically feasible, company
shall allow a third party to make a contribution in aid of construction in the
amount of the difference in cost between the total project cost and the amount
that is determined to be financially feasible by the company. This contribution
in aid of construction shall not constitute an ownership position of the gas
facilities by the contributing third party. Failure on the part of the company
to allow a third party to make such a contribution may be considered a default
in the performance hereof, subject to subsection 9-2-2F of this chapter. (Ord.
298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-10: ABANDONED FACILITIES:
The company shall comply with city ordinances, Minnesota statutes, section
216D.01 et seq., and Minnesota rules part 7819.3300, as they may be amended
from time to time. The company shall maintain records describing the exact
location of all abandoned and retired gas facilities within the city, produce
such records at the city's request and comply with the location requirements of
section 216D.04 with respect to all gas facilities, including abandoned and
retired gas facilities. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-11: PREVIOUS FRANCHISES SUPERSEDED:
This franchise supersedes and replaces previous franchises granted to the
company or its predecessors. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-12: AMENDMENTS:
This chapter may be amended at any time by mutual agreement between the city
and the company. Any amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the
filing of the company's written consent thereto. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-13: SEVERABILITY:
Every section, provision, or part of this chapter is declared separate from
every other section, provision, or part; and if any section, provision, or part
shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other section, provision, or
part. Where a provision of any other city ordinance conflicts with the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord.
298, 3-6-2012)
9-2-14: LIMITATION ON APPLICABILITY:
This chapter constitutes a franchise agreement between the city and company as
the only parties and no provision of this franchise shall in any way inure to
the benefit of any third person (including the public at large) so as to
constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of the agreement or of
any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of
action in any person not a party hereto. (Ord. 298, 3-6-2012)
CHAPTER 3
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION:
9-3-1: Short Title And Definitions
9-3-2: Grant Of Authority And General Provisions
9-3-3: Construction Standards
9-3-4: Design Provisions
9-3-5: Service Provisions
9-3-6: Access Channel(s) Provisions
9-3-7: Operation And Administration Provisions
9-3-8: General Financial And Insurance Provisions
9-3-9: Sale, Abandonment, Transfer And Revocation Of Franchise
9-3-10: Protection Of Individual Rights
9-3-11: Unauthorized Connections And Modifications
9-3-12: Miscellaneous Provisions
9-3-13: Publication Effective Date; Acceptance And Exhibits
9-3-1: SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Short Title And Definitions:
      1.   Short Title: This chapter shall be known and cited as the CABLE
FRANCHISE ORDINANCE.
      2.   Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.
    BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise to
be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as defined herein shall not
be inconsistent with 47 USC section 543(b)(7).
   CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE: Any video programming provided over a cable
system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of
equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than:
         a.   Video programming carried on the basic service tier;
         b.   Video programming offered on a pay per channel or pay per program
basis; or
         c.   A combination of multiple channels of pay per channel or pay per
program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time shifted basis so
long as the combined service: consists of commonly identified video
programming; and is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.
Cable programming service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with the
definition as set forth in 47 USC section 543(1)(2) (1993) and 47 CFR 76.901(b)
(1993).
   CABLE SERVICE OR SERVICE: The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the video programming or other programming service.
   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR SYSTEM OR CABLE SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of
a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes
video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, but such term does not include:
         a.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations.
         b.   A facility that serves subscribers without using the public
rights of way.
         c.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of 47 USC section 201-206 except that such facility
shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 USC section
541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to
provide interactive on demand services.
         d.   An open video system that complies with section 653 of the cable
act; or
         e.   Any facilities of any electrical utility used solely for
operating its electrical utility system.
         f.   Internet.
         g.   Telephone - wire two-way communications.
   CITY: The city of Dawson, a municipal corporation, in the state of
Minnesota, acting by and through its city council, or its lawfully appointed
designee.
   CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of the city of Dawson, Minnesota.
   CLASS IV CABLE CHANNEL: A signaling path provided by a cable system to
transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the
system.
   CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
acceptable to a television receiver of a subscriber and by an appropriate
selector permits a subscriber to view all subscriber signals included in the
service.
   DROP: The cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber's residence
or institution to the nearest feeder cable of the system.
   FCC: The federal communications commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.
   FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal
of an authorization which has been granted subject to 47 USC section 546)
issued by a franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as
a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or
otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
   GRANTEE: Farmers Mutual Telephone Company, its lawful successors,
transferees or assignees.
   GROSS REVENUE: All revenue received directly or indirectly by the grantee,
its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, or person in which grantee has financial
interest of five percent (5%) or more, from the provision of basic cable
service, cable programming services and pay television fees, installation and
reconnection fees, upgrade and downgrade fees, advertising revenue, converter
rental fees, and lockout device fees (but only to the extent such revenue has
not already been included in a franchise fee computation) within the city. The
term gross revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by
grantee imposed by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit and
collected by grantee for such governmental unit. Gross revenues shall not
include revenues received from internet services or telephony.
   INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to the point of
connection including standard installations and custom installations.
   LOCKOUT DEVICE: An optional mechanical or electrical accessory to a
subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain program, certain
channel, or certain channels provided by way of the cable communication system.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in
the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business
hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.
   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions which are within the
control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of grantee
include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay per view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade
of the system.
   PAY TELEVISION: The delivery over the system of pay per channel or pay per
program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to
the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
other legal entity.
   RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: The area on, below, or above any real
property in city in which the city has an interest including, but not limited
to, any street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, skyway, or any
other place, area, or real property owned by or under the control of city,
including other dedicated rights of way for travel purposes and utility
easements.
   STANDARD INSTALLATION: Any residential installation which can be completed
using a drop of one hundred fifty feet (150') or less.
   SUBSCRIBER: Any person who lawfully receives service via the system. In the
case of multiple office buildings or multiple dwelling units, the "subscriber"
means the lessee, tenant or occupant. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-2: GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Grant Of Authority And General Provisions:
      1.   Franchise Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
construct, operate or maintain a cable communications system in city unless
such person or the person for whom such action is being taken shall have first
obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise ordinance. It shall also be
unlawful for any person to provide cable television service in city unless such
person shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise
ordinance. All cable communications franchises granted by city shall contain
the same substantive terms and conditions.
      2.   Grant Of Franchise: This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms
and conditions contained herein. Grantee shall comply with all provisions of
its proposal, which is expressly incorporated herein by reference. Failure of
grantee to provide a system as described in its proposal, or meet obligations
and comply with all provisions therein, shall be deemed a violation of this
franchise.
      3.   Grant Of Nonexclusive Authority:
         a.   The grantee shall have the right and privilege, subject to the
permitting and other lawful requirements of city ordinance, rule or procedure,
to construct, erect, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and
under the rights of way in city a cable system and shall have the right and
privilege to provide cable service and data service, including internet access
and related services. The system constructed and maintained by grantee or its
agents shall not interfere with other uses of the rights of way. Grantee shall
make use of existing poles and other above and below facilities available to
grantee to the extent it is technically and economically feasible to do so.
         b.   Notwithstanding the above grant to use rights of way, no right of
way shall be used by grantee if city determines that such use is inconsistent
with the terms, conditions, or provisions by which such right of way was
created or dedicated, or with the present use of the right of way.
         c.   This franchise shall be nonexclusive, and city reserves the right
to grant a use of said rights of way to any person at any time during the
period of this franchise for the provision of cable service. The terms and
conditions of any such grant of use of the rights of way shall be, when taken
as a whole and taking into account the planned usage of the rights of way, no
less burdensome or more beneficial than those imposed upon grantee pursuant to
this franchise.
      4.   Lease Or Assignment Prohibited: Except for commercial leased access
as required by federal law, no person may lease grantee's system for the
purpose of providing service until and unless such person shall have first
obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise or other lawful
authorization containing substantially similar burdens and obligations to this
franchise. Any assignment of rights under this franchise shall be subject to
and in accordance with the requirements of subsection 9-3-9A5 of this chapter.
Subject to restrictions on transfer and change of control in subsection 9-3-9A5
of this chapter, grantee may lease capacity on its cable system for noncable
services, including, without limitation, private network services for business
customers.
      5.   Franchise Term: This franchise shall be in effect for a period of
fifteen (15) years from the date of acceptance by grantee, unless sooner
renewed, revoked or terminated as herein provided.
      6.   Previous Franchises: Upon acceptance by grantee as required by
section
9-3-13 of this chapter, this franchise shall supersede and replace any previous
ordinance granting a franchise to grantee.
      7.   Compliance With Applicable Laws, Resolutions And Ordinances: The
terms of this franchise shall define the contractual rights and obligations of
grantee with respect to the provision of cable service and operation of the
system in city. However, the grantee shall at all times during the term of this
franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power, statutory
rights, local ordinance making authority, and eminent domain rights of city. In
the event any city ordinance or regulation which addresses usage of the rights
of way adds to, modifies, amends, or otherwise differently addresses issues
addressed in section
9-3-3 of this chapter, grantee shall comply with such ordinance or regulation
of general applicability, regardless of which requirement was first adopted
except that grantee shall not, through application of such city ordinance or
regulation of rights of way, be subject to additional burdens with respect to
usage of rights of way which exceed burdens on similarly situated rights of way
users.
      8.   Rules Of Grantee: The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate
such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its
business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable said grantee to exercise
its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise and to assure
uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers; provided that such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with
provisions hereto, the rules of the FCC, the laws of the state of Minnesota,
city, or any other body having lawful jurisdiction.
      9.   Territorial Area Involved: This franchise is granted for the
corporate boundaries of city, as it exists from time to time. In the event of
annexation by city, or as development occurs, any new territory shall become
part of the territory for which this franchise is granted provided, however,
that grantee shall not be required to extend service beyond its present system
boundaries unless there is a density equivalent of thirty (30) homes per cable
mile. Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential
residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the
area in which such group resides. Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of
time to construct and activate cable plant to service annexed or newly
developed areas.
      10.   Written Notice: All notices, reports, or demands required to be
given in writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when
delivered personally to any officer of grantee or city's administrator of this
franchise or forty eight (48) hours after it is deposited in the United States
mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid
thereon, addressed to the party to whom notice is being given, as follows:
 
                Mayor
If to city:     City Of Dawson
                675 Chestnut Street; P.O. Box 552
                Dawson, MN 56232-0552
                Kevin Beyer, General Manager
If to grantee:  Farmers Mutual Telephone Company
                P.O. Box 368, 301 2nd Street South
                Bellingham, MN 56212
                Donald A. Wilcox, Attorney
With copies to: Wilcox Law Office
                P.O. Box 100, 1150 Wisconsin Avenue
                Benson, MN 56215
 
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party
given as provided in this section.
      11.   Subscriber Network Drops To Designated Building: Grantee shall
provide, free of charge, installation of one subscriber network drop, one cable
outlet, one converter, if necessary, and basic cable service without charge to
the following institutions: the elementary school at 563-9th Street, the fire
hall, the senior center, and the public library on Pine Street and such other
public or educational institutions subsequently designated by city which are
located one hundred fifty feet (150') or less from the existing subscriber
network. Any such institution located more than one hundred fifty feet (150')
shall be connected if such institution agrees to reimburse grantee for
grantee's actual costs in excess of the one hundred fifty foot (150')
installation actual costs.
Additional subscriber network drops and/or outlets in any of the locations
listed will be installed by grantee at the cost of grantee's time and material.
Alternatively, said institution may add outlets at its own expense, as long as
such installation meets grantee's standards. Grantee shall have six (6) months
from the date of city designation of additional institution(s) to complete
construction of the drop and outlet unless weather or other conditions beyond
the control of grantee requires more time. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-3: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Construction Standards:
      1.   Registration, Permits And Construction Codes:
         a.   Grantee shall strictly adhere to all state and local laws and
building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to location,
construction, installation, operation or maintenance of the system in city and
give due consideration at all times to the aesthetics of the property.
         b.   Failure to obtain permits or comply with permit requirements
shall be grounds for revocation of this franchise, or any lesser sanctions
provided herein or in any other applicable law.
      2.   Repair Of Rights Of Way And Property: Any and all rights of way, or
public or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the
construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance,
expansion, extension or reconstruction of the system shall be promptly and
fully restored by grantee, at its expense, to the same condition as that
prevailing prior to grantee's work, as determined by city in the case of
streets and other public property, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. If grantee shall fail to promptly perform the restoration required
herein, after written request of city and reasonable opportunity to satisfy
that request, city shall have the right to put the rights of way, public, or
private property back into good condition. In the event city determines that
grantee is responsible for such disturbance or damage, grantee shall be
obligated to fully reimburse city for such restoration.
      3.   Conditions On Right Of Way Use:
         a.   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to prevent city from
constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading, paving,
maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any right of way;
constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water
mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or
other public work.
         b.   All system transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the grantee within city shall be located so as not to
obstruct or interfere with the use of rights of way except for normal and
reasonable obstruction and interference which might occur during construction
and to cause minimum interference with the rights of property owners who abut
any of said rights of way and not to interfere with existing public utility
installations.
         c.   If at any time during the period of this franchise city shall
elect to alter or change the grade or location of any right of way, the grantee
shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by city, remove and relocate
its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other fixtures of the system,
and in each instance comply with the reasonable and lawful standards and
specifications of city.
         d.   The grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or other fixtures of
system above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas,
electric, telephone, water or other utility fixtures and all such poles,
conduits, or other fixtures placed in any right of way shall be so placed as to
comply with all reasonable and lawful requirements of city.
         e.   The grantee shall, upon request of any person holding a moving
permit issued by city, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the
moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by
the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall be given not less than
ten (10) days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
         f.   The grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and
overhanging the rights of way of city so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables or other facilities of
the grantee.
         g.   Grantee shall use its best efforts to give reasonable prior
notice to any adjacent private property owners who will be negatively affected
or impacted by grantee's work in the rights of way.
      4.   Undergrounding Of Cable:
         a.   Unless otherwise required by action of city council, grantee must
place newly constructed facilities underground in areas of city where all other
utility lines are placed underground. Amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted
terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing technology reasonably
requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not
to be unsightly or unsafe, all pursuant to plans submitted with grantee's
permit application(s) and approved by city.
         b.   In any area of city where there are certain cables, wires and
other like facilities of a public utility or public utility district
underground and at least one operable cable, wire or like facility of a public
utility or public utility district suspended above the ground from poles
grantee may construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities from
the same pole with the consent of the owner of the pole.
         c.   Grantee shall be granted access to any easements granted to a
public utility, municipal utility or utility district in any areas annexed by
city or new developments.
      5.   Installation Of Facilities: No poles, conduits, amplifier boxes,
pedestal mounted terminal boxes, similar structures, or other wire holding
structures shall be erected or installed by the grantee without required permit
of city.
      6.   Safety Requirements:
         a.   The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable
care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to
cause damage or injuries.
         b.   The grantee shall install and maintain its system and other
equipment in accordance with city's codes and the requirements of the national
electric safety code and all other applicable FCC, state and local regulations,
and in such manner that they will not interfere with city communications
technology related to health, safety and welfare of the residents.
         c.   All cable system structures, lines, equipment and connections in,
over, under and upon the rights of way of city, wherever situated or located,
shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair
so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of city or
any person. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-4: DESIGN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Design Provisions:
      1.   System Maintenance:
         a.   Grantee shall operate and maintain the system providing service
and interrupt service only for good cause. Such interruption, to the extent
feasible, shall be preceded by notice in accordance with subsection 9-3-2A10 of
this chapter and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
         b.   All final programming decisions remain the discretion of grantee
in accordance with the proposal, provided that grantee notifies city and
subscribers in writing thirty (30) days prior to any channel additions,
deletions, or realignments, and further subject to grantee's signal carriage
obligations hereunder and pursuant to 47 USC section 531-536, and further
subject to city's rights pursuant to 47 USC section 545. Location and
relocation of the PEG channels shall be governed by section
9-3-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Interruption Of Service: The grantee shall interrupt service only
for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption shall
occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
      3.   Technical Standards: The technical standards used in the operation
of the system shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards
promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems pursuant to title 47, sections
76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time, which
regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference.
      4.   Special Testing:
         a.   The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the franchise. In
addition, the city may require special testing of a location or locations
within the system if there is a particular matter of controversy or unresolved
complaints regarding such construction or installation work or pertaining to
such location(s). Demand for such special tests may be made on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
noncompliance. Such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in
controversy or unresolved complaints. The city shall endeavor to so arrange its
request for such special testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to
grantee or to the subscribers caused by such testing.
         b.   Before ordering such tests, grantee shall be afforded thirty (30)
days following receipt of written notice to investigate and, if necessary,
correct problems or complaints upon which tests were ordered. The city shall
meet with grantee prior to requiring special tests to discuss the need for such
and, if possible, visually inspect those locations which are the focus of
concern. If, after such meetings and inspections, city wishes to commence
special tests and the thirty (30) days have elapsed without correction of the
matter in controversy or unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted by
a qualified engineer selected by city and grantee, and grantee shall cooperate
in such testing. Such tests shall be paid for by the city unless the results of
such testing indicate noncompliance with FCC regulations, in which case cost of
such testing shall be paid for by grantee.
      5.   FCC Reports: Upon request, the results of any tests required to be
filed by grantee with the FCC shall also be filed with the city or its
designee.
      6.   Nonvoice Return Capability: Grantee is required to use cable and
associated electronics having the technical capacity for nonvoice return
communications.
      7.   Lockout Device: Upon the request of a subscriber, grantee shall
provide by sale or lease a lockout device. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-5: SERVICE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Service Provisions:
      1.   Regulation Of Service Rates:
         a.   The city may regulate rates for the provision of cable service,
equipment, or any other communications service provided over the system to the
extent allowed under federal or state law(s). City reserves the right to
regulate rates for any future services to the extent permitted by law.
         b.   Grantee shall give city and subscribers written notice of any
change in a rate or charge at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective
date of the change in accordance with 47 CFR 76.964. Grantee shall not be
required to provide advance notice for changes relating to franchise fees,
access charges or any franchise related costs consistent with federal law.
Bills must be clear, concise, and understandable, with itemization of all
charges.
      2.   Nonstandard Installations: Grantee shall install and provide cable
service to any person requesting other than a standard installation. In such
case, grantee may charge for the incremental increase in material and labor
costs incurred beyond the standard installation.
      3.   Sales Procedures: Grantee shall not exercise deceptive sales
procedures when marketing any of its services within city. Grantee shall have
the right to market door to door during reasonable hours consistent with local
ordinances and regulation.
      4.   Subscriber Inquiry And Complaint Procedures:
         a.   Grantee shall have a publicly listed toll free telephone number
which shall be operated so as to receive subscriber complaints and requests on
a twenty four (24) hour a day, seven (7) days a week basis. During normal
business hours, trained representatives of grantee shall be available to
respond to subscriber inquiries.
         b.   Grantee shall maintain adequate numbers of telephone lines and
personnel to respond in a timely manner to schedule service calls and answer
subscriber complaints or inquiries in a manner consistent with regulations
adopted by the FCC and city where applicable and lawful. Under normal operating
conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait
time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the
call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30)
seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the
time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. Under
normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than
three percent (3%) of the time. Grantee shall respond to written complaints
with copy to city or its designee within thirty (30) days.
         c.   Subject to grantee's obligations pursuant to law regarding
privacy of certain information, grantee shall prepare and maintain written
records of all complaints received from city and the resolution of such
complaints, including the date of such resolution. Such written records shall
be on file at the office of grantee. Grantee shall provide city with a written
summary of such complaints and their resolution upon request of city. As to
subscriber complaints, grantee shall comply with FCC recordkeeping regulations,
and make the results of such recordkeeping available to city upon request.
         d.   Subscriber requests for repairs shall be performed to the extent
possible within thirty six (36) hours of the request unless conditions beyond
the control of grantee prevent such performance. Grantee may schedule
appointments for installations and other service calls either at a specific
time or, at a maximum, during a four (4) hour time block during normal business
hours. Grantee may also schedule service calls outside normal business hours
for the convenience of customers. Grantee shall use its best efforts to not
cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the
business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If the installer or technician
is late and will not meet the specified appointment time, he/she must use his/
her best efforts to contact the customer and reschedule the appointment at the
sole convenience of the customer. Service call appointments must be met in a
manner consistent with FCC standards.
      5.   Subscriber Contracts: Grantee shall file with city any standard form
subscriber contract utilized by grantee. If no such written contract exists,
grantee shall file with the city a document completely and concisely stating
the length and terms of the subscriber contract offered to customers. The
length and terms of any subscriber contract(s) shall be available for public
inspection during normal business hours.
      6.   Refund Policy: In the event a subscriber establishes or terminates
service and receives less than a full month's service, grantee shall prorate
the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in the period for which
service was rendered to the number of days in the billing. In addition, in the
event that an outage of service occurs for a total period of more than twenty
four (24) hours, a subscriber shall, upon request, be credited pro rata for
such outage.
      7.   Late Fees: Grantee may access additional fees for late payment in
accordance with grantee's standard late fee policy and applicable law, but in
no case shall grantee require payment of a late fee until thirty (30) days
after the date of the invoice. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-6: ACCESS CHANNEL(S) PROVISIONS:
   A.   Access Channel(s) Provisions:
      1.   Public, Educational And Government Access:
         a.   City or its designee is hereby designated to operate, administer,
promote, and manage access (public, education, and government programming)
(hereinafter "PEG access") programming on the cable system.
         b.   Grantee shall dedicate one channel for PEG access and community
programming use. All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the
total services offered on the system shall be eligible to receive such channels
at no additional charge. The channel shall be activated upon request of the
city or its designee and thereafter maintained.
         c.   City may rename, reprogram, or otherwise change the use of these
channels in its sole discretion, provided such use is noncommercial, lawful,
and retains the general purpose of the provision of community programming.
Nothing herein shall diminish the city's rights to secure additional channels
pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 238.084, which is expressly incorporated
herein by reference. City shall provide ninety (90) days' prior written notice
to grantee of city's intent to activate access channels.
      2.   Charges For Use: Channel time and playback of prerecorded
programming on the PEG access and community program channel(s) must be provided
without charge to city and the public.
      3.   Access Rules: City, or its designee, shall implement rules for use
of any access channel(s).
      4.   Title To PEG Equipment: Grantor shall retain title to all PEG
equipment and facilities purchased or otherwise acquired with funding made
available by grantee under this franchise and any franchise previously granted
by the city.
      5.   State And Federal Law Compliance: Satisfaction of the requirements
of this section satisfies any and all of grantee's state and federal law
requirements of grantee with respect to PEG access.
      6.   Technical Assistance: Grantee shall at all times cooperate with city
in providing technical assistance desired by city regarding PEG access
programming. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-7: OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS:
   A.   Operation And Administration Provisions:
      1.   Administration Of Franchise: The city manager or other designee
shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the system
and the grantee's operation under the franchise. The city, or its designee, may
issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction,
operation and maintenance of the system as are consistent with the provisions
of the franchise and law.
      2.   Delegated Authority: The city may appoint a citizen advisory body or
may delegate to any other body or person authority to administer the franchise
and to monitor the performance of the grantee pursuant to the franchise.
Grantee shall cooperate with any such delegates of city.
      3.   Franchise Fee:
         a.   During the term of the franchise, grantee shall pay quarterly to
city a franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of its annual
gross revenues.
         b.   Any payments due under this provision shall be payable annually.
The payment shall be made within ninety (90) days of the end of each of
grantee's fiscal year together with a report showing the basis for the
computation and other relevant facts that city may request.
         c.   All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by
city and acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount.
      4.   Access To Records: The city shall have the right to inspect, upon
reasonable notice and during normal business hours, or require grantee to
provide within a reasonable time copies of any records maintained by grantee
which relate to system operations including specifically grantee's accounting
and financial records.
      5.   Periodic Evaluation:
         a.   Upon thirty (30) days' written notice to grantee, the city may
require an evaluation session. Evaluation sessions may occur no more than once
every two (2) years beginning two (2) years from the effective date of this
franchise.
         b.   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may
include, but are not limited to, application of new technologies, system
performance, programming offered, access channels, facilities and support,
municipal uses of cable, subscriber rates, customer complaints, amendments to
this franchise, judicial rulings, FCC rulings, line extension policies and any
other topics city deems relevant.
         c.   As a result of a periodic review or evaluation session, city and
grantee may develop such changes and modifications to the terms and conditions
of the franchise as are mutually agreed upon. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-8: GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS:
   A.   General Financial And Insurance Provisions:
      1.   Indemnification Of City:
         a.   City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected
officials, employees and agents shall not be liable for any loss or damage to
any real or personal property of any person, or for any injury to or death of
any person, arising out of or in connection with grantee's construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of the system or as to any other
action of grantee with respect to this franchise.
         b.   Grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless city, its
officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and
agents, from and against all liability, damages, and penalties which they may
legally be required to pay as a result of the city's exercise, administration,
or enforcement of the franchise, except because of city's own programming.
         c.   Nothing in this franchise relieves a person, except city, from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring the grantee's facilities while performing work connected with grading,
regrading, or changing the line of a right of way or public place or with the
construction or reconstruction of a sewer or water system.
         d.   In order for city to assert its rights to be indemnified,
defended, and held harmless, city must with respect to each claim:
            (1)   Promptly notify grantee in writing of any claim or legal
proceeding which gives rise to such right;
            (2)   Afford grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully
control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any
claim or proceeding; and
            (3)   Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of grantee, at
grantee's expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement
or resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to
subsection A1d(2) of this section.
      2.   Insurance:
         a.   As a part of the indemnification provided in subsection A1 of
this section, but without limiting the foregoing, grantee shall file with city
at the time of its acceptance of this franchise, and at all times thereafter
maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, a comprehensive general
liability insurance policy, including broadcaster's/cablecaster's liability and
contractual liability coverage, in protection of the grantee, and the city, its
officers, elected officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees for any
and all damages and penalties which may arise as a result of this franchise.
The policy or policies shall name the city as an additional insured, and in
their capacity as such, city officers, elected officials, boards, commissions,
agents and employees.
         b.   The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not less than
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for personal injury or death of
any one person, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or
death of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage to any one person and one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one act or
occurrence.
         c.   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by
grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each
policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will
not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of
premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of grantee or for other
reasons, except after sixty (60) days' advance written notice have been
provided to city. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-9: SALE, ABANDONMENT, TRANSFER AND REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Sale, Abandonment, Transfer And Revocation Of Franchise:
      1.   City's Right To Revoke:
         a.   In addition to all other rights which city has pursuant to law or
equity, city reserves the right to commence proceedings to revoke, terminate or
cancel this franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if it
is determined by city that:
            (1)   Grantee has violated material provision(s) of this franchise;
or
            (2)   Grantee has attempted to evade any of the provisions of the
franchise; or
            (3)   Grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon city.
         b.   City may revoke this franchise without the hearing required by
subsection A2b of this section if grantee is adjudged bankrupt.
      2.   Procedures For Revocation:
         a.   City shall provide grantee with written notice of a cause for
revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow grantee sixty (60) days
subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to
provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the franchise. In
the notice required herein, city shall provide grantee with the basis of the
revocation.
         b.   Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording
due process before the city council prior to the effective date of revocation,
which public hearing shall follow the sixty (60) day notice provided in
subsection A2a of this section. City shall provide grantee with written notice
of its decision together with written findings of fact supplementing said
decision.
         c.   Only after the public hearing and upon written notice of the
determination by city to revoke the franchise may grantee appeal said decision
with an appropriate state or federal court or agency.
         d.   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full
force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires or unless continuation
of the franchise would endanger the health, safety and welfare of any person or
the public.
         e.   Upon satisfactory correction of the violation upon which said
notice was given as determined in the city's sole discretion, the initial
notice shall become void.
      3.   Abandonment Of Service: Grantee may not abandon the system or any
portion thereof without having first given three (3) months' written notice to
city. Grantee may not abandon the system or any portion thereof without
compensating city for damages resulting from the abandonment, including all
costs incident to removal of the system.
      4.   Removal After Abandonment, Termination Or Forfeiture:
         a.   In the event of termination or forfeiture of the franchise or
abandonment of the system, city shall have the right to require grantee to
remove all or any portion of the system from all rights of way and public
property within city, unless still provide other services over the network.
         b.   If grantee has failed to commence removal of system, or such part
thereof as was designated by city, within ninety (90) days after written notice
of city's demand for removal is given, or if grantee has failed to complete
such removal within twelve (12) months after written notice of city's demand
for removal is given, city shall have the right to apply funds secured by the
performance bond toward removal and/or declare all right, title, and interest
to the system to be in city with all rights of ownership including, but not
limited to, the right to operate the system or transfer the system to another
for operation by it.
      5.   Sale Or Transfer Of Franchise:
         a.   No sale or transfer of the franchise, or sale, transfer, or
fundamental corporate change of or in grantee which includes the sale of a
controlling interest in the grantee's assets, a merger including the merger of
a subsidiary and parent entity, consolidation, or the creation of a subsidiary
or affiliate entity, shall take place until a written request has been filed
with city requesting approval of the sale, transfer, or corporate change and
such approval has been granted or deemed granted, provided, however, that said
approval shall not be required where grantee grants a security interest in its
franchise and/or assets to secure an indebtedness.
         b.   City shall have such time as is permitted by state and federal
law in which to review a transfer request.
         c.   In no event shall a sale, transfer, corporate change, or
assignment of ownership or control pursuant to subsection A5a or A5b of this
section be approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to this
franchise and assuming all rights and obligations thereunder, and assuming all
other rights and obligations of the transferor to the city including, but not
limited to, any adequate guarantees or other security instruments provided by
the transferor.
         d.   In the event of any proposed sale, transfer, or assignment
pursuant to subsection A5a or A5b of this section, city shall have the right of
first refusal of any bona fide offer to purchase the system. "Bona fide offer",
as used in this subsection, means an offer received by the grantee which it
intends to accept subject to city's rights under this section. This written
offer must be conveyed to city along with the grantee's written acceptance of
the offer contingent upon the rights of city provided for in this section.
         e.   City shall be deemed to have waived its right to purchase the
system pursuant to this section only in the following circumstances:
            (1)   If city does not indicate to grantee in writing, within
thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice of a proposed sale, transfer,
corporate change, its intention to exercise its right of purchase; or
            (2)   It approves the assignment or sale of the franchise as
provided within this section.
         f.   No franchise may be transferred if the city determines grantee is
in noncompliance of the franchise unless an acceptable compliance program has
been approved by city. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-10: PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS:
   A.   Protection Of Individual Rights:
      1.   Discriminatory Practices Prohibited: Grantee shall not deny service,
deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or general citizens
on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, status as to
public assistance, affectional preference, or disability. Grantee shall comply
at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and city laws, and all
executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
      2.   Subscriber Privacy:
         a.   No signals including signals of a class IV channel may be
transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual
viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the
subscriber. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not
to exceed one year which may be renewed at the option of the subscriber. No
penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide or renew such
authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the
subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such permission shall be
required for each type or classification of class IV channel activity planned
for the purpose of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices.
         b.   No lists of the names and addresses of subscribers or any lists
that identify the viewing habits of subscribers shall be sold or otherwise made
available to any party other than to grantee or its agents for grantee's
service business and also to the subscriber subject of that information, unless
grantee has received specific written authorization from the subscriber to make
such data available. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of
time not to exceed one year which may be renewed at the option of the
subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide
or renew such authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time
by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever.
         c.   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required for
the conducting of systemwide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for
the purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of
billing. Confidentiality of such information shall be subject to the provision
set forth in subsection A2b of this section. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-11: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Unauthorized Connections And Modifications:
      1.   Unauthorized Connections Or Modifications Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or governmental
body or agency, without the express consent of the grantee, to make or possess,
or assist anybody in making or possessing, any unauthorized connection,
extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively,
electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of the system or receive
services of the system without grantee's authorization.
      2.   Removal Or Destruction Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
firm, person, group, company, or corporation to wilfully interfere, tamper,
remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of the
system for any purpose whatsoever.
      3.   Penalty: Any firm, person, group, company, or corporation found
guilty of violating this section may be fined and the costs of the action for
each and every subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall
be considered a separate occurrence. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
9-3-12: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Miscellaneous Provisions:
      1.   Franchise Renewal: Any renewal of this franchise shall be performed
in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
The term of any renewed franchise shall be limited to a period not to exceed
fifteen (15) years.
      2.   Amendment Of Franchise Ordinance: Grantee and city may agree, from
time to time, to amend this franchise. Such written amendments may be made at
any time if the city and grantee agree that such an amendment will be in the
public interest or that such an amendment is required due to changes in
federal, state or local laws. City shall act pursuant to local law pertaining
to the ordinance amendment process.
      3.   Compliance With Federal, State And Local Laws:
         a.   If any federal or state law or regulation shall require or permit
city or grantee to perform any service or act or shall prohibit city or grantee
from performing any service or act which may be in conflict with the terms of
this franchise, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, either
party shall notify the other of the point in conflict believed to exist between
such law or regulation. Grantee and city shall conform to state laws and rules
regarding cable communications not later than one year after they become
effective, unless otherwise stated, and to conform to federal laws and
regulations regarding cable as they become effective.
         b.   If any term, condition or provision of this franchise or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be held
to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of
such term, condition or provision to persons or circumstances other than those
as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected
thereby, and this franchise and all the terms, provisions and conditions hereof
shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and complied with
provided the loss of the invalid or unenforceable clause does not substantially
alter the agreement between the parties. In the event such law, rule or
regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so
that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in
conflict with the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision
shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding
on grantee and city.
      4.   Nonenforcement By City: Grantee shall not be relieved of its
obligations to comply with any of the provisions of this franchise by reason of
any failure or delay of city to enforce prompt compliance. Any such written
waiver by city of a breach or violation of any provision of this franchise
shall not operate as or be construed to be a waiver of any subsequent breach or
violation.
      5.   Rights Cumulative: All rights and remedies given to city by this
franchise or retained by city herein shall be in addition to and cumulative
with any and all other rights and remedies, existing or implied, now or
hereafter available to city, at law or in equity, and such rights and remedies
shall not be exclusive, but each and every right and remedy specifically given
by this franchise or otherwise existing or given may be exercised from time to
time and as often and in such order as may be deemed expedient by city and the
exercise of one or more rights or remedies shall not be deemed a waiver of the
right to exercise at the same time or thereafter any other right or remedy.
      6.   Grantee Acknowledgment Of Validity Of Franchise: Grantee
acknowledges that it has had an opportunity to review the terms and conditions
of this franchise and that under current law grantee believes that said terms
and conditions are not unreasonable or arbitrary, and that grantee believes
city has the power to make the terms and conditions contained in this
franchise.
      7.   Force Majeure: In the event grantee's performance of any of the
terms, conditions, obligations or requirements of this agreement is prevented
or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control, such inability to
perform shall be deemed to be excused for the period of such inability and no
penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. (Ord. 308, 3-11-
2014)
9-3-13: PUBLICATION EFFECTIVE DATE; ACCEPTANCE AND EXHIBITS:
   A.   Publication Effective Date; Acceptance And Exhibits:
      1.   Publication Effective Date: This franchise shall be published in
accordance with applicable local and Minnesota law. The effective date of this
franchise shall be the date of acceptance by grantee in accordance with the
provisions of subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Acceptance:
         a.   Grantee shall accept this franchise within sixty (60) days of its
enactment by the city council, unless the time for acceptance is extended by
city. Such acceptance by the grantee shall be deemed the grant of this
franchise for all purposes provided, however, this franchise shall not be
effective until all city ordinance adoption procedures are complied with and
all applicable timelines have run for the adoption of a city ordinance. In the
event acceptance does not take place, or should all ordinance adoption
procedures and timelines not be completed, this franchise and any and all
rights granted hereunder to grantee shall be null and void.
         b.   Upon acceptance of this franchise, grantee and city shall be
bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein.
         c.   Grantee shall accept this franchise in the following manner:
            (1)   This franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by
grantee and delivered to city.
            (2)   With its acceptance, grantee shall also deliver any
performance bond and insurance certificates required herein that have not
previously been delivered. (Ord. 308, 3-11-2014)
CHAPTER 4
MEDIACOM CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
SECTION:
9-4-1: Short Title And Definitions
9-4-2: Grant Of Authority And General Provisions
9-4-3: Construction Standards
9-4-4: Design Provisions
9-4-5: Service Provisions
9-4-6: Access Channel(s) Provisions
9-4-7: Operation And Administration Provisions
9-4-8: General Financial And Insurance Provisions
9-4-9: Sale, Abandonment, Transfer And Revocation Of Franchise
9-4-10: Protection Of Individual Rights
9-4-11: Unauthorized Connections And Modifications
9-4-12: Miscellaneous Provisions
9-4-13: Publication Effective Date; Acceptance And Exhibits
9-4-1: SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Short Title And Definitions:
      1.   Short Title: This chapter shall be known and cited as the MEDIACOM
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM ORDINANCE.
      2.   Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.
    BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise to
be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as defined herein shall not
be inconsistent with 47 USC 543.
   CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE: Any video programming provided over a cable
system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of
equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than:
         a.   Video programming carried on the basic service tier;
         b.   Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program
basis; or
         c.   A combination of multiple channels of pay-per- channel or pay-
per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so
long as the combined service: consists of commonly-identified video
programming; and is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.
Cable programming service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with the
definition as set forth in 47 USC section 543(l)(2) (1993) and 47 CFR 76.901(b)
(1993).
   CABLE SERVICE OR SERVICE: The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.
   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR SYSTEM OR CABLE SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of
a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes
video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, but such term does not include:
         a.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations;
         b.   A facility that serves subscribers without using the public
rights-of-way;
         c.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of 47 USC 201-206 except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 USC section 541) to
the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services;
         d.   An open video system that complies with section 653 of the Cable
Act; or
         e.   Any facilities of any electrical utility used solely for
operating its electrical utility system.
   CITY: The City of Dawson, a municipal corporation, in the State of
Minnesota, acting by and through its City Council, or its lawfully appointed
designee.
   CITY COUNCIL: The Governing Body of the City of Dawson, Minnesota.
   CLASS IV CABLE CHANNEL: A signaling path provided by a cable system to
transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the
system.
   CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
acceptable to a television receiver of a subscriber and by an appropriate
selector permits a subscriber to view all subscriber signals included in the
service.
   DROP: The cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber's residence
or institution to the nearest feeder cable of the system.
   FCC: The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.
   FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal
of an authorization which has been granted subject to 47 USC 546) issued by a
franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise,
permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise,
which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
   GRANTEE: Mediacom Minnesota, LLC its lawful successors, transferees or
assignees.
   GROSS REVENUE: All revenue received directly or indirectly by the grantee,
its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, or person in which grantee has financial
interest of five percent (5%) or more, from the provision of basic cable
service, cable programming services and pay television fees, installation and
reconnection fees, upgrade and downgrade fees, advertising revenue, converter
rental fees, and lockout device fees (but only to the extent such revenue has
not already been included in a franchise fee computation) within the City. The
term gross revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by
grantee imposed by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit and
collected by grantee for such governmental unit. Gross revenues shall not
include revenues received from internet services.
   INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to the point of
connection including standard installations and custom installations.
   LOCKOUT DEVICE: An optional mechanical or electrical accessory to a
subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain program, certain
channel, or certain channels provided by way of the cable communication system.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in
the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business
hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.
   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions which are within the
control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of grantee
include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade
of the system.
   PAY TELEVISION: The delivery over the system of pay-per- channel or pay-per-
program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to
the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
other legal entity.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above any real
property in City in which the City has an interest including, but not limited
to any street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, skyway, or any
other place, area, or real property owned by or under the control of City,
including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility
easements.
   STANDARD INSTALLATION: Any residential installation which can be completed
using a drop of one hundred fifty feet (150') or less.
   SUBSCRIBER: Any person who lawfully receives service via the system. In the
case of multiple office buildings or multiple dwelling units, the "subscriber"
means the lessee, tenant or occupant. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-2: GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   Franchise Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
construct, operate or maintain a cable communications system in City unless
such person or the person for whom such action is being taken shall have first
obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise ordinance. It shall also be
unlawful for any person to provide cable television service in City unless such
person shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise
ordinance. All cable communications franchises granted by City shall contain
the same substantive terms and conditions.
      2.   Grant Of Franchise: This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms
and conditions contained herein. Grantee shall comply with all provisions of
its proposal, which is expressly incorporated herein by reference. Failure of
grantee to provide a system as described in its proposal, or meet obligations
and comply with all provisions therein, shall be deemed a violation of this
franchise.
      3.   Grant Of Nonexclusive Authority:
         a.   The grantee shall have the right and privilege, subject to the
permitting and other lawful requirements of City ordinance, rule or procedure,
to construct, erect, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and
under the rights-of-way in City a cable system and shall have the right and
privilege to provide cable service and data service, including internet access
and related services. The system constructed and maintained by grantee or its
agents shall not interfere with other uses of the rights-of-way. Grantee shall
make use of existing poles and other above and below facilities available to
grantee to the extent it is technically and economically feasible to do so.
         b.   Notwithstanding the above grant to use rights-of-way, no right-
of-way shall be used by grantee if City determines that such use is
inconsistent with the terms, conditions, or provisions by which such right-of-
way was created or dedicated, or with the present use of the right-of-way.
         c.   This franchise shall be nonexclusive, and City reserves the right
to grant a use of said rights-of-way to any person at any time during the
period of this franchise for the provision of cable service. The terms and
conditions of any such grant of use of the rights-of-way shall be, when taken
as a whole and taking into account the planned usage of the rights-of-way, no
less burdensome or more beneficial than those imposed upon grantee pursuant to
this franchise.
      4.   Lease Or Assignment Prohibited: Except for commercial leased access
as required by Federal law, no person may lease grantee's system for the
purpose of providing service until and unless such person shall have first
obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise or other lawful
authorization containing substantially similar burdens and obligations to this
franchise. Any assignment of rights under this franchise shall be subject to
and in accordance with the requirements of subsection 9-4-9A5 of this chapter.
Subject to restrictions on transfer and change of control in subsection 9-4-9A5
of this chapter, grantee may lease capacity on its cable system for non-cable
services, including, without limitation, private network services for business
customers.
      5.   Franchise Term: This franchise shall be in effect for a period of
fifteen (15) years from the date of acceptance by grantee, unless sooner
renewed, revoked or terminated as herein provided.
      6.   Previous Franchises: Upon acceptance by grantee as required by
section
9-4-13 of this chapter, this franchise shall supersede and replace any previous
ordinance granting a franchise to grantee.
      7.   Compliance With Applicable Laws, Resolutions And Ordinances: The
terms of this franchise shall define the contractual rights and obligations of
grantee with respect to the provision of cable service and operation of the
system in City. However, the grantee shall at all times during the term of this
franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power, statutory
rights, local ordinance-making authority, and eminent domain rights of City. In
the event any City ordinance or regulation which addresses usage of the rights-
of-way adds to, modifies, amends, or otherwise differently addresses issues
addressed in section
9-4-3 of this chapter, grantee shall comply with such ordinance or regulation
of general applicability, regardless of which requirement was first adopted
except that grantee shall not, through application of such City ordinance or
regulation of rights-of-way, be subject to additional burdens with respect to
usage of rights-of-way which exceed burdens on similarly situated rights-of-way
users.
      8.   Rules Of Grantee: The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate
such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its
business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable said grantee to exercise
its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise and to assure
uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers; provided that such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with
provisions hereto, the rules of the FCC, the laws of the State of Minnesota,
City, or any other body having lawful jurisdiction.
      9.   Territorial Area Involved: This franchise is granted for the
corporate boundaries of City, as it exists from time to time. In the event of
annexation by City, or as development occurs, any new territory shall become
part of the territory for which this franchise is granted provided, however,
that grantee shall not be required to extend service beyond its present system
boundaries unless there is a density equivalent of thirty (30) homes per cable
mile. Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential
residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the
area in which such group resides. Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of
time to construct and activate cable plant to service annexed or newly
developed areas.
      10.   Written Notice: All notices, reports, or demands required to be
given in writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when
delivered personally to any officer of grantee or City's Administrator of this
franchise or forty eight (48) hours after it is deposited in the United States
mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid
thereon, addressed to the party to whom notice is being given, as follows:
If to City:
Mayor of Dawson
City of Dawson
675 Chestnut Street
P.O. Box 552
Dawson, MN 56232-0552
If to grantee:
Regional Manager
Mediacom Minnesota LLC
1504 2nd Street Southeast
PO Box 110
Waseca, MN 56093
With copies to:
Mediacom Communications Corporation
Legal Department
One Mediacom Way
Mediacom Park, NY 10918
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party
given as provided in this section.
      11.   Subscriber Network Drops To Designated Building: Grantee shall
provide, free of charge, installation of one subscriber network drop, one cable
outlet, one converter, if necessary, and cable service without charge to the
following institutions: the Elementary School at 563 9th St., the Fire Hall,
the Senior Center, and the Public Library on Pine Street and such other public
or educational institutions subsequently designated by City which are located
one hundred fifty feet (150') or less from the existing subscriber network. Any
such institution located more than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be
connected if such institution agrees to reimburse grantee for grantee's actual
costs in excess of the one hundred fifty foot (150') installation actual costs.
Additional subscriber network drops and/or outlets in any of the locations
listed will be installed by grantee at the cost of grantee's time and material.
Alternatively, said institution may add outlets at its own expense, as long as
such installation meets grantee's standards. Grantee shall have six (6) months
from the date of City designation of additional institution(s) to complete
construction of the drop and outlet unless weather or other conditions beyond
the control of grantee requires more time. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-3: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards:
      1.   Registration, Permits And Construction Codes:
         a.   Grantee shall strictly adhere to all State and local laws and
Building and Zoning Codes currently or hereafter applicable to location,
construction, installation, operation or maintenance of the system in City and
give due consideration at all times to the aesthetics of the property.
         b.   Failure to obtain permits or comply with permit requirements
shall be grounds for revocation of this franchise, or any lesser sanctions
provided herein or in any other applicable law.
      2.   Repair Of Rights-Of-Way And Property: Any and all rights-of- way, or
public or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the
construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance,
expansion, extension or reconstruction of the system shall be promptly and
fully restored by grantee, at its expense, to the same condition as that
prevailing prior to grantee's work, as determined by City in the case of
streets and other public property, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. If grantee shall fail to promptly perform the restoration required
herein, after written request of City and reasonable opportunity to satisfy
that request, City shall have the right to put the rights-of-way, public, or
private property back into good condition. In the event City determines that
grantee is responsible for such disturbance or damage, grantee shall be
obligated to fully reimburse City for such restoration.
      3.   Conditions On Right-Of-Way Use:
         a.   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to prevent City from
constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading, paving,
maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any right-of-way;
constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water
mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or
other public work.
         b.   All system transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the grantee within City shall be located so as not to
obstruct or interfere with the use of rights-of-way except for normal and
reasonable obstruction and interference which might occur during construction
and to cause minimum interference with the rights of property owners who abut
any of said rights-of-way and not to interfere with existing public utility
installations.
         c.   If at any time during the period of this franchise City shall
elect to alter or change the grade or location of any right-of- way, the
grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by City, remove and
relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other fixtures of the
system, and in each instance comply with the reasonable and lawful standards
and specifications of City.
         d.   The grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or other fixtures of
system above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas,
electric, telephone, water or other utility fixtures and all such poles,
conduits, or other fixtures placed in any right-of-way shall be so placed as to
comply with all reasonable and lawful requirements of City.
         e.   The grantee shall, upon request of any person holding a moving
permit issued by City, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the
moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by
the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall be given not less than
ten (10) days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
         f.   The grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and
overhanging the rights-of-way of City so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables or other facilities of
the grantee.
         g.   Grantee shall use its best efforts to give reasonable prior
notice to any adjacent private property owners who will be negatively affected
or impacted by grantee's work in the rights- of-way.
      4.   Undergrounding Of Cable:
         a.   Unless otherwise required by action of City Council, grantee must
place newly constructed facilities underground in areas of City where all other
utility lines are placed underground. Amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted
terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing technology reasonably
requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not
to be unsightly or unsafe, all pursuant to plans submitted with grantee's
permit application(s) and approved by City.
         b.   In any area of City where there are certain cables, wires and
other like facilities of a public utility or public utility district
underground and at least one operable cable, wire or like facility of a public
utility or public utility district suspended above the ground from poles
grantee may construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities from
the same pole with the consent of the owner of the pole.
         c.   Grantee shall be granted access to any easements granted to a
public utility, Municipal utility or utility district in any areas annexed by
City or new developments.
      5.   Installation Of Facilities: No poles, conduits, amplifier boxes,
pedestal mounted terminal boxes, similar structures, or other wire-holding
structures shall be erected or installed by the grantee without required permit
of City.
      6.   Safety Requirements:
         a.   The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable
care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to
cause damage or injuries.
         b.   The grantee shall install and maintain its system and other
equipment in accordance with City's codes and the requirements of the National
Electric Safety Code and all other applicable FCC, State and local regulations,
and in such manner that they will not interfere with City communications
technology related to health, safety and welfare of the residents.
         c.   All cable system structures, lines, equipment and connections in,
over, under and upon the rights-of-way of City, wherever situated or located,
shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair
so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of City or
any person. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-4: DESIGN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   System Maintenance:
         a.   Grantee shall operate and maintain the system providing service
and interrupt service only for good cause. Such interruption, to the extent
feasible, shall be preceded by notice in accordance with subsection 9-4-2A10 of
this chapter and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
         b.   All final programming decisions remain the discretion of grantee
in accordance with the proposal, provided that grantee notifies City and
subscribers in writing thirty (30) days prior to any channel additions,
deletions, or realignments, and further subject to grantee's signal carriage
obligations hereunder and pursuant to 47 USC 531-536, and further subject to
City's rights pursuant to 47 USC section 545. Location and relocation of the
PEG channels shall be governed by section
9-4-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Interruption Of Service: The grantee shall interrupt service only
for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption shall
occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
      3.   Technical Standards: The technical standards used in the operation
of the system shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards
promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems pursuant to title 47, section
76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time, which
regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference.
      4.   Special Testing:
         a.   The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the franchise. In
addition, the City may require special testing of a location or locations
within the system if there is a particular matter of controversy or unresolved
complaints regarding such construction or installation work or pertaining to
such location(s). Demand for such special tests may be made on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
noncompliance. Such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in
controversy or unresolved complaints. The City shall endeavor to so arrange its
request for such special testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to
grantee or to the subscribers caused by such testing.
         b.   Before ordering such tests, grantee shall be afforded thirty (30)
days following receipt of written notice to investigate and, if necessary,
correct problems or complaints upon which tests were ordered. The City shall
meet with grantee prior to requiring special tests to discuss the need for such
and, if possible, visually inspect those locations which are the focus of
concern. If, after such meetings and inspections, City wishes to commence
special tests and the thirty (30) days have elapsed without correction of the
matter in controversy or unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted by
a qualified engineer selected by City and grantee, and grantee shall cooperate
in such testing. Such tests shall be paid for by the City unless the results of
such testing indicate noncompliance with FCC regulations, in which case cost of
such testing shall be paid for by grantee.
      5.   FCC Reports: Upon request, the results of any tests required to be
filed by grantee with the FCC shall also be filed with the City or its
designee.
      6.   Nonvoice Return Capability: Grantee is required to use cable and
associated electronics having the technical capacity for nonvoice return
communications.
      7.   Lockout Device: Upon the request of a subscriber, grantee shall
provide by sale or lease a lockout device. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-5: SERVICE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   Regulation Of Service Rates:
         a.   The City may regulate rates for the provision of cable service,
equipment, or any other communications service provided over the system to the
extent allowed under Federal or State law(s). City reserves the right to
regulate rates for any future services to the extent permitted by law.
         b.   Grantee shall give City and subscribers written notice of any
change in a rate or charge at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective
date of the change in accordance with 47 CFR 76.964. Grantee shall not be
required to provide advance notice for changes relating to franchise fees,
access charges or any franchise related costs consistent with Federal law.
Bills must be clear, concise, and understandable, with itemization of all
charges.
      2.   Non-Standard Installations: Grantee shall install and provide cable
service to any person requesting other than a standard installation. In such
case, grantee may charge for the incremental increase in material and labor
costs incurred beyond the standard installation.
      3.   Sales Procedures: Grantee shall not exercise deceptive sales
procedures when marketing any of its services within City. grantee shall have
the right to market door-to-door during reasonable hours consistent with local
ordinances and regulation.
      4.   Subscriber Inquiry And Complaint Procedures:
         a.   Grantee shall have a publicly listed toll-free telephone number
which shall be operated so as to receive subscriber complaints and requests on
a twenty four (24) hour-a-day, seven (7) days-a-week basis. During normal
business hours, trained representatives of grantee shall be available to
respond to subscriber inquiries.
         b.   Grantee shall maintain adequate numbers of telephone lines and
personnel to respond in a timely manner to schedule service calls and answer
subscriber complaints or inquiries in a manner consistent with regulations
adopted by the FCC and City where applicable and lawful. Under normal operating
conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait
time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the
call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30)
seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the
time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. Under
normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than
three percent (3%) of the time. Grantee shall respond to written complaints
with copy to City or its designee within thirty (30) days.
         c.   Subject to grantee's obligations pursuant to law regarding
privacy of certain information, grantee shall prepare and maintain written
records of all complaints received from City and the resolution of such
complaints, including the date of such resolution. Such written records shall
be on file at the office of grantee. Grantee shall provide City with a written
summary of such complaints and their resolution upon request of City. As to
subscriber complaints, grantee shall comply with FCC record- keeping
regulations, and make the results of such record-keeping available to City upon
request.
         d.   Subscriber requests for repairs shall be performed to the extent
possible within thirty six (36) hours of the request unless conditions beyond
the control of grantee prevent such performance. Grantee may schedule
appointments for installations and other service call either at a specific time
or, at a maximum, during a four (4) hour time block during normal business
hours. Grantee may also schedule service calls outside normal business hours
for the convenience of customers. Grantee shall use its best efforts to not
cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the
business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If the installer or technician
is late and will not meet the specified appointment time, he/she must use his/
her best efforts to contact the customer and reschedule the appointment at the
sole convenience of the customer. Service call appointments must be met in a
manner consistent with FCC standards.
      5.   Subscriber Contracts: Grantee shall file with City any standard form
subscriber contract utilized by grantee. If no such written contract exists,
grantee shall file with the City a document completely and concisely stating
the length and terms of the subscriber contract offered to customers. The
length and terms of any subscriber contract(s) shall be available for public
inspection during normal business hours.
      6.   Refund Policy: In the event a subscriber establishes or terminates
service and receives less than a full month's service, grantee shall prorate
the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in the period for which
service was rendered to the number of days in the billing. In addition, in the
event that an outage of service occurs for a total period of more than twenty
four (24) hours, a subscriber shall, upon request, be credited pro rata for
such outage.
      7.   Late Fees: Grantee may access additional fees for late payment in
accordance with grantees standard late fee policy and applicable law, but in no
case shall grantee require payment of a late fee until thirty (30) days after
the date of the invoice. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-6: ACCESS CHANNEL(S) PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   Public, Educational And Government Access:
         a.   City or its designee is hereby designated to operate, administer,
promote, and manage access (public, education, and government programming)
(hereinafter "PEG access") programming on the cable system.
         b.   Grantee shall dedicate one channel for PEG access and community
programming use. All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the
total services offered on the system shall be eligible to receive such channels
at no additional charge. The channel shall be activated upon request of the
City or its designee and thereafter maintained. City may rename, reprogram, or
otherwise change the use of these channels in its sole discretion, provided
such use is non-commercial, lawful, and retains the general purpose of the
provision of community programming. Nothing herein shall diminish the City's
rights to secure additional channels pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 238.084,
which is expressly incorporated herein by reference. City shall provide ninety
(90) days prior written notice to grantee of City's intent to activate access
channels.
      2.   Charges For Use: Channel time and playback of prerecorded
programming on the PEG access and community program channel(s) must be provided
without charge to City and the public.
      3.   Access Rules: City, or its designee, shall implement rules for use
of any access channel(s).
      4.   Title To PEG Equipment: Grantor shall retain title to all PEG
equipment and facilities purchased or otherwise acquired with funding made
available by grantee under this franchise and any franchise, previously granted
by the City.
      5.   State And Federal Law Compliance: Satisfaction of the requirements
of this section satisfies any and all of grantee's State and Federal law
requirements of grantee with respect to PEG access.
      6.   Technical Assistance: Grantee shall at all times cooperate with City
in providing technical assistance desired by City regarding PEG access
programming. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-7: OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   Administration Of Franchise: The City Manager or other designee
shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the system
and the grantee's operation under the franchise. The City, or its designee, may
issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction,
operation and maintenance of the system as are consistent with the provisions
of the franchise and law.
      2.   Delegated-Authority: The City may appoint a citizen advisory body or
may delegate to any other body or person authority to administer the franchise
and to monitor the performance of the grantee pursuant to the franchise.
Grantee shall cooperate with any such delegates of City.
      3.   Franchise Fee:
         a.   During the term of the franchise, grantee shall pay quarterly to
City a franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of its annual
gross revenues.
         b.   Any payments due under this provision shall be payable annually.
The payment shall be made within ninety (90) days of the end of each of
grantee's fiscal year together with a report showing the basis for the
computation and other relevant facts that City may request.
         c.   All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by
City and acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount.
      4.   Access To Records: The City shall have the right to inspect, upon
reasonable notice and during normal business hours, or require grantee to
provide within a reasonable time copies of any records maintained by grantee
which relate to system operations including specifically grantee's accounting
and financial records.
      5.   Periodic Evaluation:
         a.   Upon thirty (30) days written notice to grantee, the City may
require an evaluation session. Evaluation sessions may occur no more than once
every two (2) years beginning two (2) years from the effective date of this
franchise.
         b.   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may
include, but are not limited to, application of new technologies, system
performance, programming offered, access channels, facilities and support,
Municipal uses of cable, subscriber rates, customer complaints, amendments to
this franchise, judicial rulings, FCC rulings, line extension policies and any
other topics City deems relevant.
         c.   As a result of a periodic review or evaluation session, City and
grantee may develop such changes and modifications to the terms and conditions
of the franchise as are mutually agreed upon. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-8: GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   Indemnification Of City:
         a.   City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected
officials, employees and agents shall not be liable for any loss or damage to
any real or personal property of any person, or for any injury to or death of
any person, arising out of or in connection with grantee's construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of the system or as to any other
action of grantee with respect to this franchise.
         b.   Grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless City, its
officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and
agents, from and against all liability, damages, and penalties which they may
legally be required to pay as a result of the City's exercise, administration,
or enforcement of the franchise, except because of City's own programming.
         c.   Nothing in this franchise relieves a person, except City, from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring the grantee's facilities while performing work connected with grading,
regarding, or changing the line of a right-of-way or public place or with the
construction or reconstruction of a sewer or water system.
         d.   In order for City to assert is rights to be indemnified,
defended, and held harmless, City must with respect to each claim:
            (1)   Promptly notify grantee in writing of any claim or legal
proceeding which gives rise to such right;
            (2)   Afford grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully
control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any
claim or proceeding; and
            (3)   Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of grantee, at
grantee's expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement
or resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to
subsection A1d(2) of this section.
      2.   Insurance:
         a.   As a part of the indemnification provided in subsection A1 of
this section, but without limiting the foregoing, grantee shall file with City
at the time of its acceptance of this franchise, and at all times thereafter
maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, a comprehensive general
liability insurance policy, including broadcaster's/cablecaster's liability and
contractual liability coverage, in protection of the grantee, and the City, its
officers, elected officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees for any
and all damages and penalties which may arise as a result of this franchise.
The policy or policies shall name the City as an additional insured, and in
their capacity as such, City officers, elected officials, boards, commissions,
agents and employees.
         b.   The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not less than
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for personal injury or death of
any one person, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or
death of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage to any one person and one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one act or
occurrence.
         c.   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by
grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each
policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will
not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of
premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of grantee or for other
reasons, except after sixty (60) days advance written notice have been provided
to City. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-9: SALE, ABANDONMENT, TRANSFER AND REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   City's Right To Revoke:
         a.   In addition to all other rights which City has pursuant to law or
equity, City reserves the right to commence proceedings to revoke, terminate or
cancel this franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if it
is determined by City that:
            (1)   Grantee has violated material provision(s) of this franchise;
or
            (2)   Grantee has attempted to evade any of the provisions of the
franchise; or
            (3)   Grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon City.
         b.   City may revoke this franchise without the hearing required by
subsection A2b of this section if grantee is adjudged a bankrupt.
      2.   Procedures For Revocation:
         a.   City shall provide grantee with written notice of a cause for
revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow grantee sixty (60) days
subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to
provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the franchise. In
the notice required herein, City shall provide grantee with the basis of the
revocation.
         b.   Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording
due process before the City Council prior to the effective date of revocation,
which public hearing shall follow the sixty (60) day notice provided in
subsection A2a of this section. City shall provide grantee with written notice
of its decision together with written findings of fact supplementing said
decision.
         c.   Only after the public hearing and upon written notice of the
determination by City to revoke the franchise may grantee appeal said decision
with an appropriate State or Federal court or agency.
         d.   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full
force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires or unless continuation
of the franchise would endanger the health, safety and welfare of any person or
the public.
         e.   Upon satisfactory correction of the violation upon which said
notice was given as determined in the City's sole discretion, the initial
notice shall become void.
      3.   Abandonment Of Service: Grantee may not abandon the system or any
portion thereof without having first given three (3) months written notice to
City. Grantee may not abandon the system or any portion thereof without
compensating City for damages resulting from the abandonment, including all
costs incident to removal of the system.
      4.   Removal After Abandonment, Termination Or Forfeiture:
         a.   In the event of termination or forfeiture of the franchise or
abandonment of the system, City shall have the right to require grantee to
remove all or any portion of the system from all rights-of-way and public
property within City.
         b.   If grantee has failed to commence removal of system, or such part
thereof as was designated by City, within ninety (90) days after written notice
of City's demand for removal is given, or if grantee has failed to complete
such removal within twelve (12) months after written notice of City's demand
for removal is given, City shall have the right to apply funds secured by the
performance bond toward removal and/or declare all right, title, and interest
to the system to be in City with all rights of ownership including, but not
limited to, the right to operate the system or transfer the system to another
for operation by it.
      5.   Sale Or Transfer Of Franchise:
         a.   No sale or transfer of the franchise, or sale, transfer, or
fundamental corporate change of or in grantee which includes the sale of a
controlling interest in the grantee's assets, a merger including the merger of
a subsidiary and parent entity, consolidation, or the creation of a subsidiary
or affiliate entity, shall take place until a written request has been filed
with City requesting approval of the sale, transfer, or corporate change and
such approval has been granted or deemed granted, provided, however, that said
approval shall not be required where grantee grants a security interest in its
franchise and/or assets to secure an indebtedness.
         b.   City shall have such time as is permitted by State and Federal
law in which to review a transfer request.
         c.   In no event shall a sale, transfer, corporate change, or
assignment of ownership or control pursuant to subsection A5a or A5b of this
section be approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to this
franchise and assuming all rights and obligations thereunder, and assuming all
other rights and obligations of the transferor to the City including, but not
limited to, any adequate guarantees or other security instruments provided by
the transferor.
         d.   In the event of any proposed sale, transfer, or assignment
pursuant to subsection A5a or A5b of this section, City shall have the right of
first refusal of any bona fide offer to purchase the system. Bona fide offer,
as used in this section, means an offer received by the grantee which it
intends to accept subject to City's rights under this section. This written
offer must be conveyed to City along with the grantee's written acceptance of
the offer contingent upon the rights of City provided for in this section.
         e.   City shall be deemed to have waived its right to purchase the
system pursuant to this section only in the following circumstances:
            (1)   If City does not indicate to grantee in writing, within
thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice of a proposed sale, transfer,
corporate change, its intention to exercise its right of purchase; or
            (2)   It approves the assignment or sale of the franchise as
provided within this section.
         f.   No franchise may be transferred if the City determines grantee is
in noncompliance of the franchise unless an acceptable compliance program has
been approved by City. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-10: PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS:
   A.   Rights:
      1.   Discriminatory Practices Prohibited: Grantee shall not deny service,
deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or general citizens
on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, status as to
public assistance, affectional preference, or disability. Grantee shall comply
at all times with all other applicable Federal, State, and City laws, and all
executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
      2.   Subscriber Privacy:
         a.   No signals including signals of a Class IV channel may be
transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual
viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the
subscriber. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not
to exceed one year which may be renewed at the option of the subscriber. No
penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide or renew such
authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the
subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such permission shall be
required for each type or classification of Class IV channel activity planned
for the purpose of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices.
         b.   No lists of the names and addresses of subscribers or any lists
that identify the viewing habits of subscribers shall be sold or otherwise made
available to any party other than to grantee or its agents for grantee's
service business and also to the subscriber subject of that information, unless
grantee has received specific written authorization from the subscriber to make
such data available. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of
time not to exceed one year which may be renewed at the option of the
subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide
or renew such authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time
by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever.
         c.   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required for
the conducting of system wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for
the purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of
billing. Confidentiality of such information shall be subject to the provision
set forth in subsections A2b of this section. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-11: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   Unauthorized Connections Or Modifications Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or governmental
body or agency, without the express consent of the grantee, to make or possess,
or assist anybody in making or possessing, any unauthorized connection,
extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively,
electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of the system or receive
services of the system without grantee's authorization.
      2.   Removal Or Destruction Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
firm, person, group, company, or corporation to willfully interfere, tamper,
remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of the
system for any purpose whatsoever.
      3.   Penalty: Any firm, person, group, company, or corporation found
guilty of violating this section may be fined and the costs of the action for
each and every subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall
be considered a separate occurrence. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
9-4-12: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   Franchise Renewal: Any renewal of this franchise shall be performed
in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations.
The term of any renewed franchise shall be limited to a period not to exceed
fifteen (15) years.
      2.   Amendment Of Franchise Ordinance: Grantee and City may agree, from
time to time, to amend this franchise. Such written amendments may be made at
any time if the City and grantee agree that such an amendment will be in the
public interest or that such an amendment is required due to changes in
Federal, State or local laws. City shall act pursuant to local law pertaining
to the ordinance amendment process.
      3.   Compliance With Federal, State And Local Laws:
         a.   If any Federal or State law or regulation shall require or permit
City or grantee to perform any service or act or shall prohibit City or grantee
from performing any service or act which may be in conflict with the terms of
this franchise, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, either
party shall notify the other of the point in conflict believed to exist between
such law or regulation. Grantee and City shall conform to State laws and rules
regarding cable communications not later than one year after they become
effective, unless otherwise stated, and to conform to Federal laws and
regulations regarding cable as they become effective.
         b.   If any term, condition or provision of this franchise or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be held
to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of
such term, condition or provision to persons or circumstances other than those
as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected
thereby, and this franchise and all the terms, provisions and conditions hereof
shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and complied with
provided the loss of the invalid or unenforceable clause does not substantially
alter the agreement between the parties. In the event such law, rule or
regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so
that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in
conflict with the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision
shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding
on grantee and City.
      4.   Nonenforcement By City: Grantee shall not be relieved of its
obligations to comply with any of the provisions of this franchise by reason of
any failure or delay of City to enforce prompt compliance. Any such written
waiver by City of a breach or violation of any provision of this franchise
shall not operate as or be construed to be a waiver of any subsequent breach or
violation.
      5.   Rights Cumulative: All rights and remedies given to City by this
franchise or retained by City herein shall be in addition to and cumulative
with any and all other rights and remedies, existing or implied, now or
hereafter available to City, at law or in equity, and such rights and remedies
shall not be exclusive, but each and every right and remedy specifically given
by this franchise or otherwise existing or given may be exercised from time to
time and as often and in such order as may be deemed expedient by City and the
exercise of one or more rights or remedies shall not be deemed a waiver of the
right to exercise at the same time or thereafter any other right or remedy.
      6.   Grantee Acknowledgment Of Validity Of Franchise: Grantee
acknowledges that it has had an opportunity to review the terms and conditions
of this franchise and that under current law grantee believes that said terms
and conditions are not unreasonable or arbitrary, and that grantee believes
City has the power to make the terms and conditions contained in this
franchise.
      7.   Force Majeure: In the event grantee's performance of any of the
terms, conditions, obligations or requirements of this agreement is prevented
or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control, such inability to
perform shall be deemed to be excused for the period of such inability and no
penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. (Ord. 319, 9-5-
2017)
9-4-13: PUBLICATION EFFECTIVE DATE; ACCEPTANCE AND EXHIBITS:
   A.   Provisions:
      1.   Publication, Effective Date: This franchise shall be published in
accordance with applicable local and Minnesota law. The effective date of this
franchise shall be the date of acceptance by grantee in accordance with the
provisions of subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Acceptance:
         a.   Grantee shall accept this franchise within sixty (60) days of its
enactment by the City Council, unless the time for acceptance is extended by
City. Such acceptance by the grantee shall be deemed the grant of this
franchise for all purposes provided, however, this franchise shall not be
effective until all City ordinance adoption procedures are complied with and
all applicable timelines have run for the adoption of a City ordinance. In the
event acceptance does not take place, or should all ordinance adoption
procedures and timelines not be completed, this franchise and any and all
rights granted hereunder to grantee shall be null and void.
         b.   Upon acceptance of this franchise, grantee and City shall be
bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein.
         c.   Grantee shall accept this franchise in the following manner:
            (1)   This franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by
grantee and delivered to City.
            (2)   With its acceptance, grantee shall also deliver any
performance bond and insurance certificates required herein that have not
previously been delivered. (Ord. 319, 9-5-2017)
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE LIMITS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Purpose
10-1-2: Fire Zone 1
10-1-3: Fire Zone 2
10-1-4: Permit Required
10-1-5: Application
10-1-6: Issuance
10-1-7: Repair After Damage
10-1-8: Nonconforming Building
10-1-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter relating to fire limits are adopted for the
purpose of guarding against the calamity of fire within the city. (1982 Code §
9.111)
10-1-2: FIRE ZONE 1:
   A.   Description: The following parts of the city are hereby made a part of
fire zone 1:
      1.   Block 44 of Dawson;
      2.   The west one-half of blocks 52 and 60 of Dawson;
      3.   The east one-half of blocks 43, 51 and 59 of Dawson; and
      4.   All territory embraced within the following described limits:
commencing at the point of intersection of the center line, extended and
prolonged, of the alley running north and south through block 44 with the
southerly line of the right of way of the Minneapolis and St. Louis Railroad,
thence running north along the center line of said alley, if extended and
prolonged, across the right of way and following the center line of the alley
running north and south through block 36 to the center line of Locust Street to
the point of intersection of the center line of Locust Street with the center
line, extended and prolonged, southerly of the alley running north and south
through block 27, thence south in a straight line to the point where the
southerly line of the right of way intersects the center line, extended and
prolonged, of the alley running north and south through block 42, thence
southeasterly along the southerly line of the right of way of the Minneapolis
and St. Louis Railroad to the point of beginning.
   (1982 Code § 9.112)
   B.   Restrictions: No building or structure, nor any part of or addition to
any building, constructed of wood or other combustible material shall be
erected or placed within fire zone 1 unless the outer walls are constructed of
brick, stone or other noncombustible material not less than four inches (4")
thick and the roof covered with noncombustible material. (1982 Code § 9.114)
10-1-3: FIRE ZONE 2:
   A.   Description: The following parts of the city are hereby made a part of
fire zone 2:
      1.   The east one-half of blocks 52 and 60 of Dawson;
      2.   The west one-half of blocks 43, 51 and 59 of Dawson;
      3.   Blocks 3 and 4 of the First Addition to Dawson; and
      4.   That part of block 8 of the First Addition to Dawson lying north of
the Lac Qui Parle River.
   (1982 Code § 9.113)
   B.   Restrictions: No building or structure, nor any part of or addition to
any building, constructed of wood or other combustible material shall be
erected or placed within fire zone 2 unless the outer walls are constructed of
brick, stone or other noncombustible material, or covered with noncombustible
material, and the roof covered with noncombustible material. (1982 Code §
9.115)
10-1-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall erect or place any building or structure, or any part of or
addition to any building, nor make any repairs or alterations costing more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) to an existing building within fire zones 1 or 2
without first having obtained a permit to do so. (1982 Code § 9.116)
10-1-5: APPLICATION:
Application for a permit shall be made to the city clerk. Each application
shall state the location of the building or structure, or part of or addition
to a building, and a description and specification of the materials of which
the outer walls and the roof of the same are or will be constructed, or
specifications of such repairs and alterations. (1982 Code § 9.117)
10-1-6: ISSUANCE:
If it appears from the application that the building is to be placed, erected,
altered or repaired as required, the city council shall grant the permit. Each
permit shall be signed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk. The
permit shall specify the location of the building and the materials of which
the outer walls and the roof of the building shall be constructed or the nature
of the repairs or alterations. (1982 Code § 9.118)
10-1-7: REPAIR AFTER DAMAGE:
Whenever any wooden building or structure, or any such addition to a building,
situated upon the following described areas within the city is damaged by fire,
decay or otherwise to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, the
building or structure, or part or addition to any building, shall not be
repaired or rebuilt unless the outer walls are constructed of brick, stone or
other noncombustible material not less than four inches (4") thick and the roof
covered with noncombustible materials:
   A.   Block 44 of Dawson;
   B.   West one-half of blocks 52 and 60 of Dawson;
   C.   East one-half of blocks 43, 51 and 59 of Dawson;
   D.   East one-half of block 3 of the First Addition to Dawson; and
   E.   West one-half of block 4 of the First Addition to Dawson. (1982 Code §
9.119)
10-1-8: NONCONFORMING BUILDING:
If any building or structure, or any part of an addition to any building is
placed, erected, repaired or altered contrary to the requirements prescribed in
this chapter, and if the owner, after notice, fails to correct the violation,
the council upon notice and hearing may cause the building, structure, part or
addition to be razed and removed, or the council may cause to be made at the
owner's expense such repairs and modifications as will make the building,
structure, part or addition to be in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. (1982 Code § 9.120)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Building Permit Required
10-2-2: Application
10-2-3: Issuance; Filing Fees
10-2-4: Zoning Regulations
10-2-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
No building shall be erected or structurally altered, nor shall any building or
addition thereto be moved into and placed in the city until and unless a
building permit therefor shall have been issued. (1982 Code § 9.211)
10-2-2: APPLICATION:
Application for a building permit shall be made by the owner of the premises on
which the building is to be erected, altered or placed, and shall state the
legal description of the premises so to be improved, the type of construction,
the approximate outside dimensions of the building or alteration, the location
on the premises including distances from the respective boundaries of the
premises, the proposed use of the structure, and the name of the person or
firm, if any, employed to construct or place the improvement on the premises.
(1982 Code § 9.212)
10-2-3: ISSUANCE; FILING FEE:
The application may be made on blanks furnished by the clerk, and shall be
filed with the clerk, who shall charge and receive a fee of two dollars ($2.00)
for filing it. The clerk shall present the application to the council for
consideration at its next regular meeting, and upon approval by the council
shall issue the permit forthwith. (1982 Code § 9.213)
10-2-4: ZONING REGULATIONS:
This title shall not be interpreted to alter or amend any zoning regulation of
the city. (1982 Code § 9.214)
CHAPTER 3
MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL CAMPING AREAS 1
SECTION:
10-3-1: Definition
10-3-2: Building Permit Required
10-3-3: Investigation
10-3-4: General Restriction
10-3-5: Permanent Residence
10-3-6: Temporary Residence
10-3-7: Use At Construction Projects
10-3-8: Parking At Residential Premises
10-3-9: Emergency And Temporary Parking
10-3-10: Sanitary And Water Facilities
10-3-11: Discharge Of Wastewater
10-3-12: Dealers
10-3-13: Operation Of Parks And Camping Areas
10-3-14: Manufactured Homes And Mobile Homes Requirements
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  13-1-10 of this code.
10-3-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used in this chapter which are
defined in Minnesota Statutes Annotated sections 327.14 through 327.28 shall
have the meaning given to them there. In addition, the following term not
defined there shall have the meaning given to it as follows:
SMALL RECREATIONAL CAMPING AREA: Any area accommodating two (2) or more units
used for recreational camping purposes and which would be defined under
Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 327.14, subdivision 8, as a recreational
camping area but for accommodating fewer units than the minimum number of units
set forth in that law for definition as a recreational camping area. (1982 Code
§ 9.611)
10-3-2: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall establish a mobile home park,
recreational camping area or small recreational camping area within the city,
or add to the number of sites in such a park or area, nor shall any person park
a mobile home outside a mobile home park for temporary or permanent use as a
residence, without obtaining a building permit to do so pursuant to chapter 2
of this title.
   B.   Mobile Home: In the case of a mobile home, the person shall give the
name, date of birth, address and occupation of each occupant of the mobile
home, and the length of time the mobile home will remain at the location at
which it is to be parked.
   C.   Mobile Home Park; Recreational Camping Area: In the case of a mobile
home park or recreational camping area, the applicant shall furnish a copy of
the actual or proposed application for a state license.
   D.   Small Recreational Camping Area: In the case of a small recreational
camping area, the applicant shall furnish the same information that would
otherwise be required by an applicant for a recreational camping area. (1982
Code § 9.612)
10-3-3: INVESTIGATION:
Upon filing of a building permit application pursuant to section
10-3-2 of this chapter, the chief of police, or such other official as the city
council may designate, shall promptly inspect the park, area or mobile home;
verify the truth of the information contained in the application; and verify
that all health, sanitation and safety requirements will be met and that all
other requirements of law, agency regulation and this code will be complied
with. (1982 Code § 9.613)
10-3-4: GENERAL RESTRICTION:
No person shall park or place for occupancy a mobile home within the city
outside a licensed mobile home park, nor shall any person park a recreational
camping vehicle within the city outside a licensed recreational camping area or
duly established small recreational camping area except as is allowed in this
chapter. (1982 Code § 9.621)
10-3-5: PERMANENT RESIDENCE:
No special permit in accord with a nonconforming use shall be issued by the
city council, in accordance with the zoning ordinances of the city, for the
placement of a mobile home on any lot that has been zoned in a residential or
multiple dwelling district. However, notwithstanding the previous sentence, a
special permit shall be issued for the placement of a mobile home within the
following areas:
   A.   Block 64 of the original townsite of the city; and
   B.   Blocks 1, 2 and 3 of the Park Heights addition of the city. (Ord. 211,
9-4-1990)
10-3-6: TEMPORARY RESIDENCE:
A mobile home may be occupied as a temporary residence by any person in the
process of erecting or altering a permanent residence which will be occupied by
the occupant of the mobile home, but only if placed upon the lot or parcel upon
which the permanent residence is being constructed or altered and only for such
time, not to exceed one year, as is reasonably necessary until the permanent
residence is ready for occupancy. (1982 Code § 9.623)
10-3-7: USE AT CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS:
A mobile home or recreational camping vehicle may be used upon premises
associated with a construction project where it is used by the person doing the
construction for office and other nonresidential business purposes related to
the construction project during the time that construction is actually
underway. (1982 Code § 9.624)
10-3-8: PARKING AT RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
   A.   Permitted Parking: One mobile home or recreational camping vehicle may
be parked in an accessory garage or in a rear yard on the residential premises
of its owner.
   B.   Living Quarters: No living quarters shall be maintained in or any
business conducted from the mobile home or recreational camping vehicle.
   C.   Visitors: In addition, one such unit may be parked and occupied by its
owner for up to three (3) days while actually visiting the person occupying the
residence. (1982 Code § 9.625)
10-3-9: EMERGENCY AND TEMPORARY PARKING:
A mobile home or recreational camping vehicle may be parked for up to twenty
four (24) hours in an emergency or while in transit from, through, or into the
city on the private property of the owner, on suitable and safe commercial or
industrial property, or along any street or alley, subject to any laws,
regulations or provisions of this code respecting parking or stopping along the
street or alley. (1982 Code § 9.627)
10-3-10: SANITARY AND WATER FACILITIES:
No person shall occupy a mobile home as a residence, or permit it to be so
occupied on land owned by him, unless there is available during twenty four
(24) hours of each day adequate sanitary and water facilities for the mobile
home. (1982 Code § 9.631)
10-3-11: DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER:
No person shall discharge wastewater from sinks, showers or other fixtures of
any mobile home or recreational camping vehicle upon any street, alley or lot
in the city. (1982 Code § 9.632)
10-3-12: DEALERS:
Any person dealing in the buying or selling of mobile homes or recreational
camping vehicles may park or store unoccupied mobile homes or recreational
camping vehicles on land zoned to permit automobile sales. (1982 Code § 9.626)
10-3-13: OPERATION OF PARKS AND CAMPING AREAS:
A mobile home park, recreational camping area or small recreational camping
area shall at all times be operated in compliance with all requirements of law,
agency regulations and this code. Insofar as they may be made applicable, a
small recreational area shall also at all times be operated in compliance with
all health, sanitary and safety laws and regulations which apply to
recreational areas but would not otherwise apply to small recreational areas,
except that no state license and caretaker shall be required. (1982 Code §
9.633)
10-3-14: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MOBILE HOMES REQUIREMENTS:
A manufactured home is considered a mobile home under this section and is a
structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode,
is eight feet (8') or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length,
or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with plumbing, heating and air conditioning and electrical systems contained
therein, and which meets all the requirements established under Minnesota
statutes section 327.31, the manufactured home building code, as it may be
amended from time to time. Only manufactured homes which comply with the
manufactured home building code established by Minnesota statutes section
327.31, as it may be amended from time to time, may be located in and used as a
dwelling within the city. A mobile home, manufactured home, house trailer or
other mobile dwelling which does not comply with the manufactured home building
code and which is used as a residence after the date of the adoption of this
code is a nonconforming use as defined by Minnesota statutes section 462.357,
subdivision 1e, as it may be amended from time to time, and this nonconforming
use may be continued, including through repair, maintenance, replacement,
restoration or improvement but if the nonconformity or occupancy is
discontinued for a period of more than one year, or the nonconforming use is
destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than fifty percent
(50%) of its market value and no building permit is applied for within one
hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is damaged, any subsequent use
or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy.
(Ord. 307, 10-1-2013)
CHAPTER 4
FENCES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Definitions
10-4-2: Permit Required
10-4-3: Fee
10-4-4: Building Code Application
10-4-5: Construction
10-4-6: Chainlink
10-4-7: Front And Side Yard Fences
10-4-8: Back Yard Fences
10-4-9: Property Line Fence
10-4-10: Variance
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the
meanings given to them:
DEVELOPED AREA: Any residential platted development.
ENCLOSURE: Any structure of lumber, building blocks or similar materials,
constructed at a value of less than the minimum for which a building permit is
required, and intended to provide shelter.
FENCE: Any structure, lumber, building blocks, wire or similar materials placed
in a fashion which is intended to impede free passage from the fenced area to
the outside area or from the outside area into a fenced area. The fence may be
on or near a property line. (Ord. 202, 12-1-1987)
10-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Building Permit: It shall be necessary for all fence construction in
the city to have the owner or his contractor obtain a building permit before
erecting a fence or enclosure. Fences that comply with this chapter only
require the city manager's approval.
   B.   Nonconforming Fences: All those fences which are existing on December
9, 1987, are permitted even though they may not comply with this chapter;
however, any major repair to existing fences shall conform to this chapter.
(Ord. 202, 12-1-1987)
10-4-3: FEE:
The application fee for a fencing or enclosure permit is fixed by chapter 2 of
this title and will cover the cost of supplying the fence builder with
information as to what is legally required for fencing, what the maximum
allowable height is and types of materials which are allowable and will cover
the costs of explaining construction procedures only. The fee will not include
the cost of finding or locating property lines or corners or providing
instructions on how to properly construct a fence. (Ord. 202, 12-1-1987)
10-4-4: BUILDING CODE APPLICATION:
All enclosures constructed in developed areas must conform with all setback
requirements for permanent structures. All enclosures which are intended to
remain more than ninety (90) days must be constructed in accordance with the
building code. (Ord. 202, 12-1-1987)
10-4-5: CONSTRUCTION:
All fencing will be constructed straight, true and plumb and will consist of
chainlink fencing and/or timber only in the front and side yard setback area.
Such material as wire mesh, hog wire fencing, straight wire fencing or barbed
wire fencing will not be allowed. (Ord. 202, 12-1-1987)
10-4-6: CHAINLINK:
   A.   Allowed: All those fences which are constructed of chainlink wire
design or very similar design will be allowed throughout the property in a
developed area.
   B.   Front And Side Yard: Fences in the front yard setback area and corner
lot side yard setback area shall be no higher than forty two inches (42") plus
two (2) additional inches for clearance at the ground line.
   C.   Other Areas: All fences constructed in other areas than the front yard
and corner lot side yard clearance areas may be no more than seven feet (7') in
height. (Ord. 202, 12-1-1987)
10-4-7: FRONT AND SIDE YARD FENCES:
All fences in the front and side yard clearance areas for corner lots shall be
chainlink or wood fencing. Wood fencing shall be set back thirty feet (30')
from the block corner along each property line. If hedges or plantings are used
in lieu of fencing on the property line within thirty feet (30') of the block
corner, such hedges or plantings shall be no higher than thirty six inches
(36") above the curb line or sidewalk line. (Ord. 202, 12-1-1987)
10-4-8: BACK YARD FENCES:
   A.   Maximum Height: All fencing for the remainder of the yard in the area
other than setback area will have a maximum height of seven feet (7') plus two
inches (2") of clearance at the ground.
   B.   Materials: Fencing in this area may be chainlink, hog wire, and timber
but no barbed wire fencing is to be used in the developed area.
   C.   Construction: All fencing shall be constructed so that the exterior or
outer face of the fencing will face to the outside or away from the property
being fenced. This means that the fence posts, bracing and similar material
will be located on the inside or the owner's side of the fence. (Ord. 202, 12-
1-1987)
10-4-9: PROPERTY LINE FENCE:
Fences may be located on the property line of any reasonable distance from the
property line. The neighbor has the authority to remove the fence or require
the owner to immediately remove a fence if such fence is located on neighboring
property. If there is a dispute as to where the actual property corners are,
hearsay or measured distance by individuals other than registered surveyors
will not be cause to have a fence removed. (Ord. 202, 12-1-1987)
10-4-10: VARIANCE:
If a variance from the above requirements is requested, the variance shall be
made in accordance with the zoning variance procedures, and fees for this
variance will be in accordance with the zoning variance fee. (Ord. 202, 12-1-
1987)
CHAPTER 5
MAILBOXES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Intent
10-5-2: Grouping Mailboxes
10-5-3: Mailbox Location Plan
10-5-4: Handicapped Persons
10-5-5: Cul-De-Sacs
10-5-6: New Developments
10-5-7: All Other Residences And Businesses
10-5-8: Maintenance
10-5-9: Penalty
10-5-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to reduce the number of mailboxes located on city
streets. The reason for this is to make snow removal a more efficient process
and to enhance the looks of the city streets. (Ord. 214, 10-1-1991)
10-5-2: GROUPING MAILBOXES:
   A.   Group Size: All mailboxes shall be clustered in groups of not more than
six (6). Groups of three (3) mailboxes will be allowed only where three (3) or
less possible deliveries exist, with approval of the postmaster.
   B.   Mailbox Size: The approved size of these mailboxes shall be nineteen
inches long, six and one-half inches wide and nine inches high (19" x 61/2" x
9").
   C.   Poles: Mailboxes shall be erected upon a standardized pole to the
specification of U.S. postal service and MNDOT. (Ord. 215, 1-7-1992)
10-5-3: MAILBOX LOCATION PLAN:
The postmaster, city manager and head of city maintenance shall produce a
mailbox location plan for the city and designate group mailbox locations.
Residents replacing existing mailboxes will check at city hall for the new
group box locations. All locations are placed upon final approval of the
postmaster. (Ord. 215, 1-7-1992)
10-5-4: HANDICAPPED PERSONS:
Any handicapped or elderly person who would have difficulty using a group box
location shall, upon notification of handicap or physical condition to the city
clerk, municipal building, be dealt with on an individual basis by the
postmaster. This mail delivery is specific to the individual, not the property.
(Ord. 215, 1-7-1992)
10-5-5: CUL-DE-SACS:
Group mailbox stands shall not be located in any cul-de-sac. Box locations will
be allowed on streets entering and leaving the cul-de-sac. (Ord. 214, 10-1-
1991)
10-5-6: NEW DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Installation: The city maintenance department shall install mailbox
platforms in all new developments after the streets are complete.
   B.   Costs: All costs shall be payable immediately to the city clerk's
office.
   C.   Per Dwelling Unit Fee:
      1.   Determination Of Fee: A per unit dwelling unit fee will be
recommended as determined necessary by the head of city maintenance, to the
city council, who shall set the per dwelling unit fee in the current fee
structure.
      2.   Payment: The per unit dwelling fee shall be charged for the
installation of mailboxes and stands in new developments. Such charge shall be
added to the building permit at the time of issue.
      3.   Reimbursement: The city maintenance department budget shall be
directly reimbursed to cover costs involved. (Ord. 214, 10-1-1991)
10-5-7: ALL OTHER RESIDENCES AND BUSINESSES:
Approved mailbox platforms and poles shall be available from the city
maintenance department at a cost to cover material and labor immediately
payable to the city clerk. (Ord. 214, 10-1-1991)
10-5-8: MAINTENANCE:
Maintenance of the mailbox platforms shall be the responsibility of the
residents served. (Ord. 214, 10-1-1991)
10-5-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
as provided in the general penalty in subsection 1-4-1B of this code, plus the
cost of prosecution in the case. (Ord. 214, 10-1-1991; amd. 2005 Code)
CHAPTER 6
BLIGHT PREVENTION
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose
10-6-2: Causes Of Blight Or Blighting Factors
10-6-3: Exterior Property Areas; Vacant Properties
10-6-4: Exterior Of Structures
10-6-5: Interior Areas Of Structures, Including Residential Dwellings
10-6-6: Vacated Structures And Vacant Properties
10-6-7: Fuel Wood Storage
10-6-8: Inspection Officer And Enforcement Officer
10-6-9: Inspection Of Structures, Vacant Properties, Generally
10-6-10: Compliance Order (Citation)
10-6-11: Variance And Appeals
10-6-12: Penalty
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a uniform and equitable method
of eliminating blight in the city. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-2: CAUSES OF BLIGHT OR BLIGHTING FACTORS:
It is hereby determined that the uses, structures, activities, causes of blight
or blighting factors described herein, if allowed to exist, will tend to result
in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods or commercial business sites so as to
be harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. The purpose of this
chapter is to protect the character and stability of the properties within the
city and to avoid blight and blighted conditions. The "fee title" owner,
occupant or agent shall comply with the regulation contained herein. (Ord.
266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-3: EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS; VACANT PROPERTIES:
   A.   Sanitation: All exterior property areas and vacant areas shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, safe and free from any hazard or
dangerous condition, and free from any accumulation of refuse or garbage.
   B.   Noxious Weeds And Pests: All properties shall be free from noxious
weeds and pests. All exterior property areas and vacant areas shall be kept
free from species of weeds or plant growth, rodents, vermin, or other pests,
which are noxious or detrimental to the public health. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-4: EXTERIOR OF STRUCTURES:
   A.   The exterior of all structures and accessory structures including
detached garages shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and
repair.
   B.   Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting
boards or timbers, falling or loose stucco or substantial amount of peeling
paint.
   C.   All doors and windows shall be maintained in good repair, fit
reasonably well within their frames, and be free of open breaks or holes. (Ord.
266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-5: INTERIOR AREAS OF STRUCTURES, INCLUDING RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS:
   A.   The interior of every structure shall be maintained in clean and
sanitary conditions, free of accumulations of garbage or refuse.
   B.   The interior of every structure shall be maintained free from
infestation of noxious insects, rodents, and other pests.
   C.   All plumbing systems shall be properly installed, connected, and
maintained in good working order, and must be kept free from obstructions,
leaks, and defects. Plumbing systems must conform to the requirements for
public water and sanitary sewer systems.
   D.   The storage of excessive or unreasonable amounts of hazardous flammable
liquids shall be prohibited in areas not zoned for such use. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-
2007)
10-6-6: VACATED STRUCTURES AND VACANT PROPERTIES:
The "fee title" owner of any dwelling which is unfit for human habitation, as
determined by the enforcement officer in good faith, and the owner of any
structure which has been vacant for a period of sixty (60) days or more, shall
make same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety,
and welfare of the public, and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any such
structure open at the doors and windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a
hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and a public nuisance
within the meaning of this chapter. The owner of vacant lands shall make said
lands safe and secure by barricading or fencing the property or the like, or by
placing said lands in their natural unimproved condition and removing all
dangerous conditions. Upon failure of the owner to comply, the city will have
such structure or vacant property and lands made safe and secure or remove the
dangerous conditions, and assess the cost to the "fee title" owner by
certifying such cost to the county auditor as a special assessment against the
specific offending property. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-7: FUEL WOOD STORAGE:
   A.   Outside fuel wood shall not be stored in the front yard. In addition,
on a corner lot, outside fuel wood shall not be stored on the side yard and
back yard abutting a street or avenue unless such fuel wood is set back from
the street or avenue the distance that the house or garage is set back from the
street.
   B.   Fuel wood shall not encroach upon rights of way, other landowners'
property or sidewalks.
   C.   Outside fuel wood piles shall not exceed six feet (6') in height due to
safety.
   D.   Outside fuel wood piles shall be neat in appearance, free from
unreasonable infestation of rodents or other pests, and shall be securely piled
in a safe manner so as to prevent falling over. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-8: INSPECTION OFFICER AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
   A.   The inspection officer includes police officers, state fire marshal
personnel, licensed building inspectors, and city officials, or their designee,
and are hereby authorized to make inspections reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   The city law enforcement/police department is hereby appointed as the
enforcement officer in cooperation with the city attorney and it is the
enforcement officer's duty to enforce an ordinance or statute, made pursuant to
this section, issue citations whenever the officer has probable cause to
believe the person cited has committed a misdemeanor which the officer has the
duty to enforce, and issue a notice to appear and release such person on his or
her written promise to appear in court. The officer shall deliver executed
citations or notices to the city attorney for filing with the court after the
city attorney has reviewed for legal sufficiency. A copy of the notice will
also be placed on file in the city clerk's office.
   C.   The police department for the city is hereby designated the citation
authority by the city council. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-9: INSPECTION OF STRUCTURES, VACANT PROPERTIES, GENERALLY:
The inspection officer shall be authorized to make or cause to be made
inspections to determine the condition of structures and premises and vacant
properties and lands in order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of
the public. The inspection officer shall, with the permission of the "fee
title" owner, occupant, operator or agent, be authorized to inspect any vacant
areas and the exterior areas of any premises, and the interior areas of
structures at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing the duties
under this chapter. If the owner, operator, or person in possession of the
structure shall refuse to consent to the inspection, and there is probable
cause to believe that a violation exists on the premises, a search warrant may
be obtained. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-10: COMPLIANCE ORDER (CITATION):
Whenever the enforcement officer is notified that any structure, premises or
lands fail to meet the provisions of this chapter, the enforcement officer will
issue a compliance order setting forth the violations of this chapter and
ordering the "fee title" owner, occupant, operator, or agent to correct such
violations. The compliance order shall:
   A.   Be in writing;
   B.   Describe the location (street address or legal address) and nature of
the violations of this chapter;
   C.   Establish a time for the correction of such violation, which shall be
at least ten (10) days;
   D.   Notify of ability to appeal to the city council;
   E.   Be served upon the violator, the "fee title" owner, occupant, operator
or agent. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the violator
if a copy thereof is:
      1.   Served upon the "fee title" owner, occupant, operator or agent
personally; or
      2.   Sent by registered or certified mail to that person's address or to
the property address. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-11: VARIANCE AND APPEALS:
Appeals of interpretation or request for a variance shall be made in writing to
the city council and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days
after receipt of the compliance order. Variances requested more than ten (10)
days after the receipt of the compliance order will not be heard by the city
council. Action by the city council is completely discretionary, and shall not
delay or prevent criminal prosecution or other enforcement actions, unless the
city council grants the appeal or grants the variance prior to the completion
of the enforcement activities. The city council may grant variances in
instances where strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship
because of circumstances unique to the individual party under consideration,
when it is demonstrated that such an action will be in keeping with the spirit
and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 266B, 6-6-2007)
10-6-12: PENALTY:
The enforcement officer shall enforce violations of any provision of this
chapter which shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is
allowed to exist shall constitute an offense after a reasonable time has been
allowed to effect compliance. The enforcement officer may proceed under the
city's administrative fee schedule for any violation of this chapter. (Ord.
266B, 6-6-2007)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-1-0: Urban And Rural Service Districts
11-1-1: Districts Established
11-1-2: Conforming Uses
11-1-3: Nonconforming Uses
11-1-4: Lot Area Requirements
11-1-5: Setback Requirements; Blocks
11-1-6: Special Permits
11-1-7: Building Inspector
11-1-8: Zoning Board Of Appeals
11-1-9: Amendments
11-1-10: Zoning Permits, Regulations And Fees
11-1-11: Penalty
11-1-0: URBAN AND RURAL SERVICE DISTRICTS:
   A.   Establishment Of Tax Districts: Pursuant to Minnesota statute 272.67,
the city of Dawson hereby divides the area within its corporate limits into an
urban service district and a rural service district. Said districts shall be
constituted as separate taxing districts for the purpose of all municipal
property taxes, except those levied for the payment of bonds, and judgments and
interest thereon.
   B.   Criteria/Definitions:
      1.   The urban service district shall include all properties located
within the corporate limits of the city of Dawson, except those properties
which are included in a rural service district.
      2.   The rural service district shall include only unplatted lands, which
need not be contiguous to one another, and which, in the judgment of the city
council at the time of the adoption of the ordinance, are rural in character,
and are not developed for commercial, industrial, or urban residential
purposes, and, for these reasons, are not benefited to the same degree as other
lands located within the limits of the city of Dawson and financed by general
taxation.
The lands described on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein are
hereby included in the rural service district.
   C.   Zoning District Designation: The Dawson city zoning ordinance is hereby
amended by changing the district map and adding to the zoning ordinance a new
zoning district known as RS, rural service district.
In rural service districts, the following regulations shall apply, unless
otherwise provided herein:
      1.   The property must be rural in character.
      2.   The property must not be developed, or used, for commercial,
industrial, or residential purposes. (Ord. 266, 4-3-2007)
      3.   (Rep. by Ord. 297, 1-17-2012)
      4.   The property must be unused and seeded, or used for agricultural
purposes only.
For purposes of this district, "agricultural purposes" shall include only the
following uses:
Agricultural uses, including farm crops, and farm and agricultural related
buildings and structures (but not residential dwellings), subject to Minnesota
pollution control standards, but not including feedlots, manure spreading,
livestock, or other commercial or industrial operations.
      5.   Farm and agriculture related buildings and structures existing (but
no residential dwellings) at the time a property is first included in the rural
service district may continue to be utilized for agricultural purposes.
Existing buildings and structures may be repaired or replaced, if destroyed by
wind or fire, but may not be expanded. No permit shall be granted to construct
any new or additional buildings or structures.
      6.   The following uses may be permitted by conditional use permit:
Landscape nurseries or forestlands.
Privately owned recreational uses, such as golf courses, golf driving ranges,
and similar outdoor recreational activities which require relatively large
amounts of land.
   D.   Change In Use Of Property In RS District: Whenever application is made
for a permit for construction of a commercial, industrial, or residential
building, or improvement, or whenever such improvement or building is commenced
without a permit, the Dawson city council shall make and enter an order for
resolution transferring such parcel, or part thereof, from the rural service
district to the urban service district.
Any application for platting of the property shall also permit the governing
body of the city of Dawson to make and enter an order by resolution
transferring such parcel from the rural service district to the urban service
district.
   E.   Tax Ratio: In the judgment of the Dawson city council, the ratio which
exists between the benefits resulting from tax supported municipal service to
parcels in the rural service district to parcels in the urban service district
is equal to property taxes levied within Riverside township, plus any municipal
property taxes levied for payment of bonds, and judgments, and interest
thereon.
The property tax rate levied upon property in a rural service district shall be
equal to the levy rate imposed for properties in Riverside township, except
those levied for the payment of bonds, judgments and interest thereon.
   F.   Annexed Land: Any property which is annexed to the city of Dawson after
the adoption hereof, and which is included in the rural service district as
part of the annexation order, shall be reviewed by the city council if the
property is not developed for a period of five (5) years after annexation to
determine whether inclusion in the rural service district is still appropriate.
The Dawson city council may review the use of the property at any sooner time.
By amendment of this section, such parcel shall be included in the urban
service district if any area adjacent thereto is determined by the city council
to be substantially developed as urban property.
   G.   Required City Services:
      1.   The city of Dawson shall not provide any city water, storm sewer,
sanitary sewer, or other utility service to any property located in the rural
service district.
      2.   No other city service beyond that normally provided by Riverside
township will be provided by the city in a rural service district. (Ord. 266,
4-3-2007)
11-1-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Use Districts: For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided
into the following use districts:
      Residential
      Multiple dwelling
      Commercial
      Light industrial
      Heavy industrial
   B.   Boundaries: The boundaries, extent and area of each respective district
are particularly described in this subsection. Use districts of the city are
hereby designated as hereinafter described; provided, that the city council, at
any regular meeting held within six (6) months after the adoption of this
chapter, may, by resolution adopted by the vote of a majority of the city
council, make such changes in designation and description as they deem
necessary:
      1.   Residential District: All that part of the city of Dawson and the
respective additions thereto not included with the designations hereinafter set
forth in this subsection. (1982 Code § 9.311; amd. Ord. 225B, 12-5-1995)
      2.   Multiple Dwelling District: Blocks 41, 42, 49, 50, 53, 57 and 58,
blocks 14 to 22 inclusive of Kerwin's addition, all of Hoidale's first
addition, all of Hoidale's second addition, lot 1 and the north 30 feet of lot
2, block 1, Ronning's addition and all of block 4, American Legion Memorial
addition, all of the city of Dawson.
(Ord. 315, 5-17-2016)
      3.   Commercial District: Blocks 43, 51, 59 and 60, and the west 1/2 of
block 52 of the city of Dawson, and blocks 3, 4, 8, 12, 16 and the east 1/2 of
blocks 7, 11, and 15 of first addition to Dawson, and the west 1/2 of block 5
and the west 1/2 of block 7, and lots 10, 11, and 12 in block 7 of Vold's first
addition to Dawson, all of block two (2), American Legal Memorial addition,
city of Dawson, and that part of outlot 9 of Hoidale's 2nd addition to Dawson,
described by metes and bounds as follows, to- wit: commencing at the point of
the intersection of the south line of Locust Street, as now laid out and
established, and the west line of said outlot nine (9), thence south on and
along the said west line a distance of three hundred (300) feet, thence east on
a line parallel with the south line of said Locust Street a distance of one
hundred forty (140) feet, thence north on a line parallel with the said west
line of outlot nine (9) a distance of three hundred (300) feet to the south
line of Locust Street, thence west on and along the south line of Locust Street
a distance of one hundred forty (140) feet to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 272, 11-5-2008)
      4.   Industrial District - Heavy, Industrial District - Light: Blocks 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of Kerwin's addition to Dawson, and blocks 17, 18, 25, 26,
27, except lots 12 to 20, 28 except lots 1 to 9 inclusive and lots 13 to 21
inclusive, 34, 36, 44, 45, 54, 55, 56, 61, 62, 63, 64 and lots 1 to 10
inclusive in block 43 and the east 1/2 of block 52 of the city of Dawson.
(1982 Code § 9.311; amd. Ord. 225B, 12-5-1995)
11-1-2: CONFORMING USES:
   A.   Residential District: In the residential district, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, no building or premises shall be used and no building
shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered except for one or more of
the following uses:
      1.   One- or two-family private dwellings of two and one-half (21/2)
stories or less, and their accessory buildings.
      2.   Farming or truck gardening; plant nurseries or greenhouse.
      3.   Recreational or community buildings which are publicly owned and
operated.
      4.   Parks and playgrounds; golf courses or clubs of not less than forty
(40) acres.
      5.   Churches, libraries, museums, schools, memorial buildings, including
name plates and bulletin boards, provided these are placed in back of the
prescribed setback lines.
      6.   Temporary signs, not more than six feet (6') square in area,
pertaining to the leasing or sale of premises; such signs to be placed in back
of the prescribed setback lines.
Any land which may be added to the city in the future shall be assigned to the
use district designated in the ordinance or order annexing it or accepting its
addition to the city. (1982 Code § 9.312)
   B.   Multiple-Dwelling District: In the multiple-dwelling district, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, no building or premises shall be used, and
no building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered except for one
or more of the following uses:
      1.   All uses permitted in subsection A of this section.
      2.   Apartments and flats; also hotels which do not have commercial
enterprises located in the building except those used solely by guests.
      3.   Hospitals and clinics; clubs, fraternities and lodges; boarding and
lodging houses. (1982 Code § 9.313)
   C.   Commercial District: In the commercial district, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered except for one or
more of the following uses:
      1.   In the east half of blocks 43, 51, and 59 and the west half of block
44, 52, and 60, Dawson, street levels only of buildings or premises used in
conforming to this subsection as follows:
         a.   All uses permitted in subsections A and B of this section.
         b.   Retail commercial merchandising establishments such as grocery
stores, dry goods and department stores, drugstores, bakeries, candy and ice
cream shops, jewelry stores and other similar enterprises.
         c.   Public garages, gasoline filling stations, battery service
stations, tire service stations.
         d.   Licensed places of amusement, restaurants, offices, financial
institutions, telephone and telegraph businesses, newspaper or job printing,
bookbinding, dressmaking shops, shoe repairing or dyeing shops.
         e.   Carpenter, furniture repairing or upholstery shop, electrical,
metal working, tinsmithing, plumbing, water, gas or steam fitting shop, paint
or paperhanging shop.
         f.   Mortuaries and funeral homes, but only by special permit of the
city council.
         g.   Any uses of the same general character as the uses hereinbefore
specifically permitted, provided such business or use is not obnoxious by
reason of the emission of dust, odor, gas, smoke, or noise, or by reason of
being an excessive fire hazard. (1982 Code § 9.314; amd. Ord. 224, 9-5-1995)
         h.   Sexually oriented businesses or adult uses. (Ord. 228, 5-6-1997)
      2.   In the remainder of the commercial district, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered except for one or
more of the following uses:
         a.   All uses permitted in subsections A and B of this section.
         b.   Retail commercial merchandising establishments such as grocery
stores, dry goods and department stores, drugstores, bakeries, candy and ice
cream shops, jewelry stores and other similar enterprises.
         c.   Public garages, gasoline filling stations, battery service
stations, tire service stations. (Ord. 224, 9-5-1995)
         d.   Licensed places of amusement, restaurants, offices, financial
institutions, telephone and telegraph businesses, newspaper or job printing,
bookbinding, dressmaking shops, shoe repairing, dyeing shops or kennels. (Ord.
282, 6-1-2010)
         e.   Carpenter, furniture repairing or upholstery shop, electrical,
metal working, tinsmithing, plumbing, water, gas or steam fitting shop, paint
or paperhanging shop.
         f.   Mortuaries and funeral homes, but only by special permit of the
city council.
         g.   Any uses of the same general character as the uses hereinbefore
specifically permitted, provided such business or use is not obnoxious by
reason of the emission of dust, odor, gas, smoke, or noise, or by reason of
being an excessive fire hazard. (Ord. 224, 9-5-1995)
   D.   Industrial District: In the industrial district, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered except for one or
more of the following uses:
      1.   All uses permitted in subsections A, B and C of this section.
      2.   Creameries, milk distributing stations, bottling works, laundries.
      3.   Store houses, express and hauling office or station, ice plants,
coal or lumber sales or storage yards, blacksmith shop, grain elevators and
storage warehouses, railyards and roundhouses.
      4.   Masonry and stone cutting establishments, canning factories.
      5.   Gasoline and oil bulk stations and distributing plants.
      6.   Contractor plants and accessory storage yards, but this shall not be
so construed as to permit automobile or general junk yards.
      7.   Any use whatsoever which is not in conflict with any ordinance of
the city; provided, that with the exception of the uses specifically permitted
in subsections D1 through D6, inclusive, of this section, all uses in the
industrial district must be by special permit of the city council; provided
further, that before any special permit may be issued the proposed use shall be
approved by the board of zoning appeals. (1982 Code § 9.315)
11-1-3: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Existing Uses:
      1.   Continued Use: The lawful use of a building or premises existing at
the time that this chapter takes effect may be continued, although such use
does not conform to the provisions hereof.
      2.   Extension Of Use: Such use may be extended through the building,
provided no structural alterations are made therein, other than those required
by ordinance or law.
      3.   Discontinuance Of Use:
         a.   Substantial Building: If such nonconforming use consists of a
substantial building and is discontinued for one year or more, any future use
of the building must be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
         b.   No Substantial Building: However, if any nonconforming use on
land on which there is no substantial building is discontinued, for any length
of time, any future use of the land must be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
   B.   Billboards; Signs: No billboards or signs shall be erected in the
residential district or in the multiple dwelling district. Billboards and signs
in other districts shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of
the building code. This provision shall apply to the signs attached to, or
painted on, the walls or roofs of buildings.
   C.   Filling Station, Public Garage, Gasoline Distributing Station: No
filling station, public garage, or gasoline distributing station shall be
located within three hundred feet (300') of a school, church, hospital or other
public meeting place having a seating capacity of more than fifty (50) persons.
   D.   Undersized Lot: No building shall be erected or altered for use as a
dwelling on a lot having less than fifty feet (50') frontage on a street. This
provision shall not be so construed as to prohibit the owner of a single lot of
less than fifty feet (50') width from building thereon; provided, that the lot
is of record as being owned by him, on or before the date of the passage
hereof; and provided further, that the early intent to build a home thereon is
satisfactorily demonstrated to the board of zoning appeals.
   E.   Visibility At Intersections:
      1.   Residential District; Multiple-Dwelling District: For the purpose of
ensuring reasonable visibility in the residential and multiple dwelling
districts, it is provided that no structure may be erected or any vegetation
maintained other than trees trimmed to a height of eight feet (8') above curb
level, and shrubs and hedges trimmed below a height of three feet (3') above
curb level, for a distance of forty feet (40') from the intersection of the
property lines of the two (2) streets.
      2.   Commercial District: For the purpose of ensuring reasonable
visibility in the commercial district, it is provided that no corner building
shall project past a line drawn between two (2) points, one point being ten
feet (10') along the property line from the intersection of the two (2)
property lines on the corner and the other point ten feet (10') from said
intersection, but at right angles to the line along which the first point was
measured.
   F.   Neighborhood Commercial Center: In the event that a neighborhood
commercial center is established in a residential area, the setback lines of
the adjoining residential district shall be extended through the commercial
center and any building constructed, therein shall observe these setback lines.
   G.   Damage Or Destruction; Restrictions On Rebuilding: Any building which
is partially damaged or destroyed by fire, earthquake, wind, water, or
explosion may be restored to its former use; provided, that no building which
does not conform to the requirements of the use district in which it is
located, and which is thus partially damaged or destroyed to the extent of
fifty percent (50%) or more, may be rebuilt or reconstructed. Estimate of the
extent of damage or destruction shall be made by the city council or its
appointed agents.
   H.   Farm Animals: Stables, chicken or other poultry yards or houses, cow
yards or lots, pig pens or sites, or other similar use of property which may be
objectionable to adjacent property owners because of unsanitary conditions,
odor, breeding of flies or vermin, or general nuisance, may be permitted in the
residential district or in the multiple dwelling district only after the owner
of the proposed use has secured the written consent of seventy five percent
(75%) of all of the property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed use; following this, the proposed use must be approved by the four-
fifths (4/5) vote of the board of zoning appeals and by a five- sixths (5/6)
vote of the city council.
   I.   Damaged Residential Dwelling Changed To Commercial: In residential
districts and multiple dwelling districts, no new construction of dwellings,
nor rebuilding or reconstruction of damaged or destroyed buildings, shall be
commenced until special permit shall have been issued therefor by the city
council, which shall be issued only after showing made that the design of such
building will harmonize reasonably with, and that the building will be of cost
or value reasonably comparable to, buildings then existent in the same block
and adjacent to such proposed building. (1982 Code § 9.316)
11-1-4: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Residential And Multiple Dwelling Districts: In the residential
district and the multiple dwelling district, every building designed for the
housing of one or two (2) families, not including accessory buildings, shall
provide a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. In the
case of all buildings housing more than two (2) families, a lot area must be
provided of not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per family. (1982
Code § 9.320)
   B.   Future Additions: In all future platted additions to the city, each
residence lot shall be at least seven thousand (7,000) square feet in area; all
streets shall be a least sixty feet (60') wide, and the city council may
require all thoroughfare streets to be not less than eighty feet (80') wide.
(1982 Code § 9.322(2))
11-1-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS; BLOCKS:
   A.   Front Yard:
      1.   Less Than Twenty Five Percent Built On: In a block in the
residential or multiple dwelling districts in which less than twenty five
percent (25%) of the total number of lots have permanent buildings erected upon
them, no building shall be erected which is set back from the front lot lines
less than a distance equal to thirty percent (30%) of the depth of the lot.
      2.   More Than Twenty Five Percent Built On: If more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the lots in a block are built upon, no building shall be
erected which is set back from the front lot line less than a distance which
shall be the average of the setback observed by the adjoining houses on either
side.
      3.   Definition: Reference to a "block" in this subsection shall be
construed to mean any one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets. (1982 Code § 9.317)
   B.   Rear Yard:
      1.   Buildings Less Than Two And One-Half Stories: In the residential and
multiple-dwelling districts, every building two and one-half (21/2) stories or
less in height shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty percent (20%) of
the depth of the lot.
      2.   Buildings Greater Than Two And One-Half Stories: Every building
greater than two and one-half (21/2) stories in height shall have a rear yard
of not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the depth of the lot.
      3.   Corner Lot: In the case of a corner lot, the above requirements
shall be construed to require a setback from the street lines on those sides of
such lot upon which adjoining buildings front or upon which lots have been
platted; provided, that the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to
less than sixty percent (60%) of the width of the lot. (1982 Code § 9.318)
   C.   Side Yards:
      1.   Buildings Less Than Two And One-Half Stories: In the residential and
multiple dwelling districts, every building two and one-half (21/2) stories or
less in height shall have two (2) side yards, one being not less than ten
percent (10%) of the lot width and the other being not less than fifteen
percent (15%) of the lot width.
      2.   Buildings More Than Two And One-Half Stories: Every building greater
than two and one-half (21/2) stories in height shall have two (2) side yards of
not less than twenty five feet (25') each.
      3.   Public And Semipublic Buildings: Notwithstanding subsections C1 and
C2 of this section, in the case of public and semipublic buildings such as
schools, churches, libraries, etc., in the residential and multiple dwelling
districts, such buildings shall have two (2) side yards of not less than twenty
five feet (25') each. (1982 Code § 9.319)
   D.   Unplatted Tracts: All buildings on masonry foundations hereafter
erected on unplatted tracts adjoining any platted part of the city shall
conform to the setback provisions by extending the setback lines of the
adjoining platted property. (1982 Code § 9.322)
11-1-6: SPECIAL PERMITS:
   A.   Petition: Petitions for special permits to allow the construction or
operation of any nonconforming use must be accompanied by the written consent
of the owners of at least seventy five percent (75%) of the real property
within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed nonconforming use.
   B.   Hearing; Notice: Upon the filing of an application for permit
accompanied by such written consent, the city clerk shall fix a date for
hearing thereon and shall cause notice thereof to be published in the official
paper of the city at least fifteen (15) days before the date of such hearing.
   C.   Recommendation Of Zoning Board Of Appeals: The city clerk shall cause
the application and consent to be presented to the board of zoning appeals for
recommendation and report to the city council prior to said hearing. (1982 Code
§ 9.321)
11-1-7: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to see that this chapter is
enforced through proper legal channels. The building inspector shall be
appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor. (1982 Code § 9.321)
11-1-8: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
   A.   Established: A board of zoning appeals is hereby established, vested
with such administrative authority as is hereinafter provided.
   B.   Membership:
      1.   Appointment; Term; Removal: The zoning board of appeals shall
consist of five (5) resident freeholders, who shall be appointed by the mayor
and approved by the city council at the first meeting following the regular
biennial city elections, for terms of two (2) years, subject to removal by the
city council by four- sixths (4/6) vote.
      2.   Compensation: The board shall serve without compensation.
   C.   Secretary: The city clerk shall act as secretary of the board, and
shall call meetings of the board on notice of twenty four (24) hours as often
as may be found to be necessary.
   D.   Powers And Duties: The duty of the board of zoning appeals shall be to
hear and decide appeals from any decision of the building inspector in carrying
out the terms of this chapter, and to hear all matters referred to it by the
city council arising out of this chapter. The board shall not have any
authority to change or amend this chapter; it shall act in a purely advisory
manner, making its recommendations in all matters referred to it, and
transmitting them to the city council for final action. In general, the board
shall hear and make recommendations on the following matters:
      1.   Permit for a temporary nonconforming building, such permit to be
issued for a reasonable variation of setback regulations when the strict
enforcement thereof will work unnecessary hardship.
      2.   Special permits to build, maintain or operate nonconforming uses as
set forth in section
11-1-3 of this chapter.
      3.   Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way that when
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, a reasonable modification or
variation in the application of the regulations established by this chapter may
be provided so that the spirit of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall
be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
   E.   Voting: A majority vote of the board of zoning appeals shall be
necessary to reverse any decision of an administrative officer of the city or
to decide in favor of an applicant. (1982 Code § 9.321)
11-1-9: AMENDMENTS:
This chapter may be changed, altered or amended only by a two- thirds (2/3)
vote of the city council. Ordinances proposing changes in limits of use
districts, or proposing changes in permissible conforming uses within
respective districts, shall not receive final passage until after a public
hearing before the city council to be held on notice to be given by the city
clerk by publication in the official paper of the city at least fifteen (15)
days before the date of hearing, and said notice shall clearly reflect and
submit the proposed changes. (1982 Code § 9.321)
11-1-10: ZONING PERMITS, REGULATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No building shall be erected or structurally altered,
nor shall any building or addition thereto be moved within or into the city
until and unless a zoning permit therefor shall have been issued as hereinafter
set forth. No permit authorizing the moving of such building or structure may
be granted unless the city building inspector and city manager determine that
the building or structure is in a state of good condition and repair.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a zoning permit shall be made
by the owner of the premises on which said building is to be erected, altered
or moved, and shall state the legal description of the premises to be improved,
the type of construction, the approximate outside dimensions of the building or
alteration, the location on the premises including distances from the
respective boundaries of the premises, the proposed use of the structure and
the name of the person employed to construct or place such improvement on the
premises.
   C.   Fees: Such application may be made on blanks furnished by the city
clerk, and shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall charge and receive
fees for the filing as follows:
Garage or shop                               $ 10.00
New single-family dwelling                   25.00
Commercial or multiple-family dwelling value
$25,000.00 or less                           25.00
25,001.00 to $50,000.00                      50.00
50,001.00 to 75,000.00                       75.00
75,001.00 or more                            100.00
Remodeling (changing dimensions of           10.00
outside structure)
Moving structure permit                      50.00
Fence permit                                 10.00
Additional inspections required by           10.00
building inspector, per inspection
 
   D.   Permit Issuance:
      1.   The city clerk shall present application to the city council for
approval of new construction at its next regular meeting, and upon approval by
the city council, shall issue the permit for new construction forthwith.
      2.   The city clerk shall present application for modifying the external
dimensions of an existing building to the city building inspector and city
manager for approval, and upon approval by the city building inspector and city
manager, shall issue the permit forthwith.
   E.   Conditions Of Permit: Permits require that construction commence within
ninety (90) days of issuance. All permits shall be for the duration of one year
from date of issuance. Any moving, remodeling, alteration or reconditioning of
any building or structure must be completed within such one year period.
   F.   Penalty: Any violation or failure to comply with any provision hereof
is a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 245, 8-7-2001)
11-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject, on conviction thereof, to a fine as provided in
the general penalty in subsection 1-4-1B of this code. (1982 Code § 9.322; amd.
2005 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND ADULT USES 1
SECTION:
11-2-1: Purpose And Intent
11-2-2: Definitions
11-2-3: General Provisions
11-2-4: Principal Uses
11-2-5: Accessory Uses
11-2-6: Nonconforming Uses
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 9 of this code.
11-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The regulation of this chapter has neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. It is not the intent nor effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is
the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses and adult
uses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens
of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to:
   A.   Prevent additional criminal activity within the city;
   B.   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse
effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
   C.   To locate sexually oriented businesses away from residential areas,
schools, churches and parks and playgrounds;
   D.   Prevent concentration of sexually oriented businesses within certain
areas of the city;
   E.   Prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. (Ord. 228, 5-6-
1997)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
ADULT USES: Any of the activities and businesses described below constitute
sexually oriented businesses which are subject to the regulations of this code
and more specifically subsection 11-1-2C1h of this title:
Adult Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the
service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or
nontransparent to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore: A business engaging in the barter, rental, or sale of items
consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, if such
shop is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the
public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or
significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an
emphases on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult Cabaret: An establishment which provides dancing or other live
entertainment, if such establishment excludes minors by virtue of age, or if
such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the performance, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Companionship Establishment: A companionship establishment which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides the service on engaging in or
listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Entertainment Uses: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters,
adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult
companionship establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty
businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels
or motels, adult body painting studios, and other adult establishments.
Adult Establishment: A. A business engaged in any of the following activities
or which utilizes any of the following business procedures or practices,
either:
      1.   Any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of
adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat
either by law or by the operators of such business; or
      2.   Any other business which offers its patrons services or
entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing,
describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   B.   Specifically included in the term, but without limitation, are adult
bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters,
adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult companionship establishments, adult
health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture
arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotel or motel, and adult body painting
studios.
Adult Hotel Or Motel: Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which
minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is
presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexually activities or specified
anatomical areas.
Adult Massage Parlor, Health Club: A massage parlor or health club which
restricts minors by reason by age, and which provides the services of massage,
if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A business premises within an enclosed
building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting
visual media material, if such business as a prevailing practice excludes
minors by virtue of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Modeling Studio: An establishment whose major business is the provision,
to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in
specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted by such customers.
Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture machines, projectors
or other image producing devises are maintained to show images to five (5) or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Motion Picture Theaters: A business premises within an enclosed building
with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting visual media
material, if said business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue
of age, or if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Novelty Business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale
of devices which simulate human genitals or devices which are designed for
sexual stimulation.
Adult Sauna: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides
a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation,
or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing
agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area.
CHURCH: A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which by
design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized
religious services and associated accessory uses.
SCHOOL: A public school or a nonpublic school or a nonsectarian nonpublic
school as these terms are defined in Minnesota statutes.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a
sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or
conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
   B.   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence; or
   C.   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or
masturbation; or
   D.   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or
female breast; or
   E.   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in
undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any such persons; or
   F.   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact
with an animal by a human being; or
   G.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
YOUTH FACILITY: A public playground, park, public swimming pool, public
library, or licensed day care facility. (Ord. 228, 5-6-1997)
11-2-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Sexually oriented businesses or "adult uses" as defined in section
11-2-2 of this chapter shall be subject to the following general provisions:
   A.   Obscene Activities: Activities defined as "obscene" by Minnesota
Statutes Annotated section 617.241 are not permitted and are prohibited.
   B.   Utilized For Residential Purposes: Sexually oriented businesses and
adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in
any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.
   C.   Alcoholic Beverages: Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses,
either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place
which is also used to dispense, consume or sell alcoholic beverages.
   D.   Not Qualified As Accessory: A sexually oriented business or adult use
which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as an adult use-
principal.
   E.   License Required: Sexually oriented businesses or adult uses classified
as an adult use-principal may not locate or operate within the city without
first obtaining a sexually oriented businesses adult uses-principal license as
required by title 3, chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 228, 5-6-1997)
11-2-4: PRINCIPAL USES:
   A.   Sexually oriented businesses classified as adult use-principal shall be
located at least three hundred (300) radial feet, as measured in a straight
line from the closest point of the property line of the building upon which the
adult use-principal is located to the property line of:
      1.   Residentially zoned property or residential uses;
      2.   A licensed daycare center;
      3.   Public or private educational facilities;
      4.   A public library;
      5.   A public park;
      6.   Another adult use, principal;
      7.   An on sale liquor, wine or beer establishment;
      8.   Churches;
      9.   Commercial recreational facilities, if the majority of its customers
consist of minors; or
      10.   Specialty schools, if the majority of its students consist of
minors.
   B.   Single Use: Adult use-principal activities as defined by this code
shall be classified as one use. Two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses or
adult uses-principal shall not be located in the same building or upon the same
property.
   C.   Sign Regulations: Sexually oriented businesses shall adhere to the
following signing regulations.
      1.   Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the
type of business or use which is being conducted; and
      2.   Shall not contain material classified as advertising; and
      3.   Shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the
district in which they are located.
   D.   Prohibited: Adult use-principal activities shall be prohibited at any
public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical, or other performance
or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are permitted. (Ord.
228, 5-6-1997)
11-2-5: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Requirements: Adult use-accessory shall:
      1.   Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located.
      2.   Comprise no more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross receipts of
the entire business operation.
      3.   Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of
merchandise.
   B.   Minors: Adult use-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit
access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general
public access. Business owner shall make every reasonable precaution to limit
access to minors.
      1.   Movie Rentals: Display areas shall be restricted from general view
and shall be situated in such fashion as to prohibit access and visibility to
minors, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the
persons responsible for the operations.
      2.   Magazines: Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall
not be accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means
to prevent display of any material other than the publication title.
      3.   Other Use: Adult uses-accessory not specifically cited shall comply
with the intent of this section, subject to the approval of the city council.
   C.   Signs; Advertising: Adult use-accessory shall be prohibited from both
internal and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.
(Ord. 228, 5-6-1997)
11-2-6: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Existing Uses: Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses which are
classified as legal nonconforming uses may continue in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, except that any such nonconforming use shall be
terminated and become illegal on and after effective date hereof.
   B.   Notice: To the extent possible, the city shall attempt to identify all
such uses which become classified as nonconforming under the provisions of this
chapter and shall notify the property owners and operators of such uses, in
writing, of the change in status and the terms and conditions which apply.
   C.   Application For Extension: The owner of any property on which an adult
use is located may apply to the city council for an extension of the
termination date. Any such application shall be in writing and be received by
the city no later than on or after effective date hereof. Failure to submit a
timely extension application shall constitute a waiver of the right to request
an extension.
   D.   Grounds For Granting Extension: The extension may be granted if the
applicant demonstrates that the amortization period is an unreasonable burden
upon the business and does not allow adequate time to recover a reasonable
return upon the business investment. The applicant shall have the burden of
proof to demonstrate hardship with the established termination date and also
the time required for an extension.
   E.   Criteria For Consideration: In making its decision, the city council
may consider any factor relevant to the issue, including, but not limited to:
      1.   The degree or magnitude of threat to the public health, safety, and
general welfare posed by the secondary impacts of the operation.
      2.   The length of time that the adult use has been operating.
      3.   The ease by which the property could be converted to a conforming
use.
      4.   The nature and character of the surrounding neighborhood.
      5.   The value and condition of the improvements on the property.
      6.   The amount of the applicant's investment in the business.
      7.   The amount of investment already realized.
      8.   The cost of relocating the adult use. (Ord. 228, 5-6-1997)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
12-1-1: Definitions
12-1-2: Procedure
12-1-3: Design Standards
12-1-4: Improvements
12-1-5: Preapplication Plans And Data
12-1-6: Preliminary Plats
12-1-7: Final Plats
12-1-8: Variances
12-1-9: Inspection
12-1-10: Maintenance Bond; Security
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  13-1-8 of this code.
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
COMPREHENSIVE MUNICIPAL PLAN: The thoroughfare plan, land use plan, and such
other plans, maps and statements of policy for development of the city as may
be in effect from time to time.
EASEMENTS: A right to use property without obstruction for certain specified
purposes.
PLAT: A map or maps approved or to be approved by the city council containing
pertinent survey data and showing a tract of land divided into units identified
as lots and blocks.
STREETS AND ALLEYS: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard,
lane, place, drive or however otherwise designated.
SUBDIVISION: A tract of land which has been or is being platted.
SUBDIVISION OR SUBDIVIDE: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more
lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land;
provided, that a division of the land for agricultural purposes into lots or
parcels of five (5) acres or more and not involving a new street shall not be
deemed a subdivision. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to
the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the process of
resubdividing or to the land subdivided.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 217, 3-2-1992)
12-1-2: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Preapplication:
      1.   Submittal To Planning Commission: Previous to the filing of an
application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat (preliminary
subdivision plan, general subdivision plan), the subdivider shall submit to the
planning commission plans and data as specified in preapplication plans and
data, subsection 12-1-5A of this chapter. This step does not require formal
application, fee or filing of the plat with the planning commission.
      2.   Review By Planning Commission: Within thirty (30) days of
submission, the planning commission shall inform the subdivider that the plans
and data as submitted or as modified do or do not meet the general objectives
of these regulations. When the planning commission finds the plans and data do
not meet the general objectives of these regulations, it shall express its
reasons therefor. Approval under this section does not constitute approval of
any type of preliminary or final plat.
   B.   Conditional Approval Of Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Preparation Of Preliminary Plat: On reaching conclusions, informally
as recommended in subsection A of this section, regarding the general program
and objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat,
together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified
in preliminary plats subdivision, subsections 12-1-6A, B, C and D of this
chapter.
      2.   Submittal Of Preliminary Plat To Planning Commission:
         a.   Number Of Copies: Five (5) copies of the preliminary plat and
supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the planning commission
with written application for conditional approval at least twenty five (25)
days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
         b.   Notice Of Hearing: The planning commission shall give notice of
public hearing on the preliminary plan by at least ten (10) days published
notice in the official newspaper.
         c.   Review By Other Agencies: The planning commission shall submit
copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified to the
public utilities, flood control commission, police and fire departments for a
report upon the features of the plat of concern to each department. (Ord. 217,
3-2-1992)
         d.   Review By City Engineer: The planning commission shall submit a
copy to the city engineer for his report upon the accuracy of the surveys, the
adequacy of the monuments, the proposed street improvements and other special
features of concern and to check the plat boundary survey with the county
surveyor to determine the coinciding of the plat boundary lines with the
boundary line of adjoining plats, tracts or other subdivision lines or markers.
(Ord. 217, 3-2-1992; amd. 2005 Code)
      3.   Review By Planning Commission: The planning commission shall hold
the hearing and receive testimony from persons interested in the plat and
either during the hearing or at its conclusion shall review other data
submitted in response to the requests in subsection B2 of this section.
      4.   Action By Planning Commission: Following: a) review of the
preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity thereof to these
regulations; b) testimony at the hearing and agency response; and c)
recommended changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to
be made, the planning commission shall, within forty (40) days of initial
submission, act thereon as submitted or modified, and shall make
recommendations in regard to the plat and its reasons therefor.
      5.   Distribution Of Copies: The action of the planning commission shall
be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached
to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one
retained by the planning commission and one sent to the city council for its
action.
      6.   Conditional Approval: Conditional approval of a preliminary plat
shall not constitute approval of the final plat (subdivision plat). Rather, it
shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the
preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be
submitted for approval of the planning commission and for recording upon
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and conditions of the
conditional approval, if any.
   C.   Final Plat:
      1.   Conformance To Preliminary Plat: The final plat shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the
subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary
plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however,
that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
      2.   Application For Approval: Application for approval of the final plat
shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
      3.   Action By City Council: The planning commission shall make
recommendations to the city council which shall act to approve or disapprove
the plat. Such action shall be taken within sixty (60) days of the initial
application for final approval.
      4.   Copies; Time Limitation: Five (5) copies of the final plat and other
exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified in final plats,
subsections 12-1-7A, B, C, D and E of this chapter, and shall be submitted to
the planning commission within six (6) months after approval of the preliminary
plat; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless an extension
of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission. (Ord. 217, 3-2-
1992)
12-1-3: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Application: All plats shall comply with the design standards set forth
in this section.
   B.   Community Unit Development: The design standards of this section may be
modified in the case of a plan utilizing an unusual concept of development
which meets the requirements of Minnesota state law. The community unit
development provision is intended to encourage original and imaginative
subdivision design which preserves the natural amenities of the site and
provides for the general welfare of the city. All modification of the
subdivision regulations shall conform with the community unit development
requirements of the title 11 of this code.
   C.   Dedication Of Lands For Public Purposes:
      1.   Utilities And Roads: The developer shall dedicate a reasonable
portion of the subdivision to the public for use as public streets, roads,
sewers, electric, gas and water facilities, storm water drainage and holding
areas for ponds and similar utilities and improvements.
      2.   Parks, Playgrounds; Cash In Lieu: In addition, at the option of the
city council, the developer shall dedicate a reasonable portion of the
subdivision to the public, or preserve the same for public use, such as parks,
playgrounds, trails or open space; provided, however, that the city may choose,
at its option, to accept an equivalent amount in cash from the developer for
all or part of the portion required to be dedicated for such public use, based
upon the fair market value of the land no later than at the time of final
approval. Any cash payments received hereunder shall be placed in a special
fund which shall be used only for the purpose of acquisition of additional open
spaces described herein or maintenance thereof.
      3.   Considerations: In determining what is a reasonable portion of the
subdivision to be dedicated, the city council shall consider all relevant
factors relating to the subdivision, including the additional burden to be
placed upon city's public facilities as set forth herein.
   D.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which would add value to
the subdivision and the city such as trees, steep slopes, watercourses,
historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved, insofar as
possible, through harmonious design of the subdivision.
   E.   Streets: The city council shall not approve any plat unless all streets
shown thereon are designed and located as to accommodate the probable volume of
traffic thereon, afford adequate light and air, facilitate fire protection,
provide access of fire fighting equipment to buildings, and provide a
coordinated system of streets conforming to the city street plan; and shall
specifically comply with the following:
      1.   Access To Major Street: In the case of subdivision for commercial,
industrial and public purposes, no street giving access upon a major street,
shall be located closer than three hundred feet (300') along the same side of
such major street, to any other driveway, public or private street in the same
or another subdivision.
      2.   Local Streets: Local streets shall be so planned as to discourage
through traffic.
      3.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs shall normally not be longer than four
hundred feet (400'), including a turnaround which shall be provided at the
closed end with an outside curb radius of at least forty feet (40') and a right
of way radius of not less than fifty feet (50').
      4.   Alleys: Alleys shall not be provided in residential districts, but
shall be included in commercial and industrial areas where needed for loading
and unloading or access purposes.
      5.   Parallel Streets: The minimum distance between centerlines of
parallel or approximately parallel streets intersecting a cross street from
opposite directions shall be one hundred twenty five feet (125').
      6.   Intersections: Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one
point shall be avoided.
      7.   Dead End Streets: Dead end streets shall be prohibited unless
provided with a turnaround or cul-de-sac arrangement.
      8.   Right Of Way Requirements: Right of way requirements may be
increased for specific thoroughfares if existing or anticipated traffic flow
warrants it, or if drainage easements parallel such thoroughfares. Such
increased width will be set by the city council after recommendation of the
planning commission and engineer.
      9.   Minimum Widths: Minimum right of way widths, paving widths, angle of
intersection, curb radius, horizontal alignments, vertical alignments, as well
as maximum grades shall be in accordance with the following table:
   STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
    Major   Local                  Pedestrian/
     Stree   Stree   Cul-De-Sac   Bikeway
                       Major      Local                     Pedestrian/
                        Streets    Streets    Cul-De-Sac   Bikeway
Right of way width      80 feet    60 feet    50 feet      10 feet
Paving width            44 feet    36 feet    28 feet      8 feet
                                                                  
                                                                    Subject to
Maximum grade           3 percen   5 percen   5 percent    approval
                                                                    of city
                                                                    engineer
                                                                    Subject to
Minimum angle for       90 degre   70 degre   70 degrees   approval
intersection                                                        of city
                                                                    engineer
                                                                    Subject to
Minimum curb radius     35 feet    12 feet    12 feet      approval
                                                                    of city
                                                                    engineer
Horizontal alignment
(Minimum radii of       Subject to approval of city engineer
centerline)
Vertical curves
(Minimum sight          500 feet   200 feet   100 feet   
distance)
 
   F.   Blocks: Blocks shall ordinarily not exceed five hundred feet (500') in
length. Where it is necessary for blocks to exceed this length, pedestrianways
and/or easements may be required near the center of the block.
   G.   Lots: The lot and yard sizes shall conform with the requirement of the
city zoning regulations and the lot shall be designed in accord with the
following design standards:
      1.   Access: Every lot shall be provided with access adequate for the use
of public safety vehicles and other public and private street system, improved
in accordance with this chapter and connected to the general street system.
      2.   Side Lot Lines: Side lines of lots shall be approximately right
angles to straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets. Some
variation of this rule is permissible, but pointed or very irregular lots shall
be avoided unless it is clearly evident that such variations shall improve the
overall neighborhood design.
      3.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots shall be avoided.
      4.   Future Subdivision: When a tract is subdivided into larger than
required building lots and there is no covenant preventing resubdivision of the
lots, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit a logical location
and opening of future streets and resubdividing with provisions for adequate
utility connections for each subdivision.
   H.   Easements: Easements shall be required at a minimum of twenty feet
(20'). Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a storm water easement or drainage right of way of width sufficient
for the purpose.
   I.   Water And Sewer Systems: The water supply and sewage disposal systems
for the subdivision shall meet the design standards and requirements of the
city and all regulations promulgated by the Minnesota department of health.
(Ord. 217, 3-2-1992)
12-1-4: IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Standards For Construction: All of the required improvements specified
in this section shall be constructed in accordance with the city standards for
construction and all other applicable city, county and state regulations.
   B.   Monuments And Markers: Concrete monuments shall be set at the
intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision.
Iron or steel markers shall be set: 1) at the beginning and ending of all
curves along street property lines; 2) at all points where lot lines intersect
curves, either front or rear; 3) at all angles in property lines of lots; and
4) at all other lot corners.
   C.   Streets: The streets shall be graded, if required by the planning
commission, to the grades and dimensions shown on plans and profiles and
approved by the planning commission and shall include the following
improvements:
      1.   Drainage: Suitable drainage structures, culverts, storm sewers,
ditches and related installations shall be provided to ensure adequate drainage
of all points along the streets.
      2.   Curbs And Gutters: Concrete curbs and gutters shall be required on
all streets.
      3.   Base Course: The base course shall consist of latest Minnesota
department of highways approved material.
      4.   Paving: Blacktop paving, as specified by the engineer, shall be
required on all streets.
      5.   Shoulders: Street shoulders shall be constructed which are uniformly
and thoroughly compacted by rolling and level with tops of curbs.
   D.   Sidewalks: Paved sidewalks shall be installed along all streets.
   E.   Storm Drainage: The construction of a storm drainage system shall
conform to the following requirements:
      1.   Drainage ditches or channels shall have a minimum gradient of one
percent (1%).
      2.   Open watercourses shall have adequate capacity and erosion control
to ensure safe and healthful disposal of storm water.
      3.   When top soil has been removed from the surface of a lot on a slope
where erosion will cause a displacement of loose material, the subdivider shall
be required to seed or provide other means to prevent the wash from damaging
adjacent property or accumulating on street surfaces.
   F.   Water Supply:
      1.   Public Water Available: Where public water supply is available, as
determined by the planning commission, the subdivider shall connect to such
public water supply and construct a system of water mains with a connection for
each lot.
      2.   Public Water Not Available: Where public water is not available:
         a.   The subdivider shall supply acceptable evidence of the
availability of water. The subdivider may be required to make one or more test
wells in the area to be platted if such evidence is deemed not acceptable.
Copies of well logs from said test wells which are obtained shall include the
name and address of the well driller and shall be submitted with the plan to
the city council.
         b.   If a private water supply is permitted, individual private wells
shall comply with pollution control agency requirements.
   G.   Sewers:
      1.   Accessible To Municipal System: Where the municipal sewer system is
reasonably accessible to the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide the
subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system to be connected to the
municipal sanitary sewer.
      2.   Unaccessible To Municipal System: Where the municipal sewer system
is not reasonably accessible to the subdivision and, in the judgment of the
planning commission, extension of the municipal sewage system to the
subdivision will not take place in the foreseeable future, private sewage
disposal systems on individual lots consistent with all city, county and state
regulations applicable thereto will be allowed.
   H.   Utilities: Every lot in a subdivision shall be capable of being served
by utilities, and easements acceptable to the utility companies shall be
provided. Electric, gas and other utility distribution lines shall be installed
within public rights of way or within properly designated easements. To the
fullest extent possible, underground utility lines shall be encouraged but not
installed beneath existing or proposed paved areas.
   I.   Trees: Trees shall be planted along the streets. The location and types
of trees must meet the approval of the planning commission.
   J.   Street Signs: Street name signs of a type adopted or approved by the
planning commission shall be installed at each street intersection by the
subdivider, on a location specified by the engineer. (Ord. 217, 3-2-1992)
12-1-5: PREAPPLICATION PLANS AND DATA:
The following information shall be submitted prior to the submission of the
preliminary plat:
   A.   Existing Conditions: General subdivision information shall describe or
outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as
necessary to supplement the drawings required below. This information shall
include, but is not necessarily limited to: 1) data on existing covenants, land
characteristics, and available community facilities and utilities; and 2)
information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential
lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas, playgrounds,
park areas, and other public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed
utilities and street improvements.
   B.   Location Map: Location map shall show: 1) the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or influence
it, including development name and location; 2) main traffic arteries; 3)
public transportation lines; 4) shopping centers; 5) elementary and high
schools; 6) parks and playgrounds; 7) principal places of employment; 8) other
community features such as railroad stations, airports, hospitals and churches;
9) title; 10) scale; 11) north arrow; and 12) date.
   C.   Sketch Plan: Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple
sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation
to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made
directly on a print of the topographic survey. In any event, the sketch plan
shall include either the existing topographic data listed herein or such of
these data as the planning commission determines is necessary for its
consideration of the proposed sketch plan. (Ord. 217, 3-2-1992)
12-1-6: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
   A.   Data For Preliminary Plats: The following information shall be
submitted as a basis for the preliminary plat and, shall include existing
conditions as follows, except when otherwise specified by the planning
commission:
      1.   Boundary Lines: Bearings and distances.
      2.   Easements: Location, width and purpose.
      3.   Streets On And Adjacent To Tract: Name and right of way width and
location; type, width and elevation of surfacing; any legally established
centerline elevations; walks; curbs; gutters; culverts; etc.
      4.   Utilities On And Adjacent To Tract: Location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water
mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles, and
streetlights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract,
indicate the direction and distance to, and size of nearest ones, showing
invert elevation of sewers.
      5.   Ground Elevations On The Tract Based On Datum Plane Approved By City
Engineer: For land that slopes less than approximately two percent (2%), show
spot elevations at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales,
and at selected points not more than one hundred feet (100') apart in all
directions; for land that slopes more than approximately two percent (2%),
either show contours with an interval of not more than five feet (5') if ground
slope is regular and such information is sufficient for planning purposes, or
show contours with an interval of not more than two feet (2') if necessary
because of irregular land or need for detailed data for preparing plans and
construction drawings.
      6.   Subsurface Conditions On Tract If Required By Planning Commission:
Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and
ground water conditions; depth to ground water unless tests pits are dry at a
depth of five feet (5'); location and results of soil percolation tests if
individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
      7.   Other Conditions On Tract: Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in diameter,
houses, barns, shacks, and other significant features. No plat will be approved
for a subdivision which covers an area subject to periodic flooding or which
contains extremely poor drainage facilities and which makes adequate drainage
of the streets and lots impossible.
      8.   Other Conditions On Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other
nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recordation date, and number, and show approximate percent built up, typical
lot size, and dwelling type.
      9.   Photographs, If Required By Planning Commission: Camera locations,
directions of views and key numbers.
      10.   Zoning: Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
      11.   Proposed Public Improvements: Highways or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
      12.   Key Plan: Key plan showing location of the tract.
      13.   Title And Certificates: Present tract designation according to
official records in office of appropriate recorder; title under which proposed
subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, notation
stating acreage, scale, north arrow, datum, benchmarks, certification of
registered civil engineer or surveyor, date of survey.
   B.   Form Of Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of
two hundred feet to one inch (200' = 1") or larger preferred scale of one
hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1") . It shall show all existing conditions
required in subsection A of this section and shall show all proposals including
the following:
      1.   Street names; right of way and roadway widths; approximate grades
and gradients; similar data for alleys, if any.
      2.   Other rights of way or easements: location, width and purpose.
      3.   Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
      4.   Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers.
      5.   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds,
or other public uses.
      6.   Minimum building setback lines.
      7.   Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size,
and acres in parks, etc.
      8.   Title, scale, north arrow, and date.
   C.   Other Preliminary Plans: When required by the planning commission, the
preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground
surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable
distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross sections
of the proposed grading, roadway and sidewalk; and preliminary plan of proposed
sanitary and storm water sewers with grades and sizes indicated. All elevations
shall be based on a datum plane approved by the city engineer.
   D.   Protective Covenants: Proposed protective covenants whereby the
subdivider proposed to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise
protect the proposed development shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
(Ord. 217, 3-2-1992)
12-1-7: FINAL PLATS:
   A.   Final Plat Data And Form: The final plat shall be drawn in ink on
tracing cloth on sheets thirty inches wide by eighteen inches long (30" x 18")
and shall be at a scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1") or larger.
Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index
sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions the final plat may
be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to
the planning commission. The final plat shall show the following:
      1.   Primary control points, approved by the city engineer, or
descriptions and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
      2.   Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements and
other rights of way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites;
with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and
central angles of all curves.
      3.   Name and right of way width of each street or other right of way.
      4.   Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements.
      5.   Number to identify each lot or site.
      6.   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved.
      7.   Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
      8.   Location of description of monuments.
      9.   Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
      10.   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land
by record name, date and number.
      11.   Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to accuracy of
survey and plat.
      12.   Certification of title showing that applicant is the landowner.
      13.   Statement of owner dedicating street, rights of way and any sites
for public uses.
      14.   Title, scale, north arrow and date.
   B.   Street Cross Sections: There shall be submitted with the final plat
street cross sections and profiles drawn to city standard scales and elevations
and shall be based on a datum approved by the city engineer. The profiles and
cross sections shall be approved by the city engineer.
   C.   Installation Of Improvements And Bond: A certificate by the city
engineer certifying that the subdivider has complied with one of the following
alternatives:
      1.   All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements
of these regulations and with the action of the planning commission giving
conditional approval of the preliminary plat; or
      2.   A bond or certified check has been posted which is available to the
city for completion of improvements in sufficient amount to assure such
completion of all required improvements. Said bond or check shall be approved
as to form by the city attorney.
   D.   Protective Covenants: Such protective covenants, as required and/or
approved by the city, shall be in recordable form.
   E.   Other Data: Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or
deductions as may be required by the planning commission in the enforcement of
these regulations. (Ord. 217, 3-2-1992)
12-1-8: VARIANCES:
   A.   Power To Grant: Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary
circumstances may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may
vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured; provided, that such variation will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the general community plan or these
regulations.
      1.   Small Subdivisions: In particular, small subdivisions, where one lot
is divided into two (2) or three (3) lots, the submission of topographic maps,
soil tests, other data and fee may not be necessary if the city council after
consultation with the planning commission, so determines.
      2.   Minor Subdivision Of Larger Areas: Minor subdivision of larger
areas, where a tract of land over five (5) acres is divided into two (2)
parcels, shall be exempted from all the provisions of this chapter. However, a
dimensioned map of such subdivision shall be filed with the city clerk within
thirty (30) days after the subdivision has been made.
   B.   Conditions: In granting variances, the planning commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. (Ord. 217, 3-2-1992)
12-1-9: INSPECTION:
When the plans of streets and other improvements have been approved as provided
in this chapter, the subdivider shall first notify the city clerk of his
intention to proceed with the construction or installation of said streets and
improvements; notification shall be made at least fifteen (15) days before any
such construction or installation shall commence so as to give the city
officials an opportunity to inspect the site prior to commencement of work and
to inspect installation or construction of said streets and improvements during
the course of work being performed. In order to defray a part of the costs
incurred by the city in inspecting the installation of the improvements
required by this chapter, the subdivider shall, before he proceeds with any
construction or installation, present a certified check or money order made
payable to the city council in an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the
engineer's estimate of the cost of the improvements. (Ord. 217, 3-2-1992)
12-1-10: MAINTENANCE BOND; SECURITY:
Prior to any street or other improvement being accepted by the city as
hereinafter provided, the subdivider shall post a maintenance bond and/or other
security naming the city as obligee in an amount deemed adequate by the city
council to ensure maintenance of said improvements for a period of at least
twelve (12) months from the date of acceptance by the city. (Ord. 217, 3-2-
1992)
TITLE 13
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
13-1-1: Statutory Authorization; Findings; Purpose
13-1-2: General Provisions
13-1-3: Definitions
13-1-4: Establishment Of Zoning Districts
13-1-5: Floodway District (FW)
13-1-6: Flood Fringe District (FF)
13-1-7: General Floodplain District
13-1-8: Subdivisions
13-1-9: Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, And Bridges
13-1-10: Manufactured Homes, Manufactured Home Parks And Placement Of
Recreational Vehicles
13-1-11: Administration
13-1-11-1: Zoning Administrator
13-1-11-2: Permit Requirements
13-1-11-3: Board Of Adjustment
13-1-11-4: Conditional Uses
13-1-12: Nonconforming Uses
13-1-13: Amendments
13-1-14: Violation; Penalty
13-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Minnesota has,
in Minnesota statutes chapters 103F and 462 for municipalities, delegated the
responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council of the city of Dawson,
Minnesota, does ordain as follows:
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   Flood Hazard Areas: The flood hazard areas of Dawson, Minnesota, are
subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
      2.   Methods Used To Analyze Flood Hazards: This chapter is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota department of natural resources.
      3.   National Flood Insurance Program Compliance: This chapter is adopted
to comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance
program codified as 44 code of federal regulations parts 59 - 78, as amended,
so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the national flood insurance
program.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses
described in subsection B1 of this section by provisions contained herein.
(Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Applicable Lands: This chapter shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of Dawson shown on the official zoning map and/or the attachments
thereto as being located within the boundaries of the floodway, flood fringe,
or general floodplain districts.
   B.   Establishment Of Official Zoning Map: The official zoning map together
with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this chapter. The attached material shall include the flood
insurance study for Lac Qui Parle County, Minnesota, and incorporated areas
prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated March 16, 2006,
and the flood insurance rate map panels numbered 27073C0383C, 27073C0387C and
27073C0391C dated March 16, 2006, therein. The official zoning map shall be on
file in the office of the city clerk and the city manager.
Note: For future annexation of floodplain lands, it is a requirement of the
national flood insurance program that a community legally apply the provisions
of its floodplain ordinance to the annexed land on the date of annexation (see
subsection H of this section). The flood insurance rate map panels adopted into
this subsection must be inclusive enough so that they encompass all of the
unincorporated area of the county that may be annexed into the city into the
foreseeable future. This may mean that a city will need to adopt flood
insurance rate map panels in addition to those flood map panels that contain
the current corporate boundaries of the city.
   C.   Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot (1') above the elevation
of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
   D.   Interpretation:
      1.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
      2.   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the
official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal
appeal of the decision of the zoning administrator, the board of adjustment
shall make the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on
elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that
existed on the site at the time the community adopted its initial floodplain
ordinance or on the date of the first national flood insurance program map
showing the area within the 100-year floodplain if earlier, and other available
technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the board of
adjustment and to submit technical evidence.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: This chapter does not imply that
areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the city of Dawson or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   G.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
   H.   Annexations: The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference
into subsection B of this section may include floodplain areas that lie outside
of the corporate boundaries of the city of Dawson at the time of adoption of
this chapter. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city
of Dawson after the date of adoption hereof, the newly annexed floodplain lands
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of
annexation into the city of Dawson. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage
and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
BASEMENT: Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or
base subgrade (below ground level) on all four (4) sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
CONDITIONAL USE: A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed but only after an in depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:
   A.   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist.
   B.   The structure and/or land use conforms to the comprehensive land use
plan if one exists and is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT: A method of determining the location of floodway
boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of
conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
FLOOD: A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of
a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood
stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the flood
insurance study for Dawson.
FLOODPLAIN: The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
FLOODPROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments
to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction
or elimination of flood damages.
FLOODWAY: The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building's lowest floor.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle".
OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE: All uses or structures that are not accessory uses
or structures.
REACH: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge
crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is four
hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, is designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use. For the purposes of this chapter, the term recreational vehicle shall be
synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle.
REGIONAL FLOOD: A flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood"
used in a flood insurance study.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: An elevation no lower than one foot (1')
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a
floodway.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in subsection 13-1-10C1
of this chapter and other similar items.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Within any consecutive three hundred sixty five (365)
day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance
and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure". For the purpose of this chapter, "historic structure" shall be as
defined in code of federal regulations, part 59.1.
VARIANCE: A modification of a specific permitted development standard required
in an official control including this chapter to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only
as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship,
practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a
community's respective planning and zoning enabling legislation. (Ord. 260, 2-
21-2006)
13-1-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Districts:
      1.   Floodway District: The floodway district shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the flood insurance rate map adopted in subsection
13-1-2B of this chapter.
      2.   Flood Fringe District: The flood fringe district shall include those
areas designated as floodway fringe. The flood fringe district shall include
those areas shown on the flood insurance rate map as adopted in subsection 13-
1-2B of this chapter as being within zones AE, AO, or AH but being located
outside of the floodway.
      3.   General Floodplain District: The general floodplain district shall
include those areas designated as zone A or zones AE, AO, or AH without a
floodway on the flood insurance rate map adopted in subsection 13-1-2B of this
chapter.
   B.   Compliance: No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
chapter. Within the floodway, flood fringe and general floodplain districts,
all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in sections
13-1-5,
13-1-6, and
13-1-7 of this chapter, respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, a
caution is provided here that:
      1.   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter and specifically section
13-1-10 of this chapter.
      2.   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance
and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and
nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general
provisions of this chapter and specifically section
13-1-12 of this chapter.
      3.   As built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be
certified by ground surveys and floodproofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in
the general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in section
13-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-5: FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW):
   A.   Permitted Uses:
General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges,
picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails.
Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
   B.   Standards For Floodway Permitted Uses:
      1.   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
      2.   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
      3.   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
Placement of fill or construction of fences.
Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or new
subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds, subject to the
exemptions and provisions of subsection 13-1-10C of this chapter.
Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures
and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a
frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
Structures accessory to the uses listed in subsection A of this section and the
uses listed in this subsection.
   D.   Standards For Floodway Conditional Uses:
      1.   All Uses: No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including
fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause
any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
      2.   Floodway Conditional Uses: All floodway conditional uses shall be
subject to the procedures and standards contained in section
13-1-11-4 of this chapter.
      3.   Permissible In Underlying District: The conditional use shall be
permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
      4.   Fill:
         a.   Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         b.   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         c.   As an alternative, and consistent with subsection D4b of this
section, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow
temporary, on site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused
an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the
governing body has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of
the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.
The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the
office of the county recorder.
      5.   Accessory Structures:
         a.   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
         b.   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of floodwaters.
            (1)   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
            (2)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
         c.   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing
classifications in the state building code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification
in the state building code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a
minimal investment, does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size at
its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be
used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All floodproofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:
            (1)   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
            (2)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
floodproofed; and
            (3)   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two (2) "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at
least two (2) sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no
higher than one foot (1') above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure.
Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not
satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
      6.   Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
         a.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
         b.   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      7.   Structural Works For Flood Control: Structural works for flood
control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected
wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of Minnesota
statute, chapter 103G. Communitywide structural works for flood control
intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in
the floodway.
      8.   Levee, Dike Or Floodwall: A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in
the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and
the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both
sides of a stream. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-6: FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF):
   A.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
If no preexisting, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential
or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted
use in the flood fringe district, provided such use does not constitute a
public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for flood
fringe district "permitted uses" listed in subsection B of this section and the
"standards for all flood fringe uses" listed in subsection E of this section.
   B.   Standards For Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
      1.   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one foot (1') below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least
fifteen feet (15') beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
      2.   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed five hundred (500)
square feet at its largest projection may be internally floodproofed in
accordance with subsection 13-1-5D5c of this chapter.
      3.   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of
one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended
to elevate a structure in accordance with subsection B1 of this section.
      4.   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      5.   The provisions of subsection E of this section shall apply.
   C.   Conditional Uses: Any structure that is not elevated on fill or
floodproofed in accordance with subsections B1 and B2 of this section and/or
any use of land that does not comply with the standards in subsections B3 and
B4 of this section shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application
for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and
evaluation procedures specified in subsections D and E of this section and
section
13-1-11-4 of this chapter.
   D.   Standards For Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
      1.   Alternative Elevation Methods: Alternative elevation methods other
than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may
include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above grade,
enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of
an enclosed area shall be considered above grade and not a structure's basement
or lowest floor if: a) the enclosed area is above grade on at least one side of
the structure; b) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with
flood resistant materials; and c) it is used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage. The above noted alternative elevation methods are
subject to the following additional standards:
         a.   Design And Certification: The structure's design and as built
condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as being in compliance with the general design standards of the state building
code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent floodwater from
entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
         b.   Specific Standards For Above Grade, Enclosed Areas: Above grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be
designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
            (1)   A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. There shall be a minimum
of two (2) openings on at least two (2) sides of the structure and the bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade. The
automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a
registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area
would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters without any form of human intervention; and
            (2)   That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the state
building code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles
or storage.
      2.   Basements: Basements, as defined by section
13-1-3 of this chapter, shall be subject to the following:
         a.   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
         b.   Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation, provided the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with subsection D3 of this section.
      3.   Nonresidential Structures: All areas of nonresidential structures
including basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the structurally dry
floodproofing classifications in the state building code. Structurally dry
floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classification in the
state building code and this shall require making the structure watertight with
the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-
4 classification shall not be permitted.
      4.   Control Plan; Shoreland Ordinance: When at any one time more than
one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill or other similar material is located
on a parcel for such activities as on site storage, landscaping, sand and
gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or construction of
flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted
unless the community is enforcing a state approved shoreland management
ordinance. In the absence of a state approved shoreland ordinance, the plan
must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a
flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or regional flood event. The plan must
be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other
qualified individual acceptable to the governing body. The plan may incorporate
alternative procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if
adequate flood warning time exists.
      5.   Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
         a.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
         b.   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      6.   Other Applicable Provisions: The provisions of subsection E of this
section shall also apply.
   E.   Standards For All Flood Fringe Uses:
      1.   Vehicular Access: All new principal structures must have vehicular
access at or above an elevation not more than two feet (2') below the
regulatory flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is
granted, the board of adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use
or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining
that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures
exist.
      2.   Commercial Uses: Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad
tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in
feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four (4)
upon occurrence of the regional flood.
      3.   Manufacturing And Industrial Uses: Measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
subsection E2 of this section. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in floodplain areas.
      4.   Fill: Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The federal emergency management agency (FEMA) has established criteria
for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      5.   Hydraulic Capacity: Floodplain developments shall not adversely
affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment
limit has not been specified on the official zoning map.
      6.   Recreational Vehicles: Standards for recreational vehicles are
contained in subsection 13-1-10C of this chapter.
      7.   Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes must be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse
and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-7: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT:
   A.   Permissible Uses:
The uses listed in subsection 13-1-5A of this chapter shall be permitted uses.
All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation
criteria pursuant to subsection B of this section. Section
13-1-5 of this chapter shall apply if the proposed use is in the floodway
district and section
13-1-6 of this chapter shall apply if the proposed use is in the flood fringe
district.
   B.   Procedures For Floodway And Flood Fringe Determinations Within The
General Floodplain District:
      1.   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within
the general floodplain district, the applicant shall be required to furnish
such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the zoning
administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and whether the proposed use is within the floodway or flood fringe
district:
         a.   A typical valley cross section(s) showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross
sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water
information.
         b.   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground,
pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location, and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and
the location and elevations of streets.
         c.   Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and
downstream, and soil types.
         d.   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream for at least five hundred feet (500') in either direction
from the proposed development.
      2.   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the floodway
or flood fringe district and to determine the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota regulations 1983, parts
6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 code of federal regulations part 65 shall be
followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is
strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology
with the respective department of natural resources' area hydrologist prior to
commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall:
         a.   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
         b.   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
         c.   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage
increase than 0.5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional
stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in
computing floodway boundaries.
      3.   The zoning administrator shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the governing body. The
governing body must formally accept the technical evaluation and the
recommended floodway and/or flood fringe district boundary or deny the permit
application. The governing body, prior to official action, may submit the
application and all supporting data and analyses to the federal emergency
management agency, the department of natural resources or the planning
commission for review and comment. Once the floodway and flood fringe district
boundaries have been determined, the governing body shall refer the matter back
to the zoning administrator who shall process the permit application consistent
with the applicable provisions of sections
13-1-5 and
13-1-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-8: SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Review Criteria: No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for
the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall be able to contain a
building site outside of the floodway district at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment
facilities that comply with the provisions of this chapter and have road access
both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two
feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions
in the floodplain, the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries, the
regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access
roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and
platting documents.
   B.   Floodway/Flood Fringe Determinations In The General Floodplain
District: In the general floodplain district, applicants shall provide the
information required in subsection 13-1-7B of this chapter to determine the
100-year flood elevation, the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries and
the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.
   C.   Removal Of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation: The federal emergency
management agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special
flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill
above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific
fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi- structure or
multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-9: PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES 1 :
   A.   Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas,
electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain
shall be floodproofed in accordance with the state building code or elevated to
above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   B.   Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges
to be located within the floodplain shall comply with sections
13-1-5 and
13-1-6 of this chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
   C.   On Site Sewage Treatment And Water Supply Systems: Where public
utilities are not provided:
      1.   On site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and
      2.   New or replacement on site sewage treatment systems must be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters and they shall not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment
system designed in accordance with the state's current statewide standards for
on site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with
this section. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 8 of this code.
13-1-10: MANUFACTURED HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND PLACEMENT OF
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by section
13-1-8 of this chapter.
   B.   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in
floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only
if elevated in compliance with section
13-1-6 of this chapter. If vehicular road access for preexisting manufactured
home parks is not provided in accordance with subsection 13-1-6E1 of this
chapter, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the
property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the
governing body.
      1.   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
   C.   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified
in subsection C1 of this section shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and as specifically spelled out in subsections C3 and C4 of this
section.
      1.   Exemption: Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in subsection C2 of
this section and further they meet the following criteria:
         a.   Have current licenses required for highway use.
         b.   Are highway ready, meaning: 1) on wheels or the internal jacking
system, 2) are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks, and 3) the
recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
         c.   The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible
in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district.
      2.   Areas Exempted For Placement Of Recreational Vehicles:
         a.   Individual lots or parcels of record.
         b.   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
         c.   Existing condominium type associations.
      3.   Loss Of Exemption: Recreational vehicles exempted in subsection C1
of this section lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a structural addition to the
recreational vehicle or exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for an
accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational
vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a
new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/floodproofing requirements
and the use of land restrictions specified in sections
13-1-5 and
13-1-6 of this chapter. There shall be no development or improvement on the
parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of
the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur.
      4.   New Recreational Vehicle Parks, Subdivisions: New commercial
recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions
and condominium associations and the expansion of any existing similar use
exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:
         a.   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in
the floodway or flood fringe districts, provided said recreational vehicle and
its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation
and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with
subsection 13-1-6E1 of this chapter. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the
requirements of this section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or
regional flood.
         b.   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the
criteria of subsection C4a of this section may, as an alternative, be allowed
as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and the
provisions of section
13-1-11-4 of this chapter. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the
safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan
shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall
demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation,
and shall demonstrate the provisions of subsections C1a and C1b of this section
will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired
or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with subsection 13-1-9C
of this chapter. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-11: ADMINISTRATION:
13-1-11-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
A zoning administrator or other official designated by the governing body shall
administer and enforce this chapter. If the zoning administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, the zoning administrator shall
notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the
procedures stated in section
13-1-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-11-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit issued by the zoning administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance
and repair), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof;
prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to
the construction of a dam, fence, or on site septic system; prior to the change
or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that
has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment within the floodplain.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the zoning administrator on forms furnished by the zoning
administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
   C.   State And Federal Permits: Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the zoning administrator
shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal
permits.
   D.   Certificate Of Zoning Compliance For A New, Altered, Or Nonconforming
Use: It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the zoning administrator stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
   E.   Construction And Use To Be As Provided On Applications, Plans, Permits,
Variances And Certificates Of Zoning Compliance: Permits, conditional use
permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved
plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction
set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use,
arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance
with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and
punishable as provided by section
13-1-14 of this chapter.
   F.   Certification: The applicant shall be required to submit certification
by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Floodproofing measures shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
   G.   Record Of First Floor Elevation: The zoning administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
floodplain. The zoning administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
floodproofed.
   H.   Notifications For Watercourse Alterations: The zoning administrator
shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the commissioner
of the department of natural resources prior to the community authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a
permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minnesota statutes,
chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the commissioner of
natural resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the
Chicago regional office of the federal emergency management agency (FEMA).
   I.   Notification To FEMA When Physical Changes Increase Or Decrease The
100-Year Flood Elevation: As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6)
months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the zoning
administrator shall notify the Chicago regional office of FEMA of the changes
by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data. (Ord. 260, 2-21-
2006)
13-1-11-3: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Rules: The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of
business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such boards by state
law.
   B.   Administrative Review: The board of adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
   C.   Variances: The board of adjustment may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as will
not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as
hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for
planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of
such variance, the board of adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the
specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this
chapter, any other zoning regulations in the community, and in the respective
enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance. No variance
shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that
district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than
those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the
federal emergency management agency must be satisfied:
      1.   Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon: a) a showing of
good and sufficient cause, b) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and c) a
determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
   D.   Hearings: Upon filing with the board of adjustment of an appeal from a
decision of the zoning administrator, or an application for a variance, the
board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The board of adjustment
shall submit by mail to the commissioner of natural resources a copy of the
application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing.
   E.   Decisions: The board of adjustment shall arrive at a decision on such
appeal or variance within ten (10) days. In passing upon an appeal, the board
of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator or other
public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the
findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance the
board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as
those specified in subsection 13-1-11-4F of this chapter, which are in
conformity with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable under section
13-1-14 of this chapter. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be
forwarded by mail to the commissioner of natural resources within ten (10) days
of such action.
   F.   Appeals: Appeals from any decision of the board of adjustment may be
made, and as specified in this community's official controls and also by
Minnesota statutes.
   G.   Flood Insurance Notice And Record Keeping: The zoning administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) the issuance of a variance
to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and 2) such
construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life
and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in
its annual or biennial report submitted to the administrator of the national
flood insurance program. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-11-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
The city of Dawson's planning and zoning board shall hear and decide
applications for conditional uses permissible under this chapter. Applications
shall be submitted to the city manager who shall forward the application to the
planning and zoning board for consideration.
   A.   Hearings: Upon filing with the planning and zoning board an application
for a conditional use permit, the planning and zoning board shall submit by
mail to the commissioner of natural resources a copy of the application for
proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the commissioner will
receive at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing.
   B.   Decisions: The planning and zoning board shall arrive at a decision on
a conditional use within ten (10) days. In granting a conditional use permit
the planning and zoning board shall prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those specified in subsection F of this section,
which are in conformity with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter
punishable under section
13-1-14 of this chapter. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use
permits shall be forwarded by mail to the commissioner of natural resources
within ten (10) days of such action.
   C.   Procedures: Procedures to be followed by the planning and zoning board
in passing on conditional use permit applications within all floodplain
districts:
      1.   Require the applicant to furnish such of the following information
and additional information as deemed necessary by the planning and zoning board
for determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use:
         a.   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above
to the location of the stream channel; and
         b.   Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
      2.   Transmit one copy of the information described in subsection C1 of
this section to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in
relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to
the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters.
      3.   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the planning and zoning board shall determine the specific flood hazard
at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the
flood hazard.
   D.   Factors Upon Which The Decision Of The Planning And Zoning Board Shall
Be Based: In passing upon conditional use applications, the planning and zoning
board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this
chapter, and:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      2.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other
hydraulic structures.
      3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
      4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      5.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      6.   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
      7.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
      10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
      12.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
   E.   Time For Acting On Application: The planning and zoning board shall act
on an application in the manner described above within ten (10) days from
receiving the application, except that where additional information is required
pursuant to subsection C of this section, the planning and zoning board shall
render a written decision within ten (10) days from the receipt of such
additional information.
   F.   Conditions Attached To Conditional Use Permits: Upon consideration of
the factors listed above and the purpose of this chapter, the planning and
zoning board shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use
permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
      2.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
      3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
      4.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory
storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
      5.   Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the state building code
and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures
are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-12: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions. Historic structures, as defined in section
13-1-3 of this chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of subsections A1
through A5 of this section.
      1.   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a
way that increases its nonconformity.
      2.   Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure
or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage
potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood
protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or
floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing
classifications) allowable in the state building code, except as further
restricted for substantial improvements in subsection A6 of this section.
      3.   Reserved for future use.
      4.   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
The assessor shall notify the zoning administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of twelve (12)
months.
      5.   If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in section
13-1-3 of this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new
uses or new structures in sections
13-1-5 and
13-1-6 of this chapter will apply depending upon whether the use or structure
is in the floodway or flood fringe district, respectively.
      6.   If a "substantial improvement" occurs, as defined in section
13-1-3 of this chapter, from any combination of a building addition to the
outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation,
reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an
existing nonconforming building, then the building addition and the existing
nonconforming building must be the elevation on fill or FP-1 or FP-2 dry
floodproofing requirements of section
13-1-5 or
13-1-6 of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the structure
is in the floodway or flood fringe district, respectively. If a substantial
improvement occurs only from a building addition, the existing structure must
also meet the elevation on fill or FP-1 or FP-2 dry floodproofing requirements
for new structures if any alteration is made to the common wall in excess of
installing a standard doorway. (Ord. 260, 2-21-2006)
13-1-13: AMENDMENTS:
The floodplain designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from
floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or
that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood
protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the commissioner of natural
resources if he determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately
protected for the intended use.
All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the official zoning
map, must be submitted to and approved by the commissioner of natural resources
prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map must meet the federal
emergency management agency's (FEMA) technical conditions and criteria and must
receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The commissioner of natural
resources must be given ten (10) days' written notice of all hearings to
consider an amendment to this chapter and said notice shall include a draft of
the chapter amendment or technical study under consideration. (Ord. 260, 2-21-
2006)
13-1-14: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
   B.   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Dawson from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Such actions may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the zoning
administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after the fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the national flood insurance program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the national flood
insurance program.
      2.   When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to
the attention of the zoning administrator, the zoning administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate department of natural
resources and federal emergency management agency regional office along with
the community's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.
      3.   The zoning administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature and
extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or
use is under construction or development, the zoning administrator may order
the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the zoning administrator may either:
         a.   Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be
made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into
compliance with the official controls; or
         b.   Notify the responsible party to apply for an after the fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
      4.   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
zoning administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall
be prosecuted accordingly. The zoning administrator shall also, upon the lapse
of the specified response period, notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 260,
2-21-2006)
