DILWORTH, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-10 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 24-13, passed 12-23-2024
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street Suite 310 Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
CITY COUNCIL
Mayor              Chad Olson
Member             Julie Nash
Member             Dave Steichen
Member             Kevin Peterson
Member             Amber Borah
                   
CITY ADMINISTRATION
City Administrator L. Peyton Mastera
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 15-08
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF DILWORTH, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
   WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city
to cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book,
   NOW THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Dilworth, Minnesota, ordains:
Section 1.    The general ordinances of the city as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Dilworth." This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules
of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 2.   The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following titles:
         TITLE I:   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         TITLE III:   ADMINISTRATION
         TITLE V:   PUBLIC WORKS
         TITLE VII:   TRAFFIC CODE
         TITLE IX:   GENERAL REGULATIONS
         TITLE XI:    BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         TITLE XIII:    GENERAL OFFENSES
         TITLE XV:   LAND USAGE
         TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
         PARALLEL REFERENCES
         INDEX
Section 3.    All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the
Code of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in
part in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect any
offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions
of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public
use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor
shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature
or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of
Ordinances. All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this code
shall remain in effect unless amended in this code or until an ordinance
adopting a fee schedule is adopted or amended.
Section 4.   This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a
sufficient publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously
published in the city's official newspaper. The Clerk of the city shall cause a
substantial quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general
distribution to the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code
of Ordinances to the County Law Library or its designated depository. The
official copy of this Code of Ordinances shall be marked and be kept in the
office of the City Clerk.
Section 5.    The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of
the law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.
Section 6.    This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the
City's official newspaper.
   This ordinance amendment shall take effect and be in force from and after
its passage and publication.
   APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 10th day of August, 2015 in the City of Dilworth,
Minnesota.
MAYOR:    
_______________________________
Chad Olson, Mayor
                     ATTEST:
                     _______________________________
                     L. Peyton Mastera, City Administrator
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
 
   
10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
   
Appendix A:   Notice of code violation
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“City of Dilworth Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Dilworth, Minnesota, and all the territory lying within
its boundaries over which it has jurisdiction, as presently established or as
amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future time. The
term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council
and its authorized representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Clay County.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator for public inspection. The City Administrator shall provide a
copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in
this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Administrator shall have the authority to administer and enforce
this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals
designated within the code or by the City Administrator or City Council shall
have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and
any person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or
continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Administrator and any city official or employee designated by
this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with
the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident
of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise
enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Administrator, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting
the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only
to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Administrator or any other authorized city officer or
employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection
of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all
permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given
to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property,
stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Administrator to object to the termination before it occurs,
subject to appeal of the City Administrator’s decision to the City Council at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Community service officers have the same powers of law enforcement
officers in the city to issue a citation in lieu of arrest for violations of
the city code. Nothing in this section is to be construed as giving community
service officers any powers of law enforcement officers other than the
authority set forth in this section. For purposes of this code, a COMMUNITY
SERVICE OFFICER means an employee of the city designated by the Council and
assigned to the Police Department, exercising limited law enforcement, code
enforcement and related duties under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. 21-04, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code
and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a
majority of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
The resolution may be in the form established in
Appendix A. Such resolution may not proscribe administrative penalties for
traffic offenses designated by M.S. § 169.999, as it may be amended from time
to time.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on
the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by resolution of
a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Administrator or other
person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, in a
written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to the person
who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request
the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to
the City Treasurer within 14 days of the notice of the violation. A sample
notice is contained in
Appendix A to this chapter. In the sole discretion of the person giving the
notice of the alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an
additional 14 days, whether or not requested by the person to whom the notice
has been given. In addition to the administrative penalty, the person giving
notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance
plan to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation and may
provide that if the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting in the
alleged violation within the time specified in the notice, that the payment of
the administrative penalty will be waived.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due,
the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may request to
appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the
penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to
withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because
the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no
appeal from the decision of the Council.
   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating
the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its Attorney, may
bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance,
rather than requesting the payment of an administrative penalty, even if a
penalty for the particular violation has been established by Council
resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested
correction of the situation resulting in the violation is completed, no
criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of
this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re: Alleged violation of section of the city code, relating to (give title of
section)
Date: (Date of notice)
   I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §       of the city
code relating to             .
   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in
the amount of $       for this violation.
   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay
it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.
   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due
date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the
administrative penalty.
   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by (establish
date), then the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to
institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to
contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the
Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to
renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.
   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal
proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any city
official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at
equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money
order to the City Treasurer.
Signed:                                                            
      (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
      
31.   CITY OFFICES AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   CITY EMPLOYEES
      
33.   CITY POLICIES
      
34.   FEE SCHEDULE
      
35.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND CIVIL PENALTIES
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   City offices
   
30.02   Election of Mayor and City Council members
Council Meetings
   
30.15   Meetings
   
30.16   Rules
   
30.17   Quorum
   
30.18   Ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 CITY OFFICES.
   The Council may from time to time make appointments and create offices, as
in its discretion, it shall deem necessary.
(1963 Code, § 30.01)
§ 30.02 ELECTION OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   The elections for Mayor and City Council members will be held in even-
numbered years.
   (B)   The elections for Mayor and City Council members shall be for four-
year terms.
   (C)   The regular election of the Mayor and City Council members shall be
held the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in even-numbered
years. The first such election in Dilworth shall be held in November 2020.
   (D)   All terms of office ending December 31, 2019 at the time of the
adoption of this section shall be extended to December 31, 2020. All terms of
office ending December 31, 2021 at the time of the adoption of this section
shall be extended to December 31, 2022.
(Ord. 74-1, passed 3-11-1974; Am. Ord. 18-11, passed 12-10-2018)
Statutory Reference:
   Minnesota State law reference, Minn. Stats. §§ 205.065, 205.07.
COUNCIL MEETINGS
§ 30.15 MEETINGS.
   The City Council shall have regular sessions on the second and fourth Monday
of each month at 6:00 p.m., and if such Monday shall fall on a holiday shall
have its regular session the next following day and special sessions at any
other time the Council may deem proper. All meetings shall be held at the City
Hall. All sessions of the Council shall be public.
(1963 Code, § 20.01) (Ord. passed 10-12-1976)
§ 30.16 RULES.
   (A)   The Council shall prescribe rules for its proceedings and provide for
the calling of special meetings, but no business shall be transacted, at a
special meeting unless it was specified in the call for such special meeting.
   (B)   The Mayor shall preside at all Council meetings and in his or her
absence an Acting Mayor among the members. The Mayor shall preserve order and
shall decide questions or order subject to appeal to the Council. He or she may
make motions, second motions and he or she may speak on any question, provided
that upon demand of any member he or she shall vacate the chair and designate a
trustee to preside temporarily. The Mayor shall be entitled to vote like other
members of the Council. Minutes of the meetings shall be kept by the City
Administrator and when signed by him or her shall constitute an official record
of the Council proceedings.
(1963 Code, § 20.02)
§ 30.17 QUORUM.
   At all meetings of the Council, a majority of the Council shall constitute a
quorum to do business, but a minority may adjourn from day to day.
(1963 Code, § 20.03)
§ 30.18 ORDINANCES.
   After an ordinance shall have been passed, a complete and accurate copy
shall be made by the City Administrator and shall be signed by the Mayor or in
his or her absence by the Acting Mayor and deposited with the City
Administrator who shall attest, seal, number, file and publish and record it
permanently, together with the affidavit of publication.
(1963 Code, § 20.04)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Fire Department
   
31.01   On-call fire protection service mission
   
31.02   By-laws
   
31.03   Fire Relief Association
Loco Daze Committee
   
31.15   Name
   
31.16   Purpose
   
31.17   Membership
   
31.18   Meetings of members
   
31.19   Officers and duties
   
31.20   Committees
   
31.21   Amendments
Neighborhood Association Commission
   
31.35   Generally
   
31.36   Membership
   
31.37   Goals
   
31.38   Functions
   
31.39   City staff liaison
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.01 ON-CALL FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE MISSION.
   In order to protect the lives and property of the citizens of the city and
other nearby entities with mutual aid agreements, there is hereby established
the Fire Department of the city. Its mission shall be fire prevention and
education and the preservation and protection of life, property and the
environment against injury and damage from fires, hazardous materials
incidents, natural and human made disasters and other incidents occurring
within the city, mutual aid partners, and as directed by the City Council.
§ 31.02 BY-LAWS.
   Under direction of the Fire Chief, the Dilworth Fire Department will
maintain a set of by-laws and standard operating guidelines. It will be at the
discretion of the Fire Chief to determine the best leadership format for the
Department.
§ 31.03 FIRE RELIEF ASSOCIATION.
   The city participates in the State Fire Relief Association in accordance
with M.S. Chapter 424A, as it may be amended from time to time.
LOCO DAZE COMMITTEE
§ 31.15 NAME.
   The name of this committee shall be the “Dilworth Loco Daze Committee.”
(Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-2010)
§ 31.16 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Dilworth Loco Daze is organized for community civic celebration
purposes.
   (B)   The purpose of this Committee is:
      (1)   To hold an annual community celebration;
      (2)   To develop a variety of activities for all ages; and
      (3)   To promote the community, its heritage and history.
(Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-2010)
§ 31.17 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Appointment. Membership shall consist of no more than 16 voting
members. All voting members shall be appointed by the City Council. The City
Council shall appoint one of its members to serve as a non-voting member on the
Loco Daze Committee and may also select an alternate from the Council to serve
in the absence of this member.
   (B)   Terms. The term of each member shall be from January 1 through
December 31 of each year and shall be appointed annually by the City Council at
its first meeting in January. The appointed member from the City Council shall
also be appointed by the City Council at the first meeting in January. No
action to change the size of the Committee shall be taken except upon a two-
thirds vote of all the members of the City Council, and no such action shall be
taken until at least three years after the last resolution or ordinance
modifying the size of the Committee.
   (C)   Removal. Members shall be subject to removal only for cause, after a
hearing, by a two-thirds vote of all Council members. Failure to attend three
consecutive meetings, without justification, shall be basis for removal.
   (D)   Vacancies. Vacancies created during a term shall be filled by a
recommendation of the Loco Daze Committee and appointed by the City Council for
the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-2010)
§ 31.18 MEETINGS OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. Regularly scheduled meetings shall be held as agreed
to by the Loco Daze Committee or as deemed necessary by the Chairperson.
   (B)   Annual meeting. An annual meeting shall be held in the fall each year
at a date, time and location to be set by the Chairperson and the Loco Daze
Committee. At the annual meeting, the Committee will elect officers, receive a
financial report, review details of the current year’s celebration and
establish dates for future celebrations.
   (C)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or
a majority of the Committee.
   (D)   Notice of meetings. Printed notice of each meeting shall be given to
each voting member, by mail or e-mail. All Committee members’ names shall
appear on the mail or e-mail notices.
   (E)   Quorum. Four members must be present for business transactions to take
place and motions to pass (this number may be revised if the City Council
decides to reduce the number of members). If the Chairperson feels a majority
of the voting members should vote on the issue at hand in place of a meeting,
he or she shall have the authority to call for a paper ballot vote by mail or
e-mail on said issue. (A simple majority is necessary to pass a motion if four
or more members are present.)
(Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-2010)
§ 31.19 OFFICERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Officers. There shall be three officers on the Committee, consisting
of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary/Treasurer. (All officers are
considered voting members.)
   (B)   Duties of the Chairperson. The Chairperson shall convene regularly
scheduled Committee meetings. He or she shall preside over the meetings or
arrange for the Vice-Chairperson or Secretary/Treasurer to preside over the
meeting(s) in his or her absence.
   (C)   Duties of the Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall preside at
Committee meetings in the absence of the Chairperson.
   (D)   Duties of the Secretary/Treasurer. The Secretary/Treasurer shall be
responsible for keeping records of Committee actions, including taking minutes
at all Committee meetings, sending out meeting announcements, distributing
copies of minutes and the agenda to each Committee member and assuring that
meeting minutes are maintained.
   (E)   A financial report. A financial report shall be provided by the City
Finance Officer as requested by the Chairperson.
(Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-2010)
§ 31.20 COMMITTEES.
   The Loco Daze Committee may create sub-committees as needed. It may or may
not be a voting member.
(Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-2010)
§ 31.21 AMENDMENTS.
   These by-laws may be amended, when necessary, by paper ballot vote by a two-
thirds majority of the Loco Daze Committee and the change(s) then submitted to
the City Council for approval. Proposed amendments must be submitted to the
Secretary/Treasurer to be sent out with the regular Committee agenda.
(Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-2010)
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION COMMISSION
§ 31.35 GENERALLY.
   There shall be a Neighborhood Association Commission within the city with
the following goals and functions as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 96-1, passed 1-24-1996)
§ 31.36 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Neighborhood Association Commission will write its own by-laws
pertaining to membership, function and the like. The Commission could include
one member from each Neighborhood Association.
   (B)   The Neighborhood Association Commission would be a ten- to 15-member
board that would serve in an advisory status to the City Council. The
Commission would meet monthly and possess the same advisory status as other
city commissions such as the Planning Commission, Park Board, Star City
Commission and Loco Daze Committee.
(Ord. 96-1, passed 1-24-1996)
§ 31.37 GOALS.
   The goals of a Neighborhood Association Commission are to move decision-
making closer to the neighborhoods, improve communication and sharing of ideas
among the Neighborhood Associations and with City Hall and to provide
Neighborhood Associations with official advisory stature to the City Council.
(Ord. 96-1, passed 1-24-1996)
§ 31.38 FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   Functions are to be decided by the Neighborhood Association
Commission.
   (B)   Some of the functions of the Neighborhood Association Commission could
include:
      (1)   Determining which Neighborhood Association projects would be
approved to receive city contributions;
      (2)   Sharing ideas between Neighborhood Associations;
      (3)   Plan city-wide Neighborhood Association meetings and picnics;
      (4)   Communication with City Council and staff to solve neighborhood
concerns and address potential problem areas;
      (5)   Work with community police officer in better organizing
Neighborhood Watch Groups;
      (6)   Develop new goals and approaches to the Neighborhood Association
program;
      (7)   Initiate and form Neighborhood Watch Groups; and
      (8)   Develop a public relations strategy.
(Ord. 96-1, passed 1-24-1996)
§ 31.39 CITY STAFF LIAISON.
   The community police officer would be the city staff person assigned to the
Neighborhood Association Commission. Also, one City Council member would be
assigned as the City Council liaison. The community police officer, or a
designee, would be expected to prepare the agenda and send out notices to
members of the Neighborhood Association Commission and attend all Commission
meetings.
(Ord. 96-1, passed 1-24-1996)
CHAPTER 32: CITY EMPLOYEES
Section
   
32.01   Criminal history background check for applicants for city employment
   
32.02   Worker’s compensation for elected officials
   
32.03   Compensation and expense reimbursement
   
32.04   Salaries
§ 32.01 CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECK FOR APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized
criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment
background checks for the positions described in division (B) below.
   (B)   Criminal history employment background investigations.
      (1)   The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive
entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on
the applicants for the following positions within the city, unless the city’s
hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed.
         (a)   Employment positions: all regular part-time or full-time
employees of the city, including other positions that work with children or
vulnerable adults. (This would include, but not be limited to, municipal pool
employees and skating rink caretakers.)
         (b)   Background investigations shall be in compliance with the
Minnesota Child Protection Background Check Act as identified in M.S. §§
299C.61 and 299C.62, as they may be amended from time to time. As per M.S. §
299F.035, as it may be amended from time to time, applications for a
firefighter position are also subject to a criminal history background
investigation.
      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the State Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal
history data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority,
including the City Council, the City Administrator or other city staff involved
in the hiring process.
      (3)   (a)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the
collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions
set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s
prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of
employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor with a jail sentence.
         (b)   If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the
city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
            1.   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
            2.   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
            3.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment;
and
            4.   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 4-12-2010)
§ 32.02 WORKER’S COMPENSATION FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   The Mayor and members of the Council of the city shall be covered by
worker’s compensation while they are engaged in municipal business. This
coverage is to include all injuries caused by accidents arising out of, and in
the course of, city employment.
(Ord. 73-2, passed 1-8-1973)
§ 32.03 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.
   The Mayor and members of the Council shall be entitled to extra compensation
at the rate of $40 per day or any fraction thereof upon attendance at any
special meeting of the Mayor and Council, convention or other conference, upon
the business of the city, the attendance and extra compensation of which shall
be approved by a majority of the Mayor and Council in advance of such meeting,
convention or other conference.
(Ord. 73-1, passed 1-8-1973)
§ 32.04 SALARIES.
   (A)   Salaries. The salaries of the Mayor and members of the City Council
shall be in the amount set forth as follows:
      (1)   The Mayor shall receive an annual salary of $8,400 payable at $700
monthly.
      (2)   The Council Members shall receive an annual salary of $6,000payable
at $500 monthly.
   (B)   Effective date. This section shall take effect January 1, 2014, and
after its publication in the official newspaper.
(Ord. 13-02, passed 8-26-2013)
CHAPTER 33: CITY POLICIES
Section
   
33.01   Service charge for dishonored checks
§ 33.01 SERVICE CHARGE FOR DISHONORED CHECKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHECK. Check draft, order of withdrawal or similar negotiable or non-
negotiable instrument.
      CREDIT. An arrangement or understanding with the drawee for the payment
of a check.
      DISHONORED CHECK.
         (a)   A check which, at a time of issuance, the issuer intends shall
not be paid.
         (b)   Any of the following shall constitute evidence that the issuer
did not intend the check to be paid:
            1.   Proof that, at the time of issuance, the issuer did not have
an account with the drawee;
            2.   Proof that, at the time of issuance, the issuer did not have
sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and that the issuer failed to pay
the check within five business days after mailing of notice of non-payment or
dishonor as provided in M.S. § 609.535, as it may be amended from time to time;
or
            3.   Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable
time, the issuer did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and
that the issuer failed to pay the check within five business days after mailing
of notice of non-payment or dishonor as provided in MS. § 609.535, as it may be
amended from time to time.
         (c)   DISHONORED CHECK does not include any post-dated check or a
check given for a past consideration, except a payroll check or a check issued
to a fund for employee benefits.
   (B)   This section applies to all dishonored checks issued within the city.
   (C)   Prior to referring any dishonored check to the City Prosecutor, for
prosecution, the city shall have the discretion to send the issuer a demand
letter requesting payment of the face value of the dishonored check plus a
service charge to the victim of the dishonored check. In addition, to cover the
costs of sending such a demand letter and collecting payment, the city may
require a service charge to the city. Upon failure of the issuer within a
reasonable time to pay the face value of the dishonored check plus the
aforementioned service charges, the city may, in its discretion, refer the
dishonored check to the City Prosecutor for prosecution.
(Ord. 94-5, passed 10-11-1994)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
CHAPTER 34: FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
34.01   Fee schedule
§ 34.01 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following permit fees and service charges are hereby established for the
year 2024. The fees listed supersede those previously adopted. Not all fees may
be included. All fees not reflected are still active via previous ordinances or
resolutions.
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                                                 Fee
Appliance Pick-Up                                                              $30
Building Permit Fees (does not include state surcharges)
   Commercial construction                                                  Value
                                                                               based
                                                                               - ($1 -
                                                                               $25,000)
                                                                               $30 for
                                                                               the first
                                                                              $2,000
                                                                               plus $7
                                                                               for each
                                                                               $1,000 up
                                                                               to $25,000
                                                                               - ($25,001
                                                                               - $50,000)
                                                                               $200 for
                                                                               the first
                                                                              $25,000
                                                                               plus $5.50
                                                                               for each
                                                                               additional
                                                                               $1,000 up
                                                                               to $50,000
                                                                               - ($50,001
                                                                               -
                                                                               $100,000)
                                                                               $350 for
                                                                               the first
                                                                              $50,000
                                                                               plus $3.50
                                                                               for each
                                                                               additional
                                                                               $1,000 up
                                                                               to
                                                                               $100,000
                                                                               -
                                                                               ($100,001
                                                                               +) $550
                                                                               for the
                                                                              first
                                                                               $100,000
                                                                               plus $3
                                                                               for each
                                                                               additional
                                                                               $1,000
   Residential construction
                                                                               Value
                                                                               based;
      1- and 2-family construction (manufactured homes, houses moved in, over 2
swimming pools go by same value schedule)                                      units use
                                                                               commercial
                                                                               rates
                                                                               - ($1 -
                                                                               $100,000)
                                                                               $25 for
                                                                               the first
                                                                               $1,000
                                                                              plus $3.50
                                                                               for each
                                                                               additional
                                                                               $1,000 up
                                                                               to
                                                                               $100,000
                                                                               -
                                                                               ($100,001
                                                                               +) $371.50
                                                                               for the
                                                                              first
                                                                               $100,000
                                                                               plus $2
                                                                               for each
                                                                               additional
                                                                               $1,000
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                                         Fee
      Building sprinkler system (to be obtained by installer)    $75
                                                                       $75 + $.50
      Deck permit                                                state
                                                                       surcharge
                                                                       $20 + $.50
      Demolition permits                                         state
                                                                       surcharge
                                                                       $25 + $.50
      Driveway permit                                            state
                                                                       surcharge
      Manufactured homes (mobile homes moved to courts) building $35 + $.50
permit                                                                 state
                                                                       surcharge
      Moving permit (to be obtained by licensed mover)           $75
      Remodel                                                    Value based
                                                                       - ($0 -
                                                                       $2,000) $10
                                                                       + $1.50 for
                                                                      each
                                                                       additional
                                                                       $100 or
                                                                       fraction
                                                                       thereof
                                                                       - ($2,001 -
                                                                       $25,000)
                                                                       $32.50 for
                                                                       first
                                                                      $2,000 + $6
                                                                       for each
                                                                       additional
                                                                       $1,000 or
                                                                       fraction
                                                                       thereof
                                                                       - ($25,001
                                                                       - $50,000)
                                                                       $170.50 for
                                                                       first
                                                                      $25,000 +
                                                                       $4.50 for
                                                                       each
                                                                       additional
                                                                       $1,000 over
                                                                       $25,000
                                                                       - ($50,001
                                                                       - $100,000)
                                                                       $283 for
                                                                       first
                                                                      $50,000 +
                                                                       $3 for each
                                                                       additional
                                                                       $1,000 over
                                                                       $50,000
                                                                       - ($100,001
                                                                       +) $433 for
                                                                       the first
                                                                       $100,000
                                                                      plus $2.50
                                                                       for each
                                                                       additional
                                                                       $1,000 or
                                                                       fraction
                                                                       thereof
      Roofing permit (1- and 2-family dwellings and accessory    $50 + $.50
structures)                                                            state
                                                                       surcharge
      Satellite dishes                                           $15
                                                                       $50 + $.50
      Siding permit                                              state
                                                                       surcharge
      Wood burning appliances                                    $15
                                                                       3.95% per
Credit Card Convenience Fee                                            transaction
                                                                       ($2
                                                                       minimum)
Data Practices
                                                                       Lowest
                                                                       hourly rate
   Labor costs beyond normal scope                                  of employee
                                                                       able to
                                                                       collect
                                                                       data
                                                                       $0.25 per
                                                                       page/copy
                                                                       (based upon
                                                                       8.5 in. x
                                                                       11 in.
                                                                       paper
                                                                       black/white
   Per page                                                         copies;
                                                                       amount can
                                                                       be adjusted
                                                                       to cover
                                                                       costs if
                                                                       color or
                                                                       larger
                                                                       copies are
                                                                       requested)
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                                                   Fee
Facility Use Fees  (Additional charges for short-notice or holidays may not be
reflected)
                                                                                 $75 + $200
   Depot                                                                      (refundable)
                                                                                 damage
                                                                                 deposit
   Swimming pool
      Admission fee                                                        $3 per entry
      Family pass                                                          $120
      Family pass (over six people)                                        $10 per
                                                                                 person
      Punch card (20 punches)                                              $50
                                                                                 $200 for two
                                                                                 hours
      Private rental (after hours, up to 20 people)                        (includes
                                                                                 three
                                                                                 lifeguards)
                                                                                 $200 + $40
                                                                                 each
                                                                                 additional
                                                                                 lifeguard
                                                                                 (additional
      Private rental (after hours, over 20 people)                         lifeguard
                                                                                 required for
                                                                                 every 1-10
                                                                                 people over
                                                                                 the first
                                                                                 20)
      Single pass                                                          $50
      Swimming lessons (two-week program)                                  $50
      Swimming lessons (private session - one person @ 50 minutes)         $35
      Swimming lessons (private session - two people @ 50 minutes)         $50
Fire
   Dilworth residents                                                         No charge
   Non-Dilworth/township residents
      1 hour                                                               $500
      Each additional hour                                                 $250
      City laborer services                                                $30/hour
                                                                                 Additional
      Fire response with no burning permit                                 $75 fee to
                                                                                 total cost
                                                                                 of fire run
      Foam chemicals, floor dry, face mask repair/replacement, and other   Billed at
materials                                                                        vendor cost
      Other tools and equipment replacement                                Billed at
                                                                                 vendor cost
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                                                    Fee
Fines
                                                                                  First
                                                                                  offense:
                                                                                  $500
                                                                                  Second
Administrative offenses (except violations of Chapter 94)                         offense:
                                                                                  $1,000
                                                                                  Third
                                                                                  offense:
                                                                                  $1,500
                                                                                  First
                                                                                  offense:
                                                                                  $500
                                                                                  Second
Nuisance violations (administrative offense process)                              offense:
                                                                                  $1,000
                                                                                  Third or
                                                                                  more
                                                                                  offense:
                                                                                  $1,500
Heating License                                                                   $50
HVAC Permit Fees (does not include state surcharges; $1 per permit as of 7-1-
2015)
   Air to air exchangers or air handling unit                                  $30
   Alterations to duct work or hot water/steam piping                          $30
   Commercial central air conditioning systems (up to 8 tons)                  $35
      Each 10 tons thereafter                                               $25
      Maximum fee per unit                                                  $120
   Domestic central air conditioning systems                                   $30
   Gas piping only                                                             $30
   Installation of gas or oil burning appliances (includes new or replacement  $30
water heater, fireplace, range, dryer, generators and garage heaters)
   New or replacement heating systems and furnaces up to 200,000 BTU           $30
      Each 10,000 BTU over 200,000 input                                    $25
      Maximum fee per unit                                                  $120
   Propane (LP) tank installations                                             $30
   Temporary heating system propane or natural gas (all but electric)(includes $30
generators)
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                 Fee
Liquor
   3.2% malt liquor
      Off-sale (non-intoxicating)        $100
      On-sale (non-intoxicating)         $300
   Intoxicating
      Off-sale liquor                    $100
      On-sale liquor                     $2,000
      On-sale wine                       $300
      On-sale malt liquor (strong beer)  $300
      Sunday liquor                      $200
   Other
      1-day temporary license            $25
      2:00 a.m. closing                  Based upon annual sales
      On-sale club                       $100
   Liquor license background check through P$200
Massage Licensing                              $500
   License                                  $500
   Renewal license                          $100
Non-Sufficient Fund/Payment Return Fee         $35
Parking
   All parking infractions unless stated bel$25
   Fire lane/hydrant                        $40
   Handicapped parking                      $200
   Late fees
      7 - 14 days                        $10
      14 - 30 days                       $20
      Over 30 days (maximum late fee)    $30
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                                               Fee
Pet Licensing (per pet)
   Dangerous dog registration                                             $500
   Impound fee (not inclusive of boarding fees)                           $35
   Impound fee repeat offense(s)                                          $50
   Microchip (one time) license                                           $25
   No pet license penalty (includes license fee)                          $50
   Potentially dangerous dog                                              $200
   Yearly license (before January 31)                                     $7.50
   Yearly license (after January 31)                                      $15
Planning and Zoning Fees
   Conditional use permit                                                 $225
   Major subdivision, final                                               $150
   Major subdivision, preliminary                                         $325
   Minor subdivision requiring hearing(s)                                 $225
   Planned unit development                                               $225
   Recording fee at the County Courthouse (subject to readjustment by the $46
County Courthouse)                                                           (subject
                                                                             to change)
   Rezoning                                                               $225
                                                                             Value
                                                                             based,
   Sign permit                                                            paid to
                                                                             Building
                                                                             Inspector
                                                                             Billed at
   Title review of plat                                                   City
                                                                             Attorney
                                                                             cost
   Variance                                                               $225
Plumbing Fees (does not include state surcharges;$1 per permit as of 7-1-
2015)
   Alterations to water piping or drains, wastes and vents                $30
   Back flow valve (new construction)                                     $5
   Commercial connection fee
      Sewer                                                            $50
      Water                                                            $35
   Electric water heater (new construction only)                          $30
                                                                             $20 + $5
   Fixture openings (after 4)                                             per each
                                                                             additional
                                                                             opening
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                                      Fee
                                                                    $20
   Fixture openings (first 4)                                    (minimum
                                                                    charge)
   Residential connection fee
      Water                                                   $25
      Sewer                                                   $25
   Winter/summer switch (new construction)                       $5
Police
   Audio CD                                                      $5
   Digital photos on CD                                          $5
                                                                    $0.25/page
   Incident report copies                                        (black/
                                                                    white copy)
   Record checks                                                 $4
   Video DVD                                                     $20
Redemption Fee For Abandoned Shopping Cart                          $15
Rental Property Registration
   1 unit/single family house                                    $50
   2 to 10 units                                                 $200
   11 to 50 units                                                $300
   50+ units                                                     $500
   Rental to family member with exemption form                   $25
   Initial inspection                                            $0
   Re-inspection                                                 $100/hour
   Pre-purchase inspection                                       $100/
                                                                    building
   Missed inspection                                             $50/
                                                                    building
   Additional missed inspection                                  $100/
                                                                    building
   Rental report/background rental license check                 $5
Right-of-Way Management
   Accompanying documents when filing a permit
                                                                    City
                                                                    recognized
      Certificate of liability insurance                      as
                                                                    additional
                                                                    insured
      Contractor bond (work on driveway approach/curb/gutter/ $5,000
sidewalk)
      Contractor bond (work within ROW)                       $25,000
                                                                    minimum
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                          Fee
   Driveway approach/curb/gutter/sidewalk
      Existing developments (replacement or additi$25.50
      New construction                            Included with building
                                                        permit
   Underground utility installation and repairs
      Bore pit/utility potholing (20 sq. ft. or mo$100/each
      Bore pit/utility potholing (less than 20 sq.$20/each
      Street excavation of any type               $125/each
      Trenching/directional boring                $0.70 per lineal foot
                                                        *Does not include
                                                       utilities with
                                                        franchise agreements
Tobacco License                                         $125
                                                        $200 - per location; up
Transient Merchant License                              to 90 days at a
                                                        location
Tree Removal on Property                                Charged at vendor cost
Used Car Dealer License                                 $100
Utilities; City (Misc.)
   Administrative Penalties
      By-passing a water meter (commercial)       $1,000
      By-passing a water meter (residential)      $500
      Failure to comply with water restrictions
         1st Offense during period of restrictiWarning
         2nd Offense                           $50
         3rd Offense                           $100
                                                        Disconnection of
         4th Offense                           irrigation meter and/or
                                                        lockout of external
                                                        connections
      General
         Minor Violation                       $100
         Major Violation                       $500
Must have one or more of the following (Potential
critical impact on public health or the environment;
potential danger to human life or safety; continuing
nature of violation; cost of restitution, repair or
remediation exceeds $1,000; knowing performance of
unpermitted activities)
      Opening or interference with fire hydrant   $500
      Restricting water meter access              $100
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                                                  Fee
      Tampering with a curb stop                                          $500
      Tampering with a water meter (commercial)                           $1,000
      Tampering with a water meter (residential)                          $500
      Tampering with a water meter by-pass (commercial)                   $1,000
      Tampering with a water meter by-pass (residential)                  $500
      Tampering with city fire hydrants                                   $100
      Tampering with city main line water valves                          $100
      Tampering with water meter, water meter reading device or seal      $100
      Unauthorized delivery or possession of hydrant key or wrench        $100
      Unauthorized removal of a stormdrain grate/manhole cover            $500
      Unauthorized tap of a water distribution main                       $500
      Unpermitted connection to a city utility                            $500
   Commercial
      Hookup fees (does not include meter cost which is billed based upon
vendor price)
         5/8 in. meter                                                 $700
         3/4 in. meter                                                 $1,000
         1 in. meter                                                   $1,000
         1-1/2 in. meter                                               $2,000
         2 in. meter                                                   $2,000
         3 in. meter                                                   $3,000
         4 in. meter                                                   $4,000
      Water - Sold in bulk of 500 gallons                                 $65
                                                                                Commercial
                                                                                water rate
                                                                                + $60/hour
                                                                                for labor
      Water - Over 5,000 gallons                                          +
                                                                                additional
                                                                                tax on
                                                                                water +
                                                                                $65 meter
                                                                                fee
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                                  Fee
   Residential
      5/8 in. Iperl water meter                           Billed at vendor price + sales tax (shipping may apply)
      5/8 in. Ally water meter                            Billed at vendor price + sales tax (shipping may apply)
      Frost plate                                         $21.48
      Multi-unit development sewer hookup fee connection  No fee
      Multi-unit development water hookup fee with master $700 + $100 for each additional unit
      Radio water meter reader                            Billed at vendor price + sales tax (shipping may apply)
      Residential sewer hookup fee                        $100
      Residential water hookup fee                        $100
      Residential water meter package (5/8 in.)           Billed at vendor price
      Touchpad water meter reader                         $16.11
      Water - Solid in bulk of 500 gallons                $65
Utilities; City (monthly)
   Recycling (residential curbside)                          $7.00 per month
   Solid waste collection (residential)                      $19.27 per month + tax
   Solid waste collection (multi-family residential)         $21.27 per month X # of units + tax
                                                                Cubic Yards            Rate
                                                                1               $54
                                                                1.5               $67.65
                                                                3               $128.36
   Solid waste collection (commercial, one collection per wee4               $156.86
                                                                6               $236.96
                                                                8               $312.15
                                                                Other - small business curbside pickup   $34.89 (customer provides up to two
                                                                32-gallon containers)
                                                                Cubic Yards            Rate
                                                                1               $87.30
   Solid waste collection (commercial, two collections per   1.5               $120.36
week)                                                           3               $222.99
                                                                4               $287.36
                                                                6               $423.15
                                                                8               $590.94
   Solid waste tag                                           $2.50/tag
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                         Fee
   Sewer (commercial)                               November - April: 1.26 x water bill
                                                      May - October: Billed at same rate per month:
                                                       Average of November - April bills
   Sewer (residential)                              November - April: 1.19 x water bill
                                                      May - October: Billed at same rate per month; Average of November - April
                                                       bills
   Water (base rate + volume charge)
   Base rate (based upon meter size)
      5/8" meter                                 $14
      3/4" meter                                 $14
      1" meter                                   $21.46
      1 1/2" meter                               $38.15
      2" meter                                   $58.83
      2 1/2" meter                               $88.28
      3" meter                                   $118.81
      4" meter                                   $191.37
      6" meter                                   $373.89
   Volume charge (residential - based upon usage in 1 to 5,000 gallons: $5.52 per 1,000
gallons)
                                                      5,001 to 10,000 gallons: $5.81 per 1,000
                                                      10,001 to 17,500 gallons: $6.10 per 1,000
                                                      17,501 to 25,000 gallons: $6.39 per 1,000
                                                      25,001 to 37,500 gallons: $6.56 per 1,000
                                                      37,501 to 50,000 gallons: $6.85 per 1,000
                                                      50,001 gallons and over: $7.14 per 1,000
   Volume charge (commercial - based upon usage in  1 to 5,000 gallons: $5.81 per 1,000
gallons)
                                                      5,001 to 25,000 gallons: $6.10 per 1,000
                                                      25,001 gallons and over: $6.85 per 1,000
      Turn on fee                                $40
 
Permit/Service Fee
Permit/Service                                    Fee
      Curb stop repair                      Vendor cost
                                                  $220 (2 hours OT @ $180 + $40
      After hours turn on minimum fee       turn on fee; each hour over 2
                                                  is billed at $100/hour)
      Reconnection fee                      Vendor cost
      Reconnection fee for inactive service 1/2 of monthly minimum
request                                           utility bill
Utility Fees/Charges/Tax; City (other monthly
fees)
   Clean Water Act                             $9.72 ($0.81/month on utility
                                                  bill)
   Forestry fee                                $2.00
   New account set up                          $15
   Pest control fee                            $2.20
   Sewer bond charge                           $6
   Solid waste management tax                  Resident - 9.75%
                                                  Commercial - 17%
   Storm water utility management fee
Residential single family, duplex, town homes and $6
condominiums (per unit)
Apartments & Mobile Home Parks (per unit/occupied $6
lot)
   Churches                                    $6
   Vacant Land                                 $0
   Central Business District                   $6
   General Business District                   $12
      General Business District (over 5 acre$18
      General Business District (over 10 acr$24
      General Business District (over 15 acr$30
      General Business District (over 25 acr$42
 
 
Permit/Service         Fee
      Schools    $30
      Industrial $36es
      Railroad   $60
 
(Ord. 14-04, passed 8-11-2014; Ord. 14-05, passed 12-22-2015; Ord. 15-04,
passed 4-27-2015; Ord. passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 15-10, passed 12-14-2015; Ord. 15-
11, passed 12-28-2015; Ord. 16-08, passed 8-22-2016; Ord. 16-12, passed 12-19-
2016; Ord. 17-05, passed 12-20-2017; Ord. 18-10, passed 10-8-2018; Ord. 18-12,
passed 12-10-2018; Ord. 19-02, passed 5-13-2019; Ord. 19-03, passed 5-28-2019;
Ord. 19-09, passed 7-22-2019; Ord. 19-13, passed 12-23-2019; Ord. 20-01, passed
1-13-2020; Ord. 20-07, passed 12-14-2020; Ord. 21-09, passed 12-28-2021; Ord.
22-01, passed 2-28-2022; Ord. 22-06, passed 9-26-2022; Ord. 22-09, passed 12-
27-2022; Ord. 23-04, passed 12-26-2023; Ord. 24-13, passed 12-23-2024)
CHAPTER 35: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND CIVIL PENALTIES
Section
   
35.01   Administrative citations and civil penalties
§ 35.01 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The City Council finds that there is a need for alternative
methods of enforcing this City Code. While criminal penalties have been the
most frequent enforcement mechanism, there are certain negative consequences
for both the city and the accused involved, and the delay inherent in that
system does not ensure prompt resolution. Additionally, the City Council finds
that there is a need for alternative methods of enforcing nuisance offenses
because they are prone to occur repeatedly. Chronic nuisance offenses are a
financial and resource burden to the city as a result of repeated calls to
ameliorate those conditions. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the use
of this administrative procedure and of administrative citations is a
legitimate and alternative method of enforcement. This method of enforcement is
in addition to any other legal remedy that may be pursued under this City Code.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   Administrative citations and civil penalties. The City Council may,
by resolution or ordinance, establish a schedule of civil penalties for
administrative violations. Civil penalties shall be imposed according to the
schedule adopted by the City Council. The City Council may also adopt a
schedule of fees to be paid to administrative hearing officers.
      (2)   General civil penalty structure. As identified throughout the City
Code, violations of certain provisions of the City Code may be considered
administrative offenses that may be subject to this administrative procedure
and administrative citations and civil penalties. Administrative offenses,
except for those identified in the following division, are subject to the non-
graduated civil penalty structure established by the City Council.
      (3)   Graduated civil penalty structure. The City Council finds
violations of
Chapter 94 of this City Code are administrative offenses that are more prone to
repeat violations. These administrative offenses are subject to the graduated
civil penalty structure established by the City Council based on the number of
offense occurrences within a rolling 12-month period. A prior offense
occurrence is counted for penalty purposes if the prior offense was a violation
of the same provision of the City Code as the current offense occurrence. If a
prior administrative offense was dismissed or the offense occurrence was based
on a violation of a different provision of the City Code, it will not count
toward the number of offense occurrences.
      (4)   Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. The
city may elect to pursue either the administrative offense or the applicable
criminal offense, but not both, for the same offense.
      (5)   The City Administrator may adopt procedures for administering the
administrative citation program.
   (C)   Administrative citation.
      (1)   A person authorized to enforce the provisions of this City Code
which constitute an administrative offense may issue an administrative citation
upon belief that an offense has occurred. The citation must be issued in person
or by mail to the person responsible for the offense. The citation must state
the date, time, and nature of the offense, the name of the issuing officer, the
amount of the scheduled fine, and the manner for paying the fine or appealing
the citation.
      (2)   The person responsible for the offense must either pay the
scheduled fine or submit a written request for an appeal to the City
Administrator within seven calendar days after issuance. Payment of the fine
constitutes admission of the offense. A late payment fee of 10% of the
scheduled fine amount may be imposed under division (F) of this section.
   (D)   Administrative review hearing process.
      (1)   City Administrator review.
         (a)   Upon receipt of an accused’s written request for an appeal, the
City Administrator will contact the accused and set a time to discuss the
offense. The City Administrator will also contact the officer who issued the
citation and set a separate time to discuss the offense. After meeting with the
accused and the officer, the City Administrator has the authority to determine
that an offense occurred, to dismiss a citation, to impose the scheduled fine,
and/or to reduce, stay, or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or
upon compliance with appropriate conditions. The City Administrator will not
issue verbal findings of his or her determination on an administrative citation
during a meeting with either the accused or the officer but, instead, will
issue written findings of his or her determination following such meetings.
         (b)   The failure to attend the meeting with the City Administrator
constitutes a waiver of the accused’s rights to an appeal and an admission of
the offense. The City Administrator may waive this result upon good cause
shown. Examples of good cause are death or incapacitating illness of the
accused or a court order requiring the accused to appear for another hearing at
the same time. Good cause does not include forgetfulness and intentional delay.
The City Administrator may exercise discretion to impose a fine for more than
one day of continuing offense but only upon a finding that: (i) the offenses
caused a serious threat of harm to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
that (ii) the accused intentionally and unreasonably refused to comply with the
City Code requirements.
         (c)   If the accused would like to appeal the decision of the City
Administrator, the person must submit a written request for a hearing to the
City Administrator within seven calendar days after the issuance of the City
Administrator’s opinion. If no appeal is made, the accused must pay the
scheduled fine within seven calendar days after the issuance of the City
Administrator’s opinion.
      (2)   Hearing Board review.
         (a)   The city will compile a three person Hearing Board to hear
appeals of the decisions of the City Administrator. The Hearing Board will
consist of two City Council members and one citizen appointee. The accused will
have the right to request no later than five calendar days before the date of
the hearing that an assigned hearing officer be removed from the appeal. One
request for each case will be granted automatically by the City Administrator.
A subsequent request must be directed to the assigned Hearing Officer who will
decide whether he or she cannot fairly or objectively review the case. The City
Administrator may remove a Hearing Officer only by requesting that the assigned
Hearing Officer find that he or she cannot fairly and objectively review the
case. If such a finding is made, the Hearing Officer shall remove himself or
herself from the case, and the City Administrator will assign another Hearing
Officer. The Hearing Officers are not judicial officers but are public officers
as defined by M.S. §609.415, as may be amended from time to time. The Hearing
Officers may not be city employees.
         (b)   Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by mail on the
accused at least ten calendar days in advance unless a shorter time is accepted
by all parties. Notice need not be provided by certified mail.
         (c)   At the hearing, the parties will have the opportunity to present
testimony and question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidence will not
apply. Each party is responsible for providing its own documents and witnesses
to argue its position. The Hearing Board must record the hearing and receive
testimony and exhibits. The Hearing Board must receive and give weight to
evidence, including hearsay evidence, that possesses probative value commonly
accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs.
         (d)   The Hearing Board has the authority to determine that an offense
occurred, to dismiss a citation, to impose the scheduled fine, and/or to
reduce, stay, or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon
compliance with appropriate conditions. The Hearing Board may exercise
discretion to impose a fine for more than one day of continuing offense but
only upon a finding that: (i) the offenses caused a serious threat of harm to
the public health, safety, or welfare; or that (ii) the accused intentionally
and unreasonably refused to comply with the City Code requirements. The Hearing
Board’s decision and supporting reasons must be in writing and will be made by
a majority vote of the Hearing Officers.
         (e)   The failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the
accused’s rights to an administrative hearing and an admission of the offense.
A Hearing Board may waive this result upon good cause shown. Examples of good
cause are death or incapacitating illness of the accused; a court order
requiring the accused to appear for another hearing at the same time; and lack
of proper service of the notice of the hearing. Good cause does not include
forgetfulness and intentional delay.
   (E)   Judicial review. An accused may obtain judicial review of the decision
of the Hearing Board by filing a written appeal setting forth the party’s
grounds for the appeal to the Clay County District Court within 30 calendar
days of the date of the order of the Hearing Board. The Clerk of District Court
will notify the city of any such appeal, and the city shall file with the Court
all exhibits and the recording of the hearing before the Hearing Board. The
Court will review such record, and either uphold, reverse, or modify the order
of the Hearing Board, or, if the Court feels the record is insufficient, or
desires to hear arguments on the appeal, may schedule a new evidentiary hearing
on the matter, or arguments on the record, or both. The Court, unless it
schedules an evidentiary hearing, will uphold the order of the Hearing Board
unless the Court determines that the order was clearly erroneous or the civil
penalty imposed is clearly excessive.
   (F)   Recovery of civil penalties.
      (1)   If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it will
constitute:
         (a)   A lien on the real property upon which the offense occurred if
the property or improvements on the property were the subject of the offense
and the property owner was found responsible for that offense; or
         (b)   A personal obligation of the offender in all other situations.
      (2)   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the
same manner as taxes.
      (3)   A personal obligation may be collected by appropriate legal means.
      (4)   A late payment fee of 10% of the fine may be assessed for each 30
calendar day period, or part thereof, that the fine remains unpaid after the
due date.
      (5)   The city may request the District Court, after a hearing, to hold
the offender in contempt of court for not paying the fine, and the court may
impose any such additional penalties that the Court could impose for not paying
a fine for a criminal sentence imposed by the District Court.
   (G)   Double jeopardy. If the final adjudication in the administrative
procedure is a finding of no offense, then the city may not prosecute a
criminal violation in District Court based on the same set of facts. This does
not preclude the city from pursuing a criminal conviction for a violation of
the same provision based on a different set of facts.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021; Am. Ord. 22-06, passed 9-26-2022)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SANITARY SEWER
      
53.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
      
54.   GEOTHERMAL HEATING SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
Section
   
50.01   Disposal required
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Totes
   
50.04   Grass clippings and yard waste
   
50.05   Collection supervised by Council
   
50.06   Starting or discontinuance of service
   
50.07   Maintenance of sanitary conditions
   
50.08   Fees for collection and disposal
   
50.09   Reimbursement
   
50.10   Disturbing garbage, rubbish, or waste contents
   
50.11   On-street parking prohibited days of collection
   
50.12   Recyclable material
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, school, trailer park, commercial or
industrial establishment to not dispose of garbage and rubbish which
accumulates upon their property. Every householder, occupant and owner of any
dwelling, boarding house, apartment house, apartment building or any other
structure utilized for dwelling purposes shall use the garbage and rubbish
collection as provided by the city. No garbage or rubbish shall be burned in
any yard, street or open area.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. passed 10-14-1985; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-
1993; Ord. 19-04, passed 7-8-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All organic refuse from the preparation of food, and decayed or
spoiled animal or vegetable food from any source.
   HAULER. The contracted company hired by the City of Dilworth to provide
solid waste and recycling collection in Dilworth.
   RESIDENTIAL NO-SORT RECYCLING. Disposal of all paper fibers, plastics,
metals, glass commingled into one container. Materials are separated and baled
at a material recovery facility (MRF).
   RUBBISH. All combustible inorganic refuse matter such as papers, sweepings,
rags, grass, wood shavings or from any other source etc., originating from
ordinary household or business operations.
   TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS WASTES. Substances, whether in liquid, gaseous or solid
form, which when collected, stored, transported or disposed of, may be acutely
toxic to humans or other animals or plant life, or be directly damaging to
property, including, but not limited to, pesticides, acids, caustics,
pathological wastes, radioactive materials and similar noxious substances.
   WASTE MATERIAL. All noncombustible inorganic refuse matter such as ashes,
cinders, sand, earth, metal, concrete, building materials, tires and similar
matter, originating from the ordinary household or business operations or from
any other source that shall not include body wastes of human or animal origin.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-1993; Ord. 19-04, passed
7-8-2019)
§ 50.03 TOTES.
   (A)   Every householder, occupant and owner of any dwelling, boarding house,
or any other structure utilized for dwelling purposes will be provided a 64-
gallon tote for solid waste collection, and a 96-gallon tote for single-sort
recycling collection by the contracted hauler. It is the responsibility of each
household, occupant, and owner of any dwelling, boarding house, or any other
structure utilized for dwelling purpose to properly maintain their respective
tote(s). Damaged totes will be replaced by the contractor. All charges for the
replacement of totes shall be between the resident and contractor.
   (B)   Any restaurant, industrial or commercial establishments, that
accumulates garbage and all apartment buildings containing three or more units
and schools where garbage accumulates will be required to use vat service with
pickup of no less than once per week. The actual size of vat and frequency of
service is to be based on need. Vats shall be of no less than one cubic yard
capacity, covered, and designed with the proper attachments for lifting into
rubbish trucks.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage, rubbish,
or waste material in any park, street, alley or any other property within the
city unless such refuse is deposited in containers, the type, size and location
of which are herein provided. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section,
the city reserves the right to vary the type, size and location of containers
required herein whenever the City of Dilworth and hauler determine its ability
to sanitarily or conveniently collect and dispose of garbage, rubbish or waste
material would be impaired, whenever the city determines a nuisance condition
exists, or whenever the City of Dilworth and hauler determines that it would be
in the public interest to do so.
   (D)   Upon request and/or evaluation of the City Staff, condominiums or
similar developments may arrange for a specialized collection method. All units
are still charged the regular rate as stipulated in §
34.01 of this code.
   (E)   Garbage and recycling totes must be stored within the principal
structure of the dwellng, or, for exterior storage, placed neatly against
either the back or side of the structure with lids fully closed, or stored in
such a manner as to:
      (1)   Not create a nuisance condition; and
      (2)   Comply with all applicable setback requirements and easements.
   (F)   Solid waste and recycling and totes may be placed along the boulevard
no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day prior to collection. Solid waste and
recycling totes must be removed no later than 8:00 p.m. on the day of
collection.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. passed 9-9-1974; Ord. passed 10-10-1978;
Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-1993; Ord. 16-02, passed 1-25-2016; Ord. 19-04, passed
7-8-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 GRASS CLIPPINGS AND YARD WASTE.
   The city will provide a roll off at a designated location in which grass
clippings and yard waste can be disposed. It will be the property owners’
responsibility to dispose of yard waste properly. Upon making arrangements at
City Hall, the city employees will provide a brush/branch disposal service
periodically throughout the year. All brush/branches must be piled by an alley
or on the boulevard. The city employees will not go on private property. The
city will not grind up tree trunks over the size of 11 inches in diameter. A
fee may be charged by the city for this service.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-1993) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 COLLECTION SUPERVISED BY COUNCIL.
   All solid waste and no sort recycling in the city shall be collected by a
private hauler, conveyed and disposed of under supervision of the Council. No
other private hauler is permitted to collect in the City of Dilworth. The
Council shall have the authority to make rules and regulations concerning
collection as it deems necessary provided that such are not contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-1993; Ord. 19-04, passed
7-8-2019)
§ 50.06 STARTING OR DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   It shall be the responsibility of every resident to notify the city at least
one week in advance of starting or discontinuance of service. Temporary
discontinuation will not be permitted.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-1993)
§ 50.07 MAINTENANCE OF SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   Persons accumulating garbage or rubbish shall comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Rubbish in street. No person shall place any garbage or rubbish in any
street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property owned by
others. Nor shall any person throw or deposit any rubbish in any stream or
other body of water.
   (B)   Scattering of rubbish. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit
any garbage or rubbish in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by
the elements off his or her property within the city.
   (C)   Burning of rubbish and garbage. There shall be no out-of-doors burning
in the city except for that which complies with the Minnesota Statutes on
pollution control.
   (D)   Contagious disease rubbish. The removal of rubbish from homes or
places where highly infectious or contagious diseases are present is
prohibited. All such material shall only be disposed of in the manner required
by law.
   (E)   Inflammable or explosive rubbish. Highly inflammable or explosive
materials shall not be placed in totes for regular collection but shall be
disposed of as directed by the Fire Chief at the expense of the owner or
possessor thereof.
   (F)   Toxic or hazardous wastes. Toxic or hazardous wastes shall not be
placed in regular totes, but shall be disposed of according to county and state
regulations.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. passed 9-9-1974; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-
1993; Ord. 19-04, passed 7-8-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 FEES FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   The fees for collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish for all
residential and commercial users shall be as determined by contract with the
city plus a reasonable amount for administrative expense. The city shall
compute the amount due the city for garbage and rubbish collection and render a
statement thereof to each user as part of an overall utility bill prepared by
the city. Such charges shall be a charge against the owner of any residential
or commercial unit and any such charge properly billed and unpaid may be
collected in a civil action or, at the discretion of the City Council, may be
certified to the County Auditor with taxes against the property so served.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-1993; Ord. 16-03, passed
1-25-2016; Ord. 19-04, passed 7-8-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 50.09 REIMBURSEMENT.
   Should the owner or occupant of any premises located within the city fail to
dispose of garbage or trash in accordance with this chapter, as herein
provided, the same may be disposed of by the city, which shall seek
reimbursement of the reasonable cost and expense in the manner set forth in §
50.08.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-1993)
§ 50.10 DISTURBING GARBAGE, RUBBISH, OR WASTE CONTENTS.
   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to disturb or scatter garbage,
rubbish, or waste as required by §
50.03.
(Ord. 16-10, passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 19-04, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 50.11 ON-STREET PARKING PROHIBITED DAYS OF COLLECTION.
   It is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on the street any days solid
waste or recycling collection takes place from 5:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. pursuant
to §
73.07.
(Ord. 19-04, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 50.12 RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.
   The purpose of this section is to reduce the amount of waste generated in
the city by voluntarily disposing of recycable materials either through no-sort
recycling methods or through separation of recyclable materials.
   (A)   Single family housing units are authorized to participate in the no-
sort recycling unless authorized by the City of Dilworth.
   (B)   Recyclables must fit inside the recycling tote; additional recyclables
will not be picked up by the contractor. The resident can either wait until the
next curb-side collection or drop off recyclables at Dilworth’s drop-off
location.
   (C)   The following materials may be commingled (i.e. not sorted) from the
normal garbage, rubbish and waste material collection if the materials have not
been contaminated:
      (1)   Newspaper. Includes inserts, shoppers, or other publications
printed on newspaper stock.
      (2)   Magazines. Glossy publications less than one inch thick.
      (3)   Rinsed clear and colored glass bottles, jugs, jars; glass does not
need to be separated from color.
      (4)   Aluminum, tin and steel cans.
      (5)   #1, #2, and #5 plastics without rings, caps or lids.
      (6)   Flattened corrugated cardboard.
      (7)   Flattened paperboard.
   (D)   The City of Dilworth will provide a recycling drop-off site for
residents; however, the materials must be separated and accordingly placed into
the correct receptacle(s).
   (E)   Ownership of separated materials set out for collection by the city
shall be vested in the city. It shall be unlawful and an offense against this
section for any person, firm or corporation to pick up separated materials for
his/her own use, except the owner, lessee or occupant of a residential dwelling
may take back materials set out at that particular dwelling.
(Ord. 19-04, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, school, trailer park, commercial or industrial establishment
violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as set out in §
10.99.
(Ord. 73-5, passed 5-14-1973; Ord. 93-2, passed 5-10-1993)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Application for service
   
51.02   City can make connections
   
51.03   Water to be metered
   
51.04   Separate connections
   
51.05   Curb, stop and waste cocks
   
51.06   Check valves required
Charges and Collections of Sewer and Water Service
   
51.20   Water meters to be read and active accounts billed
   
51.21   Bills mailed
   
51.22   Disconnection for late payment
   
51.23   Additional charge
   
51.24   Owners’ liability for water service and service requirements for mobile
home parks
   
51.25   Unpaid balance collection
Regulating Water Usage
   
51.40   Regulation
   
51.41   Other restrictions
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Any person desiring a connection with the city water system shall make
application therefor in writing to the City Administrator. Such application
shall contain an exact description of the property to be served, the estimated
amount of water to be used each month and the use to which such water will be
put.
(1963 Code, § 33.01)
§ 51.02 CITY CAN MAKE CONNECTIONS.
   All connections with any water main, tapping of mains and insertion of
stopcocks shall be made under the supervision of the city; and all service or
other pipes to be laid in the streets, alleys or public grounds shall be laid
under supervision of the city and compliances with all of the ordinances. The
cost of making such connection shall be borne by the consumer.
(1963 Code, § 33.02)
§ 51.03 WATER TO BE METERED.
   All water furnished by the Water Department shall be measured by meters
furnished by the consumers. The type of such meter to be specified by the city.
Meters shall be maintained and kept in repair by the city at consumers’
expense. Meters to be furnished by the city at consumers’ expense.
(1963 Code, § 33.03)
§ 51.04 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of water
service lines, the entire distance from the water main onto private property.
Water service lines shall mean any and all lines, meters, curb stops, or other
appurtenance from the water main to a property.
   (B)   If the city determines that the curb stop is inoperable, obstructed,
or inaccessible for any reason, the city shall require the property owner to
repair said curb stop, or remove any obstructions to allow the city access to
the curb stop, within a reasonable period of time specified by the city. If the
curb stop is leaking, it must be repaired immediately.
   (C)   If the property owner does not repair the curb stop in the period of
time specified by the city, the city may repair the curb stop at the property
owner’s expense. If the property owner does not reimburse the city for the cost
of repair, the city may certify the amount to the County Auditor for collection
with the property owner’s real estate taxes.
(1963 Code, § 33.04) (Ord. 03-07, passed 11-10-2003; Am. Ord. 16-01, passed 1-
25-2016; Ord. 18-05, passed 3-26-2018) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 CURB, STOP AND WASTE COCKS.
   Every service pipe attached to the mains shall have a curb cock, the same to
be placed as near as possible to the curb, if on a street, or within one foot
of the alleyline if the main is located in the alley. Every supply pipe shall
have one or more stop and waste cocks attached at some point between the curb
cock and the meter, so that water can be shut off and the meter and house
plumbing entirely drained.
(1963 Code, § 33.05)
§ 51.06 CHECK VALVES REQUIRED.
   Check valves shall be required on all connections to steam boilers and on
every other connection deemed by the Council to need one. Safety and relief
valves shall be placed on all boilers and electric heaters, and all other
apparatus connected with the water system where steam pressures may be raised
in excess of 40 pounds per square inch.
(1963 Code, § 33.06)
CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS OF SEWER AND WATER SERVICE
§ 51.20 WATER METERS TO BE READ AND ACTIVE ACCOUNTS BILLED.
   Water meters shall be read by a person or persons designated by the City
Council for that purpose. The utility bill will be for a one month period
starting with December as the first billing period of the year. If the meter
reads no usage for any given month, the utility bill will reflect minimum and
any set charges for that month. Effective August 25, 2009, there shall be no
temporary discontinuance of service. An account may be put inactive with no
monthly minimum or set charges only if the property is vacated (all personal
belongings are removed from the premises) and the city is able to shut off the
water service to the property. Reactivation of an inactive utility account (as
satisfied in the previous sentence) will result in a customer being charged a
two-week pro-rated bill for the month which services are reactivated. The City
of Dilworth is not responsible for any damages that may arise from reactivating
a water service.
(1963 Code, § 34.01) (Ord. passed 7-11-1988; Ord. 88-3, passed 8-8-1988; Ord.
08-01, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 15-01, passed 1-12-2015; Ord. 16-01, passed 1-
25-2016)
§ 51.21 BILLS MAILED.
   Bills for water service and sewer service shall be contained on a single
statement as part of an overall utility bill prepared by the city and mailed
monthly to the subscribers on or before the fifth of each month.
(1963 Code, § 34.02) (Ord. 16-01, passed 1-25-2016)
§ 51.22 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in
the sum of $40.
§ 51.23 ADDITIONAL CHARGE.
   If services are discontinued for the reason of a delinquent utility bill, a
service charge, as set forth in the fee schedule in §
34.01, will be added to the bill and collected before services are restored. If
services are requested to be reinstated any time other than the street
employees’ regular working hours, the property owner is liable for the overtime
incurred.
(1963 Code, § 34.04) (Ord. passed 7-11-1988; Ord. 88-3, passed 8-8-1988)
§ 51.24 OWNERS’ LIABILITY FOR WATER SERVICE AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE
HOME PARKS.
   (A)   The owner of a premises receiving city water service shall be liable
for water service consumed upon the premises whether he or she is actually
occupying the premises or not, and all unpaid charges shall become a lien
against the premises served and shall be collected in accordance with M.S. §
444.075, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. All accounts for
water service shall be carried in the name of the owner of the premises who
personally or by his or her authorized agent shall apply for such service. The
owner is therefore billed for the services.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of a mobile home park receiving city water service
shall be liable for all water consumed within the mobile home park, and all
unpaid charges shall become a lien against the park served and shall be
collected in accordance with M.S. § 444.075, subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time. All accounts for water service shall be carried in the mobile
home park owner’s name who personally or by his or her authorized agent shall
apply for such service. The owner is therefor billed for the services.
      (2)   The mobile home park owner shall be billed for all water that
enters the park. The city will not read or maintain in any way, meters that are
located on individual mobile homes within the park. The city shall read and
bill the park owner from a water meter furnished by the city that is connected
to the park’s service line located in a manhole at the entrance to the mobile
home park. The city shall provide the water meter and, at the city’s
discretion, may choose to assess a monthly fee for future repair or replacement
of the meter. The park owner shall be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of the manhole which houses the water meter along with the shutoff
valve(s) for the mobile home park.
(1963 Code, § 34.05) (Ord. passed 7-11-1988; Ord. 88-3, passed 8-8-1988; Ord.
11-03, passed 7-25-2011)
§ 51.25 UNPAID BALANCE COLLECTION.
   (A)   The City Council reserves the right to certify to the County Auditor
unpaid utility balances to next year(s) property taxes. Notice will be mailed
to property owners of the date and time of the City Council meeting at which
time a resolution will be presented regarding said unpaid utility balances.
Upon adoption, the resolution will be presented to the County Auditor to be
certified on next year(s) property taxes.    
   (B)   In addition to any other penalties provided for in this chapter, the
City of Dilworth reserves the right to utilize any appropriate proceedings at
law or equity to procure payment for utility services or to enforce any failure
to comply with provisions of this chapter, including utilizing a collection
agency for unpaid utility balances.
(Ord. 16-01, passed 1-25-2016)
REGULATING WATER USAGE
§ 51.40 REGULATION.
   (A)   To better ensure a sufficient supply of water is available to all city
residents during times of shortage, a permanent summer lawn watering schedule
is hereby enacted as follows.
   (B)   Each year beginning on May 1 and continuing until September 30, lawn
watering in the city will be permitted only as follows:
      (1)   Even numbered houses will water on even-numbered days; and
      (2)   Odd numbered houses will water on odd-numbered days.
(Ord. 90-3, passed 6-11-1990) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.41 OTHER RESTRICTIONS.
   The City Maintenance Supervisor or City Engineer are further empowered to
establish other watering restrictions as may be reasonably necessary and
required to assure that city residents have a sufficient supply of water
available during times of shortage. It shall be the obligation of the City
Maintenance Supervisor or the City Engineer to give reasonable public notice of
any actions taken by their offices pursuant to this subchapter. Said reasonable
notice shall, in the minimum, include a one-day publication in the “The Forum
of Fargo-Moorhead” newspaper at least one day prior to the enforcement of the
provisions of this subchapter. Any violation of additional restrictions
established by the City Maintenance Supervisor or City Engineer pursuant to
this section shall also be subject to the fines and punishments as set forth in
§
51.99(B).
(Ord. 90-3, passed 6-11-1990)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Violation of §§
51.40 and
51.41 shall be deemed to be a petty misdemeanor punishable as set out in §
10.99.
(Ord. 90-3, passed 6-11-1990)
CHAPTER 52: SANITARY SEWER
Section
Sanitary Sewers
   
52.01   Purpose and policy
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Use of sewers
   
52.04   Private sewage disposal
   
52.05   Building sewers and connections
   
52.06   General discharge prohibitions
   
52.07   Industrial waste disposal
   
52.08   Wastewater service charge
   
52.09   Fees
   
52.10   Administration
   
52.11   Powers and authority of inspections
   
52.12   Confidential information
   
52.13   Enforcement
   
52.14   Conflict
Connection of Sump Pump Discharge Lines to City’s Edge Drain
   
52.25   Purpose
   
52.26   Permit required
   
52.27   Supplied materials
 
   
52.99   Penalty
SANITARY SEWERS
§ 52.01 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   The City Council states that pursuant to the wastewater agreement
between the City of Dilworth and the City of Moorhead, the City of Dilworth
shall enact this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for discharges
into the City of Dilworth wastewater collection system and enables City of
Dilworth and City of Moorhead to comply with all state and federal laws.
      (2)   The objectives of this subchapter are:
         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
disposal system which will interfere with the operation of the system or the
use or disposal of the sludge;
         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system which will pass through the system
inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system; and
         (c)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system.
   (C)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of discharges into the
Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system through the issuance of
permits to certain users and through enforcement of the general requirements
for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
   (D)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of and establishes
criteria for the use of public sewers; private sewage disposal; building sewers
and connections; and general discharge prohibitions.
   (E)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of industrial wastewater
discharges into the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system.
Wastewater pretreatment requirements and criteria are established and defined.
   (F)   This subchapter defines the wastewater utility rate structure and user
charge system and the method for calculating charges for each user
classification; industrial, commercial and residential. Procedures for rate
adjustments and annual rate review criteria are established.
   (G)   This subchapter provides penalties for violations of provisions of
this subchapter, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
      APPROVING AUTHORITY. Concurrent approval by City of Dilworth and City of
Moorhead.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in
five days at 20°C expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams
per liter (mg/l)).
      BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
      BUILDING SEWER CITY. That extension from the building drain to the City
of Dilworth wastewater collection system or other place of disposal.
      CITY. The City of Dilworth.
      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm
sewer, or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant
added to the water is heat.
      DILWORTH. City of Dilworth, Minnesota, a municipal corporation duly
organized and existing under the laws of the state.
      DILWORTH WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. Each and all of the trunk and
lateral sewers, within the sanitary sewer system owned by City of Dilworth
which are primarily installed to receive wastewater directly from facilities
which convey wastewater from individual structures or from private property,
and which include service connection “wye” fittings designed for connection
with these facilities. The facilities which convey wastewater from individual
structures, or from private property to the public lateral sewer, or its
equivalent are specifically excluded from the definition, with the exception of
pumping units, and pressurized lines, for individual structures or groups of
structures when such units are cost effective and are owned and maintained by
City of Dilworth.
      DILWORTH/MOORHEAD WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM. The “Dilworth Wastewater
Collection System” and the “Moorhead Wastewater Disposal System” when
functioning takes them as an integrated system.
      E.P.A. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
      EXCESSIVE INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The quantities of infiltration/inflow
which can be economically eliminated from a sewerage system by rehabilitation,
as determined in a cost-effective analysis that compares the costs for
correcting the infiltration/inflow conditions to the total costs for
transportation and treatment of the infiltration/inflow.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
      INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who discharges to Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
wastewater disposal system liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed
in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments, or from the
development of any natural resource.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes,
trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage, including industrial
cooling water and unpolluted trade or process wastes.
      INFILTRATION. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system
(including sewer service connections) from the ground through such means as
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. INFILTRATION does not
include and is distinguished from inflow.
      INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration
and inflow without distinguishing the source.
      INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system
(including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders, cellar
drains, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains, sump pumps, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm
sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters surface
runoff, street wash waters or drainage. INFLOW does not include, and is
distinguished from, infiltration.
      INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewaters from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the Cities of Dilworth/
Moorhead wastewater disposal system processes or operations which causes or
significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the City of
Moorhead NPDES or state disposal system permit. The term includes prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal by the City of Moorhead in accordance with
published regulations providing guidelines under § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C.§
1345) or any regulations developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the
Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances Control
Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or more stringent state criteria
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by City of Moorhead.
      INTERSTATE AGENCY. An agency of two or more states established under an
agreement or compact approved by the Congress, or any other agency of two or
more states, having substantial powers or duties pertaining to the control of
water pollution.
      M.P.C.A. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
      MOORHEAD. City of Moorhead, Minnesota, a municipal corporation duly
organized and existing under the laws of the state.
      MOORHEAD WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM or SYSTEM. Any devices, facilities,
structures, equipment or works owned or used by City of Moorhead for the
purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
domestic wastewater or necessary to recycle or reuse water, which is received
from the City of Dilworth sewage collection system, including intercepting
sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection system, pumping, power and other
equipment, and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling,
additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable
recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well
facilities; and any works, including land that will be an integral part of the
treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment.
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES PERMIT). Any
permit or requirements issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(M.P.C.A.) pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.); for the purpose of regulating the discharge of sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes under the authority of § 402 of the Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
      OPERABLE TREATMENT WORKS. A treatment works that:
         (a)   Upon completion of construction will treat wastewater, transport
wastewater to or from treatment, or transport and dispose of wastewater in a
manner which will significantly improve an objectionable water quality
situation or health hazard; and
         (b)   Is a component part of a complete waste treatment system which,
upon completion of construction for the complete waste treatment system (or
completion of construction of other treatment works in the system in accordance
with a schedule approved by the E.P.A. Regional Administrator) will comply with
all applicable statutory and regulatory requirements.
      OTHER WASTE. Garbage, municipal refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings,
bark, lime, sand, ashes, offal, oil tar, chemicals and all other substances not
sewage or industrial wastes.
      PERSON. The state or any agency or institution thereof, any municipality,
governmental subdivision, public or private corporation, individual,
partnership or other entity, including, but not limited to, association,
commission or any interstate body, and including any officer or governing or
managing body of any municipality, governmental subdivision or public or
private corporation or other entity.
      pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
      PRETREATMENT. The process of reducing the amount of pollutants,
eliminating pollutants or altering the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants in the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
wastewater disposal system. The reduction, elimination and alteration may be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or
other means, except as prohibited by §
52.06.
      PROJECT. The scope of work for which a grant or grant amendment may or
may not be awarded under this subchapter. The scope of work is defined as the
planning, design and/or construction of treatment works or segments. (See
definition of TREATMENT WORKS SEGMENT.)
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
      PUBLIC SEWER REPLACEMENT. A sewer in which all owners or abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
authority.
      REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes
REPLACEMENT.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants
and institutions.
      SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
      SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
      SHALL/MAY. SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system which:
         (a)   Has a discharge flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work
day;
         (b)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the City of Moorhead
wastewater disposal system;
         (c)   Has in its wastes, toxic pollutants and defined pursuant to §
307 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or state statutes and rules; or
         (d)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal system, the quality
of sludge, the system’s effluent quality or air emissions generated by the
system.
      SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
      STATE. State of Minnesota.
      STATE AGENCY. The state pollution control agency designated by the
Governor having responsibility for enforcing state laws relating to the
abatement of pollution.
      STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms, conditions
and requirements thereof), issued by the M.P.C.A. pursuant to M.S. § 115.07, as
it may be amended from time to time, for disposal system, as defined by M.S. §
115.01, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
      STORM SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only storm waters, surface runoff,
street wash waters and drainage.
      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Wastewater Disposal System or
wastewater treatment facility of Public Works Department of City of Moorhead or
the person’s duly authorized representative.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by a standard glass fiber filter.
      TREATMENT WORKS. Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid in
industrial wastes used to implement § 201 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1281,
or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over the
useful life of the works. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers,
sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling,
additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable
recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and
any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part
of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting
from such treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of
such compost, and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land
treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of
municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water
and sanitary sewer systems.
      TREATMENT WORKS SEGMENT. May be any portion of an operable treatment
works described in an approved facilities plan, which can be identified as a
contract or discrete subitem or subcontract for the planning, design and/or
construction of treatment works. Completion of construction of a treatment
works segment may, but need not, result in an operable treatment works.
      USEFUL LIFE. Estimated period during which a treatment works will satisfy
operations requirements.
      USER. Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into City of Dilworth wastewater collection system.
      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user’s
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including
replacement and debt) of such works under §§ 201(h)(2) and 204(b)(1)(A) of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C §§ 1281(h)(2) and 1284(b)(1)(A) and this subchapter.
      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to
enter the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system.
      WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM or SYSTEM. Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
wastewater disposal system.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
   (B)   Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as given in M.S. Chapter
115 and M.S. Chapter 116, as such statutes may be from time to time amended,
supplemented or replaced.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
§ 52.03 USE OF SEWERS.
   (A)   Waste disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit
or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the City of Dilworth, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the City of Dilworth, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
   (B)   Discharge to natural outlet. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any
natural outlet within the City of Dilworth, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City of Dilworth, any sewage or other polluted waters
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   On-site sewage disposal. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   Sewer connection. The owners of all houses, buildings or properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated
within the City of Dilworth and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary
or combined sewer of the City of Dilworth, are hereby required at their expense
to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
   (E)   Extraneous waters. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
unpolluted water (inflow) from any roof, surface, ground water sump pump,
footing tile, swimming pool or other natural precipitation into the sanitary
sewer system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures which require,
because of infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and the like, a
sump pump discharge system, shall have a permanently installed discharge line
which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary sewer system,
except as provided in division (F)(3) below. A permanent installation shall be
one which provides for year round discharge capability to either the outside of
the dwelling, building or structure, or is connected to the City of Dilworth
storm sewer or discharges to the curb and gutter or the street. It shall
consist of elements that do not allow altering the path of discharge.
   (F)   Roof surface, ground water sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool.
      (1)   Before January 1, 1998, any person, firm or corporation having a
roof surface, ground water sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool now
connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect
and/or remove same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be
closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by the City
of Dilworth City Engineer or his or her designated agent.
      (2)   Any persons refusing to allow their property to be inspected, in
accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances, for extraneous water connections within 14
days of the date City of Dilworth city employees or its designated
representatives are denied admittance to the property, shall immediately become
subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided for in §
52.99(B)(7), Any person found to violate this provision shall make the
necessary changes to comply with this provision relating to the discharge of
unpolluted waters (inflow) into the sanitary sewer system and furnish proof of
the changes to the City of Dilworth within 90 days. Each sump pump connection
identified may be reinspected by the City of Dilworth, or a licensed plumber,
to confirm compliance.
      (3)   (a)   The City of Dilworth City Engineer shall have the authority
and duty of hearing and deciding requests for waivers from the applicability of
this provision where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of
circumstances or cause a safety problem.
         (b)   Application for waivers pursuant to this provision shall be
addressed in writing to the City of Dilworth City Administrator. The
applications shall, at a minimum, identify the property for which the waiver is
being applied, the name of the property owner/applicant, and describe in detail
what characteristics of the subject property create an undue hardship. Within a
reasonable time, the City of Dilworth City Engineer, with City of Moorhead
Public Works approval, shall make a decision on this matter and serve a copy of
such order upon the applicant by mail. If the waiver permits the property owner
to temporarily pump directly into the sanitary sewer system between the dates
of November 1 and March 31, the applicant must agree to pay an additional fee
as set by resolution of the City of Dilworth City Council. The holder of a
waiver shall allow a City of Dilworth employee to certify that prior to April 1
of each subsequent year their discharge water connection has been removed from
the sanitary sewer. Failure to provide such certification will place the waiver
holder in violation and subject to the surcharge as outlined in §
52.99(B)(7). Any waiver granted shall be recorded at the office of the County
Recorder. The City of Dilworth shall record the waiver, but the property owner
is responsible for the filing fee. If the property owner brings the system into
total compliance, a release of waiver shall be filed by the City of Dilworth
upon request of the property owner upon payment of the filing fee.
      (4)   Properties identified as having sump pump connections will be
reinspected by the City of Dilworth to confirm compliance upon sale of the
property.
   (G)   Disposal of septage. No person shall discharge material originating
from septic tanks, sewage holding tanks, vaults, storage compartments or other
similar facilities into the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal
system.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   General. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available
under the provisions of §
52.03(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Permit application. Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the
City of Dilworth. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the City of Dilworth, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary. A permit and
inspection fee shall be paid to the City of Dilworth at the time the
application is filed.
   (C)   Permit inspection. A permit for private sewage disposal system shall
not become effective until the installation or modifications are completed to
the satisfaction of the City of Dilworth. Authorized City of Dilworth personnel
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, in
accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances, and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the City of Dilworth when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
   (D)   Sewage disposal system. The type, capacities, location and layout of a
private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the
county and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. No permit shall be issued
for any private sewage disposal system where the area of the lot is less than
22,000 square feet, employing subsurface soil absorption facilities that does
not satisfy the county and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   Connection. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
52.03(D) hereof, a direct connection shall be made to the City of Dilworth
wastewater collection system in compliance with this subchapter, and any septic
tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with sand or gravel.
   (F)   Operation. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to City of
Dilworth or City of Moorhead.
   (G)   Conflict. No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed
to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by City of
Moorhead, City of Dilworth, or any authorized City of Moorhead or City of
Dilworth personnel.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Permit - general. No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any City of Dilworth
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
City of Dilworth.
   (B)   Permit - application.
      (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or an agent of the owner shall make
application on a special form furnished by the City of Dilworth and, in the
case of industrial wastes, the City of Moorhead. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City of Dilworth at
the time the application is filed.
   (C)   Connection costs. All costs and expense incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
   (D)   Number of connections. A separate and independent building sewer shall
be provided for every building.
   (E)   Reuse of old connection. Old building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by
authorized City of Dilworth personnel, to meet all the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (F)   Construction. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of
a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and
regulations of City of Moorhead and the current regulations of the Minnesota
Water Pollution Control Agency. In the absence of code provisions or in
application thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM, Ten States Standards, and WPCF Manual of Practice
No. 9 or as approved by authorized City of Moorhead and City of Dilworth city
personnel shall apply.
   (G)   Location. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   Restrictions. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff
or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater
disposal system.
   (I)   Building Codes: The connection of the building sewer into the Cities
of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system shall conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and
regulations of City of Dilworth, City of Moorhead and State of Minnesota, of
the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM, Ten States
Standards and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by authorized City of Dilworth personnel before
installation.
   (J)   Inspection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the City of Dilworth when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of authorized City of Dilworth city personnel.
   (K)   Safety and restoration. All excavations for building sewer
installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to their
original condition or to a better condition in a manner satisfactory to the
City of Dilworth. A streetcutting permit shall be required for all excavations
made in the areas of City of Dilworth streets, sidewalks, parkways and other
paved areas.
   (L)   Maintenance responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to maintain the building sewer from the building up to and including the
wye where the building sewer is connected with the public sewer. If the
maintenance of the building sewer requires excavation of a public street, the
owner shall notify the City of Dilworth City Administrator and obtain an
excavation permit prior to excavating a public street. The contractor hired by
the owner to repair the building sewer shall follow the other requirements of
this section relating to new construction which are applicable to maintenance
work. An exception is for those property owners whose sewer lines extend
through junction boxes as installed under the supervision of the City of
Dilworth City Engineer in conjunction with Underground Utilities Project No.
1970-1 and 2. Costs for maintenance of those lines included under the exception
stated will be divided between the City of Dilworth and the property owner, as
agreed upon after completing necessary repairs.
   (M)   Infiltration/inflow elimination during construction. During any new
construction, renovation or demolition the connection(s) to the sanitary sewer
shall be protected through the use of a cover plug in order to eliminate the
potential for inflow to enter the sanitary sewer system. Any such water
collected shall not be allowed to enter the sanitary sewer system at any time.
   (N)   Sump pump requirements for new construction. All new buildings with
ground water sump systems are required, prior to final inspection by City of
Dilworth Building Inspector, to have the sump pump installed.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any of the following described substances into the Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system to include the following:
      (1)   Any industrial waste without approval by City of Moorhead and City
of Dilworth;
      (2)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system or to the operation of
the system. At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the system or any point in the system, be
more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL)
of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and
sulfides;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to
the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system such as, but not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clipping, leaves, rags, spent
grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, gas, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass
grinding or polishing wastes;
      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH lower than 6.0 or greater than 10.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
wastewater disposal system;
      (5)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system. A toxic pollutant shall include
but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a);
      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by applicable state or federal
regulations;
      (7)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids, which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair;
      (8)   Any substance which may cause the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
wastewater disposal system effluent or any other product of the wastewater
treatment process such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable tor
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case,
shall a substance discharged to the wastewater disposal system cause the system
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under § 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345; any
criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the
Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.,the Toxic Substances Control
Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or state standards applicable to the
sludge management method being used;
      (9)   Any substance which will cause the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
wastewater disposal system to violate City of Moorhead’s NPDES and/or state
disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards;
      (10)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions;
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system which violates any statute or any
rule, regulation or ordinance of any public agency or state or federal
regulatory body;
      (12)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C) or
causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or
having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the publicly
owned treatment works resulting in interference;
      (13)   Any slug load, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen
demanding pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a discharge of such volume
or strength as to cause interference in the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
wastewater disposal system. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or
contain concentration or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time
period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation;
      (14)   Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, cooling
waters, storm water, surface waters, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or ground
water;
      (15)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 150 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65.6°C); and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral
origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;
      (16)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues), or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in
such quantities that they would cause interference with the Cities of Dilworth/
Moorhead wastewater disposal system;
      (17)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor greater than three-
fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) shall be subject to review and approval of
authorized City of Dilworth personnel;
      (18)   Any wastewater having a BODs greater than 1,500 mg/l or having a
suspended solids concentration of greater than 500 mg/l in significant volumes;
      (19)   (a)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the City of Moorhead sewage treatment
processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; and
         (b)   In addition to these prohibitions, no user shall discharge to
any City of Dilworth sewer any discharge which causes interference, as defined,
with the wastewater disposal system. Pollutants in the effluent from an
industrial user shall not be considered to cause interference where the
industrial user is in compliance with specific prohibitions or standards
developed by federal, state or local governments. Where the industrial user is
in compliance with such specific prohibitions or standards, and pollutants in
the effluent from the industrial user’s facility nevertheless are determined to
have caused or significantly contributed to a violation of any requirement of
City of Moorhead NPDES or state disposal system permit, and are likely to cause
such a violation in the future, the City of Dilworth and the City of Moorhead
must take appropriate action to develop and enforce specific effluent limits
for that industrial user to ensure renewed and continued compliance with City
of Moorhead NPDES or state disposal system permit.
   (B)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the City of Dilworth sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in division (A) of this section, and
which may have a deleterious effect upon the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
wastewater disposal system, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City of
Dilworth and/or the City of Moorhead may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
      (2)   If the City of Dilworth and/or City of Moorhead permits or requires
the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shad be subject to review, approval of City of
Dilworth and City of Moorhead and to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, laws and federal and state regulations.
   (C)   (1)   All oils, greases, flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients shall be removed from the interceptor and placed in containers and
disposed of in such a manner that no part thereof shall drain into the Cities
of Dilworth wastewater collection system.
      (2)   Authorized City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead personnel shall
make the necessary inspection of the interceptors described in this section and
take all required steps of enforcement. Any person who is found in violation of
this subchapter shall be subject to the penalties of §§
52.13 and
52.99.
   (D)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owners at their expense.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
§ 52.07 INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Industrial waste measurement and sampling. Any person discharging
industrial wastewater into the City of Dilworth wastewater collection system or
any connected disposal system shall provide and maintain a suitable point or
points of access together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances at
an appropriate location prior to discharge of the total combined waste stream
into the disposal system to permit observation, measurement and sampling of
such waste by the user and authorized Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead personnel.
Plans for such points and measuring equipment shall be submitted to and
approved by authorized City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead city personnel
prior to construction and installation of same. Sampling and measuring
facilities shall be such as to provide safe access for making inspection and
verification of their proper operating condition. The metered water supply to a
source of industrial waste volume shall be measured where it can be established
that the metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same,
or where a measurable adjustment to the metered supply can be made to determine
the waste volume.
   (B)   Monitoring facilities.
      (1)   Monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems shall be
provided and operated by all industrial users. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user’s premises, but City of Dilworth may, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow
the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis.
The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
      (3)   Where constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with City of Dilworth and
City of Moorhead requirements and all applicable local construction standards
and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead, unless a time
extension is otherwise granted by City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead.
   (C)   Inspection and sampling. Authorized City of Dilworth and City of
Moorhead city personnel shall inspect the facilities of any user, in accordance
with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances, to ascertain whether the purpose of this
section is being met and compliance with all requirements is being satisfied.
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged
shall allow authorized City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead city personnel
ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination in the performance of any
associated duties. Authorized City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead city
personnel, the M.P.C.A. and the E.P.A. shall have the right to set up on the
user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements
with any security guard so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
authorized City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead city personnel, the M.P.C.A.
and the E.P.A. will be permitted to enter, without delay for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
   (D)   Industrial waste analysis. Determination of the character and
concentration of an industrial waste discharged into the Cities of Dilworth/
Moorhead wastewater disposal system shall be made by the persons discharging it
or their designated agents. Reports showing quantities and pertinent analytical
data of such industrial waste discharges shall be filed with the approving
authority as required by the City of Moorhead.
   (E)   Measurement and test procedures. All measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of waste to which reference is made in these rules and
regulations shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly
by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association
and the Water Pollution Control Federation. Sampling shall be carried out by
methods acceptable to said reference and approved by the City of Moorhead.
Alternate methods for certain analyses may be used subject to prior written
approval by the City of Moorhead.
   (F)   Confidential information.
      (1)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
      (2)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to
this section, the City of Moorhead NPDES permit, state disposal system permit
and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceeding involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
      (3)   Information accepted by City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead as
confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the
general public by City of Dilworth or City of Moorhead unless a ten-day
notification is given to the user.
   (G)   Pretreatment.
      (1)   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this section and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by
the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead shall
be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans
showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead for review, and shall be acceptable to
City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead under the
provisions of this section. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to
City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead prior to the user’s initiation of the
changes.
      (2)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available by City of Dilworth or City of Moorhead to officials of
the E.P.A. or M.P.C.A. upon request.
   (H)   Limitations or wastewater strength.
      (1)   National categorical pretreatment standards. National categorical
pretreatment standards promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(E.P.A.) pursuant to the Act shall be met by all users which are subject to
such standards in any instance where they are more stringent than the
limitations in this section unless City of Moorhead has applied for and
obtained from the M.P.C.A. approval to modify the specific limits in the
national categorical pretreatment standards. When requested, an application for
modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards will be
considered for submittal by City of Moorhead when City of Moorhead wastewater
treatment system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants. CONSISTENT
REMOVAL shall be defined as in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7(a)(1) of the General
Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution. Conditional
revisions of national categorical pretreatment standards may be made by the
City of Moorhead in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.7(b)(2)(i-iv) of the
General Pretreatment Regulations of Existing and New Sources of Pollution if
requested by the industry(ies) in accordance with requirements of 40 C.F.R. §
403.7(b)(1)(i).
      (2)   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on
discharges shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any
instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and
limitations or those in this section.
      (3)   Rights of revision. The City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead
reserve the right to establish by code more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
52.03 of this subchapter.
      (4)   Dilution. No user shall increase the use of process water or, in
any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained herein,
contained in the federal pretreatment standards, or contained in any state
requirements.
      (5)   Sludges generated. Sludges, floats, skimmings and the like,
generated by an industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall not be
placed into the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system. Such
sludges shall be contained, transported and disposed of by haulers in
accordance with all federal, state and local regulations.
   (I)   Accidental discharges.
      (1)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this section. Necessary
facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner or user’s own cost and expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead for review, and
shall be approved by the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead before
construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to
modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
section.
      (2)   Accidental discharges of prohibited waste into the City of Dilworth
wastewater collection system directly or through another disposal system, or to
any place from which such waste may enter the City of Dilworth wastewater
collection system shall be reported to the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead by the
person responsible for the discharge, or by the owners or occupants of the
premises where the discharge occurs, promptly upon obtaining knowledge of the
fact of such discharge.
   (J)   Basis for industrial wastewater charge.
      (1)   When an industrial waste discharged into the Cities of Dilworth/
Moorhead wastewater disposal system has a total biochemical oxygen demand
(TBOD) of 250 mg/l or greater or a total suspended solids (TSS) concentration
of 250 mg/l or greater, or a rated flow of 25,000/50,000 gallons or more per
day where the rated flow is:
         (a)   The daily design flow multiplied by 24 and divided by the actual
hours of discharge in a single day; and
         (b)   Flow greater than 5% of the total daily design flow of the City
of Moorhead wastewater disposal system, the normal waste charges shall be as
stated in §
52.08 hereof.
      (2)   In the event where an industrial waste charge is applicable because
of high strength waste, but the revenue generated using the charge method is
less than the revenue generated based upon flow, then the user shall be charged
the higher of the two rates.
      (3)   Whenever an industrial waste charge is determined to be applicable
to an unusually high strength waste, the analysis of which indicates total
biochemical oxygen demand and/or total suspended solids concentrations greater
than the base values to 250 mg/l and 250 mg/l respectively, then the City of
Moorhead shall apply the industrial charge to the waste of the person(s)
discharging such waste or causing it to be discharged into its disposal system.
      (4)   Industrial waste charges attributable to this section and collected
by the City of Moorhead shall be for and account of and payable to the City of
Moorhead as compensation for the costs resulting from the discharge of such
high strength waste.
      (5)   Discharges with TBOD5 concentrations between 1,000 and 1,500 mg/
l and TSS concentrations between 500 and 1,000 mg/l are accepted only under a
special contract or agreement with the City of Moorhead. Discharges above 1,500
mg/l TBOD5 and 1,000 mg/l TSS in significant volumes are prohibited. Property
owners or tenants with abnormal sewage must install and maintain devices to
sample, on a flow proportional basis, and continuously measure the wastewater
flows. The City of Moorhead shall inspect for proper operation of the devices
in regards to sample collection.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   (1)   Wastewater service charge is used herein to mean revenue
collected for the two following areas:
         (a)   Wastewater treatment operations, maintenance, replacement and
debt retirement (Moorhead); and
         (b)   Wastewater collection systems operations, maintenance,
replacement and debt retirement (Dilworth/Moorhead).
      (2)   These charges are based on actual use.
   (B)   An annual audit of expenses and revenue shall be made at the end of
each fiscal year by the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead; if upon review
of the annual audit the approving authority deems it necessary, the rates
described therein shall be adjusted accordingly to meet the needs of the annual
audit with said adjustment to be made by the City of Dilworth City Council.
      (1)   Charges.
         (a)   Part 1: wastewater treatment service charges. The wastewater
treatment service charge for the use of and for the service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the City of Moorhead shall be based on the current
wastewater rate schedule for domestic and industrial wastewater users and based
on the service agreement with the City of Dilworth.
         (b)   Part 2: wastewater collection service charges. The wastewater
collection service charge to users serviced by the City of Dilworth shall be
based on the current wastewater rate schedule adopted by the Dilworth City
Council for residential, commercial and industrial users.
      (2)   Additional regulations and restrictions.
         (a)   Annual review of wastewater service charges. The City of
Dilworth shall review not less often than every year the wastewater
contribution of users and user classes; the total costs of operation,
maintenance, replacement and debt service of the wastewater system; and its
approved user charge system. The City of Dilworth and, in the case of
industrial users, the City of Moorhead shall revise the charges as required
annually for users or user classes to accomplish the following:
            1.   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation,
maintenance, replacement and debt costs among users and user classes as
required herein;
            2.   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation,
maintenance, replacement and debt costs necessary to the proper operation,
maintenance and replacement of the wastewater system; and
            3.   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the
costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year
and adjust the rate accordingly.
         (b)   Pollutants. The user charge system shall provide that each user
which discharges any pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing
the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works shall pay for such increased
costs.
         (c)   Charges for operation and maintenance for extraneous flows. The
user charge system shall provide that the costs of operation, maintenance,
replacement and debt for all flows not directly attributable to users (i.e.,
infiltration/inflow and sewer line cleaning) be distributed among all users in
the same manner that the City of Dilworth distributes the costs of operation,
maintenance, replacement and debt among users (or user classes) for their
actual use.
         (d)   Notification. Each user shall be notified, at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to wastewater services. Public informational
meetings may be held annually.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
§ 52.09 FEES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery
of costs from users of the City of Dilworth wastewater collection system for
the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or
fees shall be set forth in the City of Dilworth Schedule of Charges and Fees
and approved by City of Dilworth City Council.
   (B)   Charges and fees. The City of Dilworth shall adopt charges and fees
which may include:
      (1)   Charges for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
      (2)   Fees for permit applications;
      (3)   Appeal fees; and
      (4)   Other fees and/or charges as may be deemed necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.
   (C)   Setting rates. For the months of November through April, excluding
months with no water usage, sewer rates are based on actual monthly water
usage. May through October rates are based on an average monthly sewer bill of
November through April, excluding months with no usage.
   (D)   New residential customers (May through October only). To calculate
sewer rates of new residential customers, monthly water usage is set at 4,500
gallons.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 8-27-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 52.10 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   User reports. The Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead may require that any
person discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater to the wastewater
disposal system file a periodic discharge report. The discharge report may
include, but not be limited to, nature of process, rates of flow, mass
discharge rate, raw material and production quantities, hours of operation,
number and classification of employees, compliance status with any state or
federal pretreatment standards or other information, which relates to the
generation of waste, including wastewater constituents and characteristics in
the wastewater discharge. Such reports may also include the chemical
constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site, even
though they may not normally be discharged. At a minimum, a summary of such
data indicating each industrial user’s compliance with this section shall be
prepared quarterly and submitted to the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead.
In addition to discharge reports, the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead may require
information in the form of wastewater discharge permit applications, self-
monitoring reports and compliance schedules.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits.
      (1)   Mandatory permits. All significant industrial users proposing to
connect or to commence a new discharge to the wastewater disposal system shall
obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging into
the wastewater system. All existing significant industrial users or industrial
users subject to federal pretreatment standards under § 307(b) and (c) of the
Act being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c), connected to or discharging into the
wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within 90
days after the effective date of this section.
      (2)   Permit applications. Users required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
an application in the form prescribed by the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead and
accompanied by a fee (fees set by Council). Existing users shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after the effective date of this
section, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to
connecting or discharging to the wastewater disposal system. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, in units and term appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:
         (a)   Name, address and location (if different from the address);
         (b)   SIC number according to the Standard industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
         (c)   Wastewater constituent and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those governed by §
52.06 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the E.P.A.
pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1314(g) and contained in 40
C.F.R. part 136, as such statute and regulations may be from time to time
amended, supplemented or replaced;
         (d)   Time and duration of discharge;
         (e)   Average daily and 30 minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any;
         (f)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewer, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation;
         (g)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be discharged;
         (h)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead, state or
federal pretreatment standards, and (for an existing discharge) a statement
regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/
or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards;
         (i)   Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production;
         (j)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         (k)   Number of full and part-time employees, and hours of work; and
         (l)   Any other information as may be deemed by the Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. The
Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead may issue a wastewater discharge
permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
   (C)   Permit conditions.
      (1)   Compliance, contents. Wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this subchapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Cities of Dilworth/
Moorhead. Permits may contain the following:
         (a)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater disposal system;
         (b)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
         (c)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
         (d)   Requirements for installation and maintenance on inspection and
sampling facilities;
         (e)   Requirements for installation, operation and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities;
         (f)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and
standards for test and reporting schedule;
         (g)   Compliance schedules;
         (h)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
         (i)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Cities of Dilworth/
Moorhead and affording the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead access thereto;
         (j)   Requirements for notification to the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in
the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system;
         (k)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges as provided in
§
52.13 of this subchapter; and
         (l)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead to ensure compliance with this subchapter.
      (2)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than
a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for
permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user’s
existing permit. The times and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead during the term of the permit
as limitations or requirements as identified in §
52.06 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of
any proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
      (3)   Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of
users subject to such standard shall be revised to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
division (B) above, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater
discharge permit shall submit to the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead
within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard the information required by division (B) above. If the
information previously submitted in an application is still current and
adequate, only a letter from the user certifying such is required.
      (4)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the City of
Dilworth and City of Moorhead. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply
with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
§ 52.11 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Authorized Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead personnel, or its designated
representative, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter and §
10.20 of this code of ordinances. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the authorized Cities of
Dilworth/Moorhead personnel ready access at all reasonable times to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
or in the performance of any of their duties. The Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead,
M.P.C.A. and E.P.A. shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations. The Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead representatives, or
its agents, shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with any security guard so that upon presentation
of suitable identification, the authorized Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
personnel, M.P.C.A. and E.P.A. will be permitted to enter, without delay, for
the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
   (C)   Authorized Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead city personnel, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City of Dilworth holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
§ 52.12 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspection shall
be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to
this subchapter, City of Moorhead NPDES permit, state disposal system permit
and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceeding involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
   (C)   Information accepted by the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead as
confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the
general public by the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead until and unless a ten-day
notification is given to the user.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
§ 52.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Sludge or accidental discharges.
      (1)   Users shall notify the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead
immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances or
wastewater in violation of this subchapter in order to enable countermeasures
to be taken by the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead to minimize damage to
the wastewater disposal system and the receiving water. Such notification will
not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the
wastewater disposal system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on
Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead on account thereof under any state or federal law.
      (2)   The Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is
necessary in the opinion of the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead, in order to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the
environment or to the wastewater disposal system, or would cause the City of
Moorhead to violate any condition of its NPDES or state disposal system permit.
      (3)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop the
discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the City of Dilworth and City of Moorhead shall take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater disposal system or
endangerment to any individuals. The Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead shall
reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment
service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed
written statement submitted by the user prescribing the causes of the slug or
accidental discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence
shall be submitted to the City of Dilworth and the City of Moorhead within 15
days of the date of occurrence.
   (B)   Revocation of permit.
      (1)   Generally. In accordance with the procedures of §
52.10(B), the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead may revoke the permit of any user
which fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics
of the discharge; which fails to report significant changes in wastewater
constituents or characteristics; which refuses reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or for violation of
conditions of its permit, this subchapter or applicable state and federal
regulations.
      (2)   Notification of violation. Whenever the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead
find that any person has violated or is violating this subchapter, wastewater
discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained
herein, the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead may serve upon such person a written
notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the
notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to
the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead by the user.
      (3)   Show cause hearing.
         (a)   Notice of hearing. If the violation is not corrected by timely
compliance, the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead may order any user which causes or
allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the City of Moorhead City
Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall
be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by
the City of Moorhead City Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the user
to show cause before the City of Moorhead City Council why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a corporation.
         (b)   Hearing officials. The City of Moorhead City Council may itself
conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate the City of
Moorhead City Manager, or a designee of the City of Moorhead City Manager, to:
            1.   Issue in the name of the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead notices
of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
            2.   Take the evidence; and
            3.   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the City of
Moorhead City Council for action thereon.
         (c)   Transcripts. At any hearing held pursuant to this subchapter,
testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The
transcript so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or
any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
         (d)   Issuance of orders. After the City of Moorhead City Council has
reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service
be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders
and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
   (C)   Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes into the City of Dilworth wastewater collection system contrary to
the provisions of this subchapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements
or any order of the City of Dilworth or the City of Moorhead, the City of
Dilworth City Attorney may, following the authorization of such action by the
City of Dilworth City Council, commence an action for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
§ 52.14 CONFLICT.
   All other sanitary ordinances, or City of Dilworth City Council actions
inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this subchapter, are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996)
CONNECTION OF SUMP PUMP DISCHARGE LINES TO CITY’S EDGE DRAIN
§ 52.25 PURPOSE.
   In areas of the city, edge drains have been installed behind the curb to
help maintain the condition of the street. Edge drains can also be utilized for
handling the ground water discharge from sump pumps. Property owners are hereby
allowed to utilize edge drains for this purpose as long as they comply with the
following conditions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 01-03, passed 6-11-2001)
§ 52.26 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   An inspection by a city employee, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances, is required to ensure that a proper
connection is made to the edge drain. A permit must be issued to the property
owner before the installation can occur. The permit fee shall be determined and
approved by the City Council. As a condition of receiving the permit, the owner
shall sign a waiver of claims for damages.
(Ord. 01-03, passed 6-11-2001)
§ 52.27 SUPPLIED MATERIALS.
   The property owner must utilize the reducing tee that is provided by the
city to make the connection to the edge drain.
(Ord. 01-03, passed 6-11-2001)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of
the City Council made in accordance with §§
52.01 through
52.14 or who has failed to comply with any provisions of §§
52.01 through
52.14, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, except
§
52.03(E), shall be liable for a civil penalty as set out in §
10.99 for each such offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or
continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
      (2)   Protection from damage. No unauthorized person shall maliciously,
willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
charge of disorderly conduct.
      (3)   Costs of damage. Any user violating any of the provisions of §§
52.01 through
52.14 or who has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage or
other impairment to the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead wastewater disposal system
shall become liable to the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead for any expense, loss or
damage caused by the violation or discharge. The City of Dilworth and, in the
case of industrial waste, the City of Moorhead may add to the user’s charges
and fees the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused
by the violation or discharge. Any refusal to pay the assessed costs shall
constitute a violation of §§
52.01 through
52.14.
      (4)   Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead attorney fees and costs. In addition to
the civil penalties provided herein, the Cities of Dilworth/Moorhead may
recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees and
other expenses of litigation by an appropriate action against the person found
to have violated this subchapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder.
      (5)   Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to §§
52.01 through
52.14 or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under §§
52.01 through
52.14 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine or by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days, or by both, as set out in §
10.99.
      (6)   Assessment. In the case of partnerships and associations, the
penalty may be imposed upon the partners or member thereof, and in the case of
corporations and local government units, upon the person authorizing the
violation or the officers thereof.
      (7)   Surcharge for infiltration/inflow.
         (a)   A surcharge as set out by the City Council per billing period is
hereby imposed. This surcharge will be in addition to the regular sewer billing
on and after January 1, 1998 to property owners who are not in compliance with
§
52.03(E).
         (b)   The surcharge shall be levied monthly on properties not
complying with §
52.03(E). All properties found during reinspection to have violated §
52.03(E) will be subject to the a bimonthly penalty for all months between the
two most recent inspections.
   (C)   Connection of sump pump discharge lines to city’s edge drain. Any
person violating any provision of §§
52.25 through
52.27 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for not to
exceed 90 days, or both, as set out in §
10.99.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 3-27-1996; Ord. 01-03, passed 6-11-2001)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
CHAPTER 53: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND
ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
Section
General Provisions, Stormwater Management
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Construction site stormwater runoff control
   
53.04   Post construction stormwater treatment requirements
Illicit Discharge and Connection
   
53.15   Purpose and intent
   
53.16   Definitions
   
53.17   Applicability
   
53.18   Responsibility for administration
   
53.19   Compatibility with other regulations
   
53.20   Ultimate responsibility
   
53.21   Discharge prohibitions
   
53.22   Watercourse protection
   
53.23   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
53.24   Compliance monitoring
   
53.25   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants by
the use of best management practices
   
53.26   Notification of spills
   
53.27   Violations and enforcement
   
53.28   Appeal of notice of violation
   
53.29   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
53.30   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
53.31   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
53.32   Remedies not exclusive
   
53.33   Salt storage at commercial, institutional, and non-NPDES permitted
industrial facilities
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for storm water
management systems within the city. In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of this chapter or other regulations adopted by the city, Clay
County, State or Federal authorities, the more restrictive standard prevails.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are as follows:
      (1)   To promote, preserve, and enhance the natural resources within the
city from adverse or undesirable impacts occasioned by development or other
activities;
      (2)   To protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the
people and property through effective storm water quantity and quality
management practices.
      (3)   To regulate land development activity, land disturbing activity, or
other activities that may have an adverse and/or potentially irreversible
impact on storm water quantity, water quality and/or environmentally sensitive
lands and to encourage compatibility between such uses;
      (4)   To establish detailed review standards and procedures for land
development activities throughout the city, thereby achieving a balance between
urban growth and development and the protection of water quality; and
      (5)   To provide for adequate storm water system analysis and design as
necessary to protect public and private property, water quality and existing
natural resources.
   (C)   This chapter applies in the city and to persons outside the city who
are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city storm water
management system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-02, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).
      (1)   The most effective and practicable means of erosion prevention and
sediment control, and water quality management practices that are the most
effective and practicable means of to control, prevent, and minimize
degradation of surface water, including avoidance of impacts,
construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed,
prohibitions, pollution prevention through good housekeeping, and other
management practices published by state or designated area-wide planning
agencies.
      (2)   Individual BMPs found in this permit are described in the current
versions of Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas, MPCA and The Minnesota
Stormwater Manual, MPCA. BMPs must be adapted to the site and can be adopted
from other sources. However, they must be similar in purpose and at least as
effective and stringent as MPCA's BMPs. (Other sources include manufacturers
specifications, Storm Water Management for Construction Activities: Developing
Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management Practices, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency 1992, and Erosion Control Design Manual, Minnesota Department
of Transportation, et al., 1993).
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Includes construction activity as defined in 40
C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14)(x) and small construction activity as defined in 40
C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(15) and CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY as defined by Minn. Rule
7090.0080, subp. 4. This includes a disturbance to the land that results in a
change in the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-
vegetative), or the existing soil topography that may result in accelerated
stormwater runoff, leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment into
surface waters or drainage systems. Examples of construction activity may
include clearing, grading, filling, and excavating. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is a
part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan
will ultimately disturb one acre or more. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY does not
include a disturbance to the land of less than five acres for the purpose of
routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility.
   DEWATERING. The removal of surface or ground water to dry and/or solidify a
construction site to enable construction activity. Dewatering may require a
Minnesota Department of Natural Recourses water appropriation permit and, if
dewatering water is contaminated, discharge of such water may require an
individual MPCA NPDES/SDS permit.
   ENERGY DISSIPATION. Methods employed at pipe outlets to prevent erosion
caused by the rapid discharge of water scouring soils. Examples include, but
are not limited to: concrete aprons, riprap, splash pads, and gabions that are
designed to prevent erosion.
   EROSION PREVENTION. Measures employed to prevent erosion. Examples include
but not limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch,
temporary erosion protection or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
   INFEASIBLE. Not technologically possible or not economically practicable and
achievable in light of the best industry practices. Page 13 of 14 October 2013
| wq-strm4-59q .
   INITIATED IMMEDIATELY. Taking an action to commence stabilization as soon as
practicable, but no later than the end of the work day, following the day when
the earth-disturbing activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, if the
permittee(s) know that construction work on that portion of the site will be
temporarily ceased for 14 or more additional calendar days or seven calendar
days where Appendix A.C.1.a applies. The following activities can be taken to
initiate stabilization:
      (1)   Prepping the soil for vegetative or non-vegetative stabilization;
      (2)   Applying mulch or other non-vegetative product to the exposed soil
area;
      (3)   Seeding or planting the exposed area;
      (4)   Starting any of the activities in (1) through (3), above, on a
portion of the area to be stabilized, but not on the entire area; and
      (5)   Finalizing arrangements to have stabilization product fully
installed in compliance with the applicable deadline for completing
stabilization .
   PERMANENT COVER. Surface types that will prevent soil failure under erosive
conditions. Examples include: gravel, asphalt, concrete, rip rap, roof tops,
perennial cover, or other landscaped material that will permanently arrest soil
erosion. A uniform perennial vegetative cover (i.e. evenly distributed, without
large bare areas) with a density of 70% of the native background vegetative
cover for the area must be established on all unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization
measures. PERMANENT COVER does not include the practices listed under temporary
erosion protection.
   PROJECT(S). All construction activity that is planned and/or conducted under
a particular permit. The project will occur on the site or sites described in
the permit application, and in the associated plans, specifications and
contract documents.
   PUBLIC WATERS. All water basins and watercourses that are described in M.S.
§ 103G.005, subd. 15, as it may be amended from time to time.
   NATURAL BUFFER. An area of undisturbed cover surrounding surface waters
within which construction activities are restricted. NATURAL BUFFER includes
the vegetation, exposed rock, or barren ground that exists prior to
commencement of earth-disturbing activities.
   NORMAL WETTED PERIMETER. Te area of a conveyance, such as a ditch, channel,
or pipe that is in contact with water during flow events that are expected to
occur from a two-year 24-hour storm event.
    PERMITTEE. Ay owner or operator of a construction site that is providing
information to the City of Dilworth in order to prove that their stormwater BMP
design for during and post construction activities adequately addresses all
requirements of this chapter.
   STABILIZE, STABILIZED, STABILIZATION. The exposed ground surface has been
covered by appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, erosion
control blanket, mats or other material that prevents erosion from occurring.
Grass, agricultural crop or other seeding alone is not stabilization. Mulch
materials must achieve approximately 90% ground coverage (typically 2-ton/
acre).
   SEDIMENT CONTROL. Methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the
site. SEDIMENT CONTROL practices include silt fences, sediment traps, earth
dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, bio rolls, rock logs,
compost logs, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent
sedimentation basins. A floating silt curtain placed in the water is not a
sediment control BMP to satisfy perimeter control requirements, except as
provided for in the SEDIMENT CONTROL part.
   STEEP SLOPES. Slopes that are 1:3 (V:H) (33.3%) or steeper in grade.
   STORMWATER. Defined under Minn. Rule 7077.0105, subpart 41(b), and includes
precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and any other surface
runoff and drainage.
   SURFACE WATER or WATERS. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands,
reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, and
irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or private, except
that surface waters do not include treatment basins or ponds that were
constructed from upland development.
   TEMPORARY EROSION PROTECTION. Methods employed to prevent erosion during
construction activities. Examples of temporary erosion protection include, but
are not limited to: straw, wood fiber blanket, wood chips, vegetation, mulch,
and rolled erosion control products.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. (As defined in M.S. § 115.01, subd. 22, as it may be
amended from time to time) means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
(Ord. 15-02, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.03 CONSTRUCTION SITE STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL.
   (A)   Construction site stormwater runoff control.
      (1)   Permittees must develop a construction site stormwater runoff
control program that reduces pollutants in stormwater from construction
activity. The permittee must develop a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) for the construction site that is at least as stringent as the MPCA's
current General permit authorization to discharge stormwater associated with
construction activity under the national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) construction general permit (CGP). A copy of the permittee’s permit
coverage must be provided prior to any construction activity taking place on
sites that disturb more than one acre of land.
      (2)   The permittee shall take into consideration with their design
sections of the CGP that qualify as erosion and sediment controls or waste
controls, as follows:
         (a)   Stormwater discharge design requirements consisting of the
following:
            1. Stormwater pollution prevention plan for during construction.
            2.   Temporary sediment basins when ten acres or more drain to a
common location.
            3.   Record retention.
            4.   Training requirements.
         (b)   Construction activity requirements consisting of the following:
            1.   Stormwater pollution prevention plan implementation.
            2.   Erosion prevention practices.
            3.   Sediment control practices.
            4.   Dewatering and basin draining.
            5.   Inspections and maintenance.
            6.   Pollution prevention management measures.
            7.   Final stabilization.
   (B)   Violations and suspensions.
      (1)   Reports of violations. The city shall document the reporting of a
violation in writing. Such violations may be obtained via a site inspection or
a public complaint followed by a site inspection. At a minimum the complaint
file shall contain the name and address of the owner, date, time and nature of
the violation as well as other information as deemed necessary to document site
conditions, including photos and personal conversation records. In the case of
a public complaint the file shall also, if voluntarily provided, contain the
name address and phone number of the individual filing the complaint. In
addition the complaint file shall contain records documenting subsequent site
inspections, compliance actions and a memo outlining the determination of the
city and any enforcement action taken and/or any applicable noncompliance fees
levied.
      (2)   Emergency suspension.
         (a)   The city may for cause order the suspension of all construction
on site when the city determines that an actual or threatened discharge
presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or
welfare of persons downstream, or substantial danger to the environment. If a
suspension occurs, all work in the area shall cease immediately. If any person
is notified of such suspension and then fails to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the city shall commence whatever steps are necessary to
obtain compliance. The city may reinstate the construction activities on site
upon proof of compliance with all plan or applicable permit conditions.
         (b)   The city may also order the immediate suspension of all work if
a person or entity is conducting an activity for which another governing
entity's permit is needed without first obtaining the appropriate permit or
city approval. The suspension shall remain in effect until the required permit
(s) and/or city approval are obtained. Whenever the city orders the suspension
of work on a site, pursuant to the emergency provisions of this section, the
city shall serve notice on the contractor, land owner, developer or the
developer's designated representative personally, via email, or by registered
or certified mail. Any person or entity served notice has the right to an
informal hearing before the city upon request made in writing and filed with
the city.
      (3)   Non-emergency suspension. The city may order the suspension of all
construction on site for a non-emergency cause, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the applicable plan or
permit;
         (b)   False statements on any required reports and applications;
         (c)   Obtaining a plan or state permit by misrepresentation or failure
to disclose fully all relevant facts; or
         (d)   Any other violation of this chapter or related ordinance.
      (4)   Hearing. If a person requests a hearing to contest the order of the
city, a notice of hearing must be served on the person appealing the order,
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held regarding the order of
the city, and directing the person appealing to show cause why the order of the
city should not be upheld. Unless the city has suspended the project and/or
permit or ordered work to stop pursuant, any order stopping all work shall be
stayed until after the hearing. The notice must be served personally or by
registered or certified mail at least five days before the hearing. The
evidence submitted at the hearing shall be considered by the city who shall
then uphold, modify or rescind the order of the city. An appeal of the decision
may be taken to the District Court according to law. Provided, that if the city
upholds the order stopping work, such work suspension shall not be stayed as a
result of the appeal to the District Court.
      (5)   Legal action.
         (a)   The discharge of deposited or eroded materials onto public
rights-of-way or public storm sewer systems within the city shall be considered
an offense and may result in an order to remove such materials. Removal of such
materials shall be at the Landowners or Developers expense based on the
properties from which they originated. The landowner and/or developer shall
have three days after receiving the notice to remove these materials. If such
materials are not removed, others may remove them under the city's direction
and any associated costs shall be the responsibility of the landowner and/or
developer and, if unpaid within 90 days, may be recommended for assessment
action by the City Council against property of the violator.
         (b)   If any person commences any Land disturbing activities which
result in increased storm water quantity or storm water quality degradation
into the city's storm water management system contrary to the provisions of
this chapter, federal or state requirements or any order of the city, the city
attorney may commence action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief
including administrative or criminal penalties.
   (C)   Enforcement, penalties and noncompliance fees.
      (1)   Enforcement, penalty and noncompliance fees. Any person who is
found to have violated an order of the city made in accordance with this
chapter, or who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter and the
orders, rules, approvals, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be
charged with a misdemeanor and be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99 or, alternatively, may be issued an administrative citation and be
subject to the civil penalty provisions of §
35.01. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues to exist shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense. All land use and building permits may
be suspended until the Permittee has corrected the violation. A schedule for
noncompliance and re-inspection fees, which may be imposed for violation of
this chapter, shall be approved by the City Council.
      (2)   Liability for damage; violation. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or who initiates an activity which causes a deposit,
obstruction, or damage or other impairment to the city's stormwater system is
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violation or
the discharge. The city may bill the person violating this chapter the costs
for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation of storm
water discharge, and if unpaid within 90 days may result in assessment of such
costs against the violator's property.
      (3)   Fees recoverable. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's
fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate action against the person
found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, approvals,
regulations and permits issued hereunder.
      (4)   Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representations, or certification in any applicable record, report,
plan, permit or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to
this chapter, or who knowingly falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring devices or method required under this chapter, may be
charged with a misdemeanor and be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99 or, alternatively, may be issued an administrative citation and be
subject to the civil penalty provisions of §
35.01.
      (5)   Severability. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision
of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-02, passed 2-9-2015; Ord. 22-08, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 53.04 POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER TREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The following are post construction stormwater treatment requirements.
   (A)   Permittees must develop a post construction stormwater management
system that is at least as stringent as the current post construction
stormwater management permit conditions (Minimum Control Measure 5) as required
by the general stormwater small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4)
permit issued to the city by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
   (B)   The Permittee shall take into consideration with their design sections
of the city's current MS4 permit as follows:
      (1)   Post construction stormwater management.
         (a)   Post-construction stormwater management program. Prior to start
of any construction activity, permittee shall develop and implement a post-
construction stormwater management program that utilizes any combination of
BMPs necessary to meet the following conditions on the site of a construction
activity to the maximum extent practicable (MEP):
            1.   For new development projects, no net increase from pre-project
conditions (on an annual average basis) of:
               a.   Stormwater discharge volume, unless precluded by the
stormwater management limitations outlined in division (B)(1)(b) listed below.
               b.   Stormwater discharges of total suspended solids (TSS).
               c.   Stormwater discharges of total phosphorus (TP).
            2.   For redevelopment projects, a net reduction from pre-project
conditions (on an annual average basis) of:
               a.   Stormwater discharge volume, unless precluded by the
stormwater management limitations outlined in division (B)(1)(b) listed below.
               b.   Stormwater discharges of TSS.
               c.   Stormwater discharges of TP.
         (b)   Infiltration as stormwater treatment method. The use of
infiltration as a stormwater treatment method is prohibited in the following
areas:
            1.   Where industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate
industrial stormwater under an NPDES/SDS industrial stormwater permit issued by
the Agency.
            2.   Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.
            3.   With less than three feet of separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally saturated
soils.
            4.   Where high levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater will
be mobilized by the infiltrating stormwater.
         (c)   Infiltration as stormwater treatment method; restrictions.
            1.   The use of infiltration as stormwater treatment method will be
restricted without a detailed engineering review, to achieve no post
construction net increase in volume, TSS or TP when the infiltration device
will receive discharges from, or be constructed in:
               a.   Areas of predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D (clay)
soils.
               b.   Areas within a drinking water supply management area
(DWSMA) as defined in Minn. Rule 4720.5100, subpart. 13.
            2.   The restrictions above do not preclude proposers of
construction activity from infiltrating stormwater. Rather, the restrictions
simply require that a higher level of design and review is needed.
            3.   The permittee may have a lesser volume reduction requirement
than required division (B)(1)(a)1. and (B)(1)(a)2., above, if the project meets
one of the prohibitions or restrictions listed above and if the owner or
operator of the construction activity implements to the maximum extent
practicable (MEP) other volume reduction techniques such as evapotranspiration,
reuse/harvesting, conservation design, green roofs, etc. on site. If other
volume reduction techniques are not used, documentation must be provided on why
that decision was made.
         (d)   Linear projections, exception. For linear projects where the
lack of right-of-way precludes the installation of volume control practices
that meet the conditions for post-construction stormwater management listed
above, the permittee may be allowed an exception. This exception will only be
allowed if it is proven that a reasonable attempt was made to obtain right-of-
way during the project planning process.
         (e)   Exceptions for stormwater discharge volume. The permittee may be
allowed lesser volume control on the site of the original construction only
under the following circumstances:
            1.   The owner and/or operator of a construction activity is
precluded from infiltrating stormwater through a designed system due to any of
the infiltration related limitations described above; and
            2.   The owner and/or operator of the construction activity
implements, to the MEP, volume reduction techniques, other than infiltration,
(e.g., evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, green roofs,
etc.) on the site of the original construction activity that reduces stormwater
discharge volume, but may not meet the conditions for post-construction
stormwater management in division (B)(1)(a)1. and (B)(1)(a)2., above.
         (f)   Mitigation.
            1.   Where TSS and TP has not been addressed on the site of the
original construction activity, permittee may mitigate project areas in the
following order of preference:
               a.   Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water
that receives runoff from the original construction activity.
               b.   Locations within the same Minnesota Department of Natural
Resource (DNR) catchment area as the original construction activity.
               c.   Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area up-
stream.
               d.   Locations anywhere within the city's jurisdiction.
            2.   Mitigation projects must involve the creation of new
structural stormwater BMPs or the retrofit of existing structural stormwater
BMPs, or the use of a properly designed regional structural stormwater BMP.
This can include permanent stormwater ponding.
            3.   Routine maintenance of structural stormwater BMPs already
required by this permit cannot be used to meet mitigation requirements of this
part.
            4.   Mitigation projects shall be completed within 24 months after
the start of the original construction activity.
            5.   The city shall determine, and document, who will be
responsible for long-term maintenance on all mitigation projects of this part.
            6.   If the city receives payment from the owner and/or operator of
a construction activity for mitigation purposes in lieu of the owner or
operator of that construction activity meeting the conditions for post-
construction stormwater management called out in this chapter, the city shall
apply any such payment received to a public stormwater project, and all
projects must be in compliance with this division (B)(1)(f), above.
         (g)   Wet sedimentation basins as a method of mitigation.
            1.   It is recognized that the vast majority of the city has Class
D soils unsuitable for infiltration.
            2.   If permittee provides supporting documents that this is the
case for the construction site and chooses to proceed with the installation of
a wet sedimentation basin as a means of mitigation, the following requirements
shall be met.
               a.   For new development projects in currently undeveloped
areas: Wet sedimentation basins shall be constructed as required by the current
MPCA CGP permit with the additional requirement that live storage in wet
sedimentation basins shall be of sufficient size to retain the 100-year rain
event for the watershed area and shall release stormwater runoff at a rate
required by the current MPCA CGP permit.
               b.   For currently developed areas or re-development areas: Wet
sedimentation basins shall be constructed as required by the current MPCA CGP
permit.
               c.   Permittee shall submit to the city design calculations
showing that the above criteria has been met for the construction site.
         (h)   Long-term maintenance of structural stormwater BMPs. Where BMP's
are to remain in place post construction as part of the post-construction
stormwater management, permittee shall comply with the following:
            1.   All BMPs shall be designed to minimize the need for
maintenance, to provide easy vehicle (typically eight feet or wider) and
personnel access for maintenance purposes, and to be structurally sound. All
BMPs shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that assures continued
effective removal of pollutants carried in storm water runoff. The city or City
Engineer may inspect all public and private BMPs at any time. Inspection
records will be kept on file at the city's office. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to obtain any necessary easements or other
property interests to allow access to the BMPs for inspection and maintenance
purposes. The city shall retain enforcement powers for assuring adequate
operation and maintenance activities through approval conditions, penalties,
noncompliance orders and fees.
            2.   In the event that a structural stormwater BMP becomes less
effective, new or improved structural stormwater BMPs must be implemented to
ensure the conditions for post-construction stormwater management in division
(B)(1)(a)1. and (B)(1)(a)2., above.
         (i)   Site plan review.
            1.   Prior to any construction activities taking place, permittee
shall provide to the city two sets of legible copies of the site plan prepared
to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for performing
the review. The site plan shall include post-construction stormwater management
BMPs.
            2.   Site plan approval issued under this chapter runs with the
land and is a condition of plat or development approval. Any landowner or
subsequent landowner of any parcel within the plat or development area must
comply with the plan or any approval, condition, revision or modification of
the plan. Failure to comply with this plan shall constitute a violation and
subject the permittee, developer, and/or landowner to enforcement provisions,
penalties and any applicable noncompliance fees.
   (C)   It is unlawful to initiate any land development activity, land
disturbing activity, or other activities which may result in an increase in
storm water quantities, degradation of storm water quality, or restriction of
flow in any storm sewer system, open ditch or natural channel, storm water
easement, water body, or wetland outlet within the jurisdiction of the city,
without having first complied with the terms of this chapter.
   (D)   A processing and approval fee may be adopted by the City Council. This
fee shall accompany all applications for site plan review and approval.
   (E)   Approval of any plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter
shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has
commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration of
approval, the Applicant makes a written request to the City for an extension of
time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the requested
extension, the City may grant one extension of not greater than one year. The
city shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt. Any plan
may be revised following the same procedure for an original approval. The city
may waive all or part of any applicable application fees if the revision is
minor. Any denied or expired application may be resubmitted with additional
information addressing the concerns contained within the denial or the reason
why the original plan was allowed to expire. The resubmitted application shall
be subject to all applicable fees and review time lines as if it were a new
application.
   (F)   It shall be the applicant's responsibility to obtain any required
permits from other governmental agencies having any jurisdictional authority
over the work to be performed. Typically, such agencies include, but are not
limited to the Buffalo-Red River Watershed District, Clay County, the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Department of Transportation,
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the State Historical Preservation
Office, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Minnesota Department of Health
and others. The City may choose to obtain some of the required permits. The
Applicant will be notified which permits are to be obtained by the city.
   (G)   Other than those outlined in the SWPPP or as required in section 2-01,
any hydrologic models and/or design methodologies used to determine runoff
conditions and to analyze storm water management structures and facilities,
shall be approved in advance by the city or City Engineer. All storm water
management plans, drawings, specifications, and computations for storm water
management facilities submitted for review shall contain a validated seal and
shall be signed by a professional engineer registered in the State of
Minnesota. The requirement of having a professional engineer sign the documents
may be waived by the city.
   (H)   The city for just cause upon 30-day notice may modify any city
approval that was made regarding any storm water management plan proposed by
the permittee. Just cause shall include but not be limited to:
      (1)   Promulgation of new federal, state or local regulatory
requirements;
      (2)   Changes in the requirements of this chapter;
      (3)   Changes in the process used by the permittee or changes in
discharge rate, volume, or character; and
      (4)   Changes in the design or capability of receiving storm water
systems.
   (I)   Upon completion of all required construction activities, the permittee
shall submit to the city record drawings to document any changes or material
modifications to the original plan concept. The record drawings shall show the
final configuration for all improvements as constructed. A professional
engineer registered in the State of Minnesota shall certify the record
drawings. If no significant or material changes occurred between the approved
plan and final construction, the record drawings need not be submitted to the
city. The permittee, however, is responsible to retain copies of said drawings
and provide them to the city upon request. Failure to provide these drawings
upon written request constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-02, passed 2-9-2015)
ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
§ 53.15 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-storm
water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This ordinance establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm
water discharges by any user.
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the director of the
municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in §
53.21 of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not
limited to any conveyances that allow any non-storm water discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps,
or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Storm Water
Permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26 (b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm
water, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the MPCA that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the State of Minnesota, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. A document which describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify
sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems,
and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.17 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
the city.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.18 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Administrator shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City
Administrator may be delegated in writing to other persons or entities acting
in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.19 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.20 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance
are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.21 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.
      (1)   No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or
allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the
MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than storm water.
      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge
to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing, landscape irrigation,
diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water
infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water
sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water,
springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
         (b)   Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges
specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health
and safety.
         (c)   Discharges associated with dye testing, however this activity
requires a verbal notification to the city prior to the time of the test.
         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency (MPCA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
      (4)   Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved sanitary sewer system
upon approval of the city.
      (5)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be
located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed.
Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of
the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall
location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations
are to be documented and provided to the city.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.22 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.23 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   The following apply for a submission of NOI to the city:
   (A)   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
   (B)   The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to
have an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial
activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) or application for
NPDES permit coverage from the MPCA to the city at the same time the operator
submits the original notice of intent to the EPA as applicable.
   (C)   The copy of the Notice of Intent or NPDES permit coverage may be
delivered to the city either in person or by mailing it to:
         Industrial or Construction Stormwater Management
         City of Dilworth
         PO Box 187
         Dilworth, MN 56529-0187
   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is
discharging storm water associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the city.
(Ord. 15-03, passed - -)
§ 53.24 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The city shall be permitted
to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
      (1)   If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger
shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
city.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.
      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this chapter.
A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
   (B)   Search warrant. If the city has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which storm water is discharged, and he or she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.25 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for
any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the
United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or facility
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-
structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise that
is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with
all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs
shall be part of a storm water management plan (SWMP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.26 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response
for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release
of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of
the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the
event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the
city in person or by phone no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the city within two business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.
   (B)   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.27 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations.
      (1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter may be subject
to the penalties set forth in this chapter or to the enforcement actions
outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated
in a manner provided by law.
      (2)   In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to
public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the
subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city
is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in §
53.30.
   (B)   Warning notice. When the city finds that any person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued
hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written warning notice,
specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting
the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution
whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of
the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged
violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the
city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a warning notice.
   (C)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter the city may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall contain:
         (a)   The name and address of the alleged violator;
         (b)   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
         (e)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
         (f)   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed
to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within seven days of service
of notice of violation; and
         (g)   A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore
compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator. Such notice may require without limitation:
            1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
            2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
            3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall
cease and desist;
            4.   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
            5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs; and
            6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (D)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties,
and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
   (E)   Suspension of MS4 access.
      (1)   Emergency cease and desist orders.
         (a)   When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or
that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's
violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, city may issue an order to the violator
directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the violator to:
            1.   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
            2.   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
         (b)   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under
this subdivision shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering
discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the city may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United
States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including
immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other
municipal utility services. The city may allow the person to recommence its
discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person that is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes
of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the city within two days of receipt of the emergency order.
Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
      (2)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United
States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.
      (3)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
         (a)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter
may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for a
reconsideration and hearing.
         (b)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of
the city.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015; Ord. 22-08, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 53.28 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the city. The notice of appeal must be received within four days from the date
of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate
authority or his/her designee shall take place within 14 days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or
their designee shall be final.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.29 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within two
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
city, then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject private
property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the
purposes set forth above.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.30 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   (A)   Within 14 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
the assessment within 30 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a
special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be
paid in not more than four equal payments. Interest at the rate of 6% per annum
shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the fourteenth day following
discovery of the violation.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.31 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.32 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   (A)   The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
   (B)   The city may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 53.33 SALT STORAGE AT COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, AND NON-NPDES PERMITTED
INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Indoor operations for the storage of deicing materials must be
provided whenever possible in order to prevent such material from being
affected by rain, snow, or meltwater.
   (B)   All salt, sand, and other deicing materials stored outdoors must be
covered at all times. When not using a permanent roof, a waterproof
impermeable, flexible cover must be placed over all storage piles. The cover
must prevent runoff and leachate from being generated by the outdoor storage
piles. The cover must be secured to prevent removal by wind or other storm
events. Piles must be formed in a conical shape and covered as necessary to
prevent leaching.
   (C)   Facility siting.
      (1)   The facility must be close to the area where the deicing materials
are to be used, if practical.
      (2)   The facility must be located on impermeable surfaces.
      (3)   Each facility must be located outside of floodplains and 300 feet
from lakes, rivers, streams, ditches, storm drains, manholes, catch basins,
wetlands, and any other areas likely to absorb runoff. A facility must not be
located near stormwater management features, water supplies, wells, or dry
wells.
      (4)   The property's slope must be away from the facility.
   (D)   Snow piles. Snow piles must be located downslope from salt and deicer
storage areas to prevent the snow melt from flowing through storage areas and
carrying material to the nearest drainage system or waterway.
   (E)   Transfer of materials. Practices must be implemented to reduce
exposure (e.g., sweeping, diversions, and/or containment) when transferring
salt or other deicing material.
(Ord. 24-07, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor and be subject
to the penalty provisions of §
10.99 or, alternatively, may be issued an administrative citation and be
subject to the civil penalty provisions of §
35.01. Any criminal or civil penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be
imposed in addition to any enforcement actions set forth in this chapter or to
any costs incurred by the city for abatement. Each act of violation and each
day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 15-03, passed --2-9-2015; Ord. 22-08, passed 9-26-2022)
CHAPTER 54: GEOTHERMAL HEATING SYSTEMS
Section
   
54.01   Purpose
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Construction and severability
   
54.04   Subsurface water management policy
   
54.05   Registration of geothermal heating systems
   
54.06   Geothermal heating systems
   
54.07   Application for geothermal heating system permit
   
54.08   Application fee
   
54.09   Application review
   
54.10   Permit decision criteria
   
54.11   Completion inspection
   
54.12   Post chapter surface discharges
   
54.13   City inspection and monitoring of geothermal facilities
   
54.14   Defective geothermal heating systems
   
54.15   City responsibility
§ 54.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of geothermal
heating systems within the city.
   (B)   In furtherance of this overall purpose, this chapter is specifically
intended to serve the following sub-purposes:
      (1)   Conservation and beneficial management of geothermal resources and
thermal ground waters in a comprehensive and coordinated manner so as to assure
their continued availability and productivity;
      (2)   Continued support and assistance for individual private geothermal
resources and thermal ground water uses, including residential, institutional,
commercial and industrial activities;
      (3)   Maximization of the public welfare and economic benefit to be
derived from geothermal resources and thermal ground waters;
      (4)   Minimization of the potential for damage or degradation to
geothermal resources and thermal ground waters; and
      (5)   Protection of the surface and subsurface environment during
development and utilization of geothermal resources and thermal ground waters.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERING. The deepening, recasting, perforating, reperforating, the
installation of packers or seals, and other material changes in the design of a
geothermal heating system.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. City Administrator of the City of Dilworth or the
Administrator’s authorized representative.
   CONSTRUCTING. The boring, digging, drilling or excavating of a geothermal
heating system, including the installation of casing or geothermal heating
system screens.
   GEOTHERMAL FLUID. Any fluid transporting or capable of transporting
geothermal heat.
   GEOTHERMAL HEAT. Heat derived from geothermal resources or heat derived from
ground water.
   GEOTHERMAL RESOURCES. The natural heat of the earth, and the energy, in
whatever form, below the surface of the earth present in, resulting from, or
created by, or which may be extracted from, the natural heat, and all minerals
in solution or other products obtained from naturally heated fluids, brines,
associated gases, in whatever form, found below the surface of the earth,
exclusive of oil, hydrocarbon gas, other hydrocarbon gas, other hydrocarbon
substances or helium, but including specifically:
      (1)   All products of geothermal processes, embracing indigenous steam,
hot water and hot brines;
      (2)   Steam and other gases, hot water and hot brines resulting from
water, gas or other fluids artificially introduced into geothermal formations;
      (3)   Heat or other associated energy found in geothermal formations; and
      (4)   Any by-product derived from them.
   GROUND WATER. Any water, except capillary moisture, beneath the land surface
or beneath the bed of any stream, lake, reservoir or other body of surface
water, whatever may be the geological formation or structure in which such
water stands, flows, percolates or otherwise moves.
   OWNER. The holder of the record title to real property or the person
entitled to use of the thermal ground water at the property.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or
fraternal organization, corporation, non-profit corporation, trust, estate,
receiver, syndicate, branch of government or similar entities, any group or
combination acting as a unit, or the successors or assigns of any of the
aforesaid.
   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical
or biological properties of any surface or ground waters which will or can
reasonably be expected to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious
to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other
legitimate beneficial use.
   RESERVOIR. An aquifer or combination of aquifers or zones containing a
common geothermal or ground water resource.
   THERMAL GROUND WATER. Ground water which is less than 250°F at bottom-hole
temperature, and possessing sufficient heat to be used for a direct thermal
application or in conjunction with a ground water heat pump.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.03 CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to the maximum
extent possible as consistent with applicable state statutes and regulations.
If the provisions of this section and state law are in conflict, then state law
shall prevail.
   (B)   It is the intention of the Council that the provisions of this chapter
are severable, and if any provision of this chapter shall be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by the judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of
the remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.04 SUBSURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT POLICY.
   In furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, it shall be the policy of
the city that all geothermal heating systems existing on the effective date of
this chapter, and those constructed or altered thereafter, be used in such a
manner as to:
   (A)   Conserve and protect the geothermal fluids and ground water within and
adjacent to the city in order to: enhance reservoir productivity and benefit,
prevent wasteful extraction and disposal of geothermal fluids and thermal
ground water, prevent geothermal fluid and thermal ground water temperature
degradation, prevent thermal pollution of surface environments and water, and
prevent harmful intermixing of geothermal fluids and other ground water;
   (B)   Allow individual utilization of geothermal fluids and thermal ground
water for residential, commercial, industrial and other lawful purposes; and
   (C)   Protect the public health, safety and welfare from improperly
constructed, operated, maintained or abandoned geothermal heating systems.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.05 REGISTRATION OF GEOTHERMAL HEATING SYSTEMS.
   Owners of pre-chapter geothermal heating systems within the city may
register their geothermal heating systems with the City Administrator. Such
registration shall be voluntary and without cost to the owner. Said
registration shall be on forms supplied by the city and may include but are not
limited to: the name and address of the owner, specific location of the
geothermal heating system, date of construction, depth and diameter of the
geothermal heating system, specifications of casing, bottom hole temperature,
static fluid or water level, type of geothermal utilization system,
accessibility for monitoring devices, and disposal method, if any. The City
Administrator shall direct reasonable public notice to the city’s inhabitants
at large, explaining the registration program and encouraging participation.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.06 GEOTHERMAL HEATING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Any pump and dump geothermal heating systems are required to be
plumbed directly into the storm sewer system, or if permitted, a ditch system.
To be plumbed into a storm sewer system, the property must be located directly
adjacent to a storm sewer main. There will be a one-time fee to connect into
the city’s system. This connection must be completed by a licensed contractor.
Discharge into the storm sewer main shall not be permitted between the months
of November 1 and March 31. Any discharge into the city’s storm water pond is
strictly prohibited. Any discharge into a ditch system must receive prior
written approval from the agency responsible for the ditch and anyone receiving
approval
to discharge into the ditch shall accept sole responsibility for compliance
with all federal, state and local regulations and shall be totally responsible
for any erosion, sediment or any problems created by the discharge.
   (B)   (1)   Only food-grade or USP-grade propylene glycol may be used as a
geothermal fluid. No other materials or additives may be used except for
potable water.
      (2)   A permanent sign must be attached to the heat pump specifying that
only approved heat transfer fluids must be used.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.07 APPLICATION FOR GEOTHERMAL HEATING SYSTEM PERMIT.
   Any person, including the city, desiring to construct, install or alter a
geothermal heating system within the city shall first apply for a geothermal
heating system permit at the City Hall on forms provided for that purpose. No
person shall commence construction or alteration of a geothermal heating system
prior to the owner of a proposed geothermal heating system receiving a permit.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.08 APPLICATION FEE.
   All applications for a geothermal heating system permit shall be accompanied
by an application fee which shall be nonrefundable, such fee to be according to
a fee schedule established by City Council resolution.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.09 APPLICATION REVIEW.
   The City Administrator, or a person designated by the Administrator, shall
review each application for conformity with the applicable city ordinances.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.10 PERMIT DECISION CRITERIA.
   Permit decisions shall contain written findings for approval or denial which
may include, but are not limited to, the following criteria:
   (A)   The estimated hydrological impact of the proposed geothermal heating
system’s operations upon the reservoir and surrounding geothermal heating
systems;
   (B)   The adequacy of provisions for environmental protection and public
safety; and
   (C)   The compliance of the proposed geothermal heating system and its use
with this chapter, the City Comprehensive Plan, and all other applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.11 COMPLETION INSPECTION.
   Upon completion of any geothermal heating system construction or alteration,
but prior to regular use, the owner shall promptly notify the city to request a
completion inspection and written report thereof to be made for the purposes of
assuring compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.12 POST CHAPTER SURFACE DISCHARGES.
   No geothermal heating system constructed or altered after the effective date
of this chapter shall be operated or altered in such a manner as to cause
geothermal fluids or thermal ground water to be discharged onto the surface of
the ground. Construction and routine maintenance of geothermal heating systems
shall be exempt from said prohibition; surface discharges for construction and
routine maintenance purposes shall be conducted in accordance with written
standards issued by the city.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.13 CITY INSPECTION AND MONITORING OF GEOTHERMAL FACILITIES.
   In connection with the principal functions and activities of the city
resource management responsibility, city officials may, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances and upon reasonable notice to the owner, enter
upon any property within the city for purposes of inspecting geothermal
facilities, or monitoring the operational characteristics of such facilities,
when such inspection or monitoring is reasonably necessary to the assessment of
other indices related to geothermal or ground water reservoir management, or
protection of the public safety and welfare. The city shall provide affected
property owners or occupants with reasonable prior notice, describing the
nature, purpose and duration of the necessary inspection or monitoring; such
inspections or monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with applicable city
and state procedures for inspections. If any person refuses to permit any
officer or employee to enter and inspect, the city officer or employee shall
not attempt to force entrance, but shall, with the assistance of the City
Attorney, seek a search warrant or other appropriate court order.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 54.14 DEFECTIVE GEOTHERMAL HEATING SYSTEMS.
   Whenever the City Administrator determines that any geothermal heating
system within the city is by the nature of its construction, installation or
operation is adversely interfering with other geothermal heating systems, or is
polluting ground water or surface water, the Administrator shall promptly
notify the affected owner, by certified mail, of the wasteful or defective
geothermal heating system and require said owner to repair or adjust the
geothermal heating system within 24 hours; a geothermal heating system
continuing wasteful or defective operation after expiration of the 24 hours may
be prosecuted as a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.15 CITY RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city does not accept any responsibility in relation to the operation and
future maintenance of the geothermal heating system or its removal if the owner
fails to maintain or abandons the heating system.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 4-13-2009)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATION
      
71.   IMPOUNDMENT
      
72.   MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVER’S LICENSE
      
73.   PARKING AND STORING OF VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
      
74.   ALL-TERRAIN AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
75.   UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATION
Section
   
70.01   Emergency vehicles
   
70.02   Unlawful interference with signs
   
70.03   Reckless and careless driving
   
70.04   Drunken driving
   
70.05   Drive on right
   
70.06   Passing
   
70.07   Overtaking vehicles
   
70.08   Passing over left of center
   
70.09   Turning
   
70.10   Intersection rules
   
70.11   Stop before entering highways
   
70.12   Pedestrians
   
70.13   Children
   
70.14   Stopping for railroad signal
   
70.15   View obstructed
   
70.16   Stopping after an accident
   
70.17   Speed restrictions
   
70.18   Speed in city
   
70.19   Speed at intersections and the like
   
70.20   Removal of vehicles
   
70.21   Unsafe equipment
   
70.22   Exhibition driving prohibited
   
70.23   Definitions
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to vehicles when operated
with due regard for safety, under the direction of peace officers, in the chase
or apprehension of persons charged with or suspected of any violation of law,
nor to Fire Department vehicles when traveling in response to a fire alarm, nor
to public vehicles when traveling in emergencies, which vehicles shall be given
the right-of-way if the driver thereof is giving audible signal by siren. This
exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the
consequences of his or her own negligence.
(1963 Code, § 40.01)
§ 70.02 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS.
   No person shall without lawful authority alter, deface, injure or remove any
official traffic control device, or post any unauthorized sign.
(1963 Code, § 40.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 RECKLESS AND CARELESS DRIVING.
   No person shall drive a vehicle in a manner as to indicate either a willful
or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. No person shall
drive, and no owner of a vehicle shall permit to be driven, any unsafe vehicle
or load or connecting part thereof upon any highway.
(1963 Code, § 40.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 DRUNKEN DRIVING.
   No person, whether licensed or not, who is a habitual user of narcotics or
who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics shall drive any
vehicle upon any highway.
(1963 Code, § 40.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 DRIVE ON RIGHT.
   Upon all highways of sufficient width, except one-way streets, the driver of
a vehicle shall drive upon the right half of the roadway unless it is
impractical to travel on such side, except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle.
(1963 Code, § 40.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 PASSING.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right and upon roadways having the width available for vehicular travel
temporarily limited by reason of obstruction thereon or otherwise, each driver
shall give the other one-half of the portion of the roadway left available for
vehicular travel.
(1963 Code, § 40.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 OVERTAKING VEHICLES.
   The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left at a safe distance and shall not again drive
to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle
except that the driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle when it is making a left turn.
(1963 Code, § 40.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 PASSING OVER LEFT OF CENTER.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not pass to the left of the centerline of the
highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle in the same direction unless
the left side is clearly visible and free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit overtaking and passing safely.
(1963 Code, § 40.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 TURNING.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an intersection
shall approach the intersection in the traffic lane nearest to the right hand
side of the roadway, and in turning shall keep as closely as practicable to the
right hand curb of the roadway. When intending to turn to the left, he or she
shall approach the intersection in that portion of the right half of the
roadway nearest to the centerline thereof, and shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the
intersection or so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver,
having so yielded and having given a signal required by this chapter, may make
a turn, and the driver of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from
the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the
turn.
(1963 Code, § 40.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.10 INTERSECTION RULES.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-
of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway. When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver on the left shall yield the right-of-
way to the vehicle on the right. As to through highways or stop intersections,
the driver of the vehicle entering the through highway must stop and yield the
right-of-way to vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through
highway or entered the stop intersection or which are approaching so closely on
the through highway or to the stop intersection as to constitute an immediate
hazard. The driver having so yielded may proceed and the driver of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection on the through highway or approaching the
stop intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding
into or across the through highway or stop intersection. The driver of a
vehicle entering or crossing a highway from a private driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The driver of any
vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit any right-of-way which he
or she might have had. No driver of a vehicle shall make a U-turn within a
congested zone, or any other streets or avenues which are posted with
appropriate signs.
(1963 Code, § 40.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 STOP BEFORE ENTERING HIGHWAYS.
   The driver of a vehicle from any public alley or private driveway, when the
view is obstructed, shall stop before entering upon any sidewalk or highway,
then proceed only if safety allows.
(1963 Code, § 40.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.12 PEDESTRIANS.
   Except as otherwise stated, pedestrians crossing a roadway or crosswalk
shall have the right-of-way over approaching vehicles on the roadway; but
pedestrians crossing the roadway at any other place than a crosswalk shall
yield the right-of-way to approaching vehicles on the roadway. When walking
along a roadway, pedestrians shall walk near the left hand side of the roadway
and shall give way to oncoming vehicles.
(1963 Code, § 40.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.13 CHILDREN.
   No person shall drive a vehicle through a column of children crossing a
street or past a member of a school safety patrol when such patrol officer is
holding up his or her official signal for vehicles to stop.
(1963 Code, § 40.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.14 STOPPING FOR RAILROAD SIGNAL.
   Whenever the driver of any vehicle approaching a grade railroad crossing and
a clearly visible electrical or mechanical device or a human flagger gives
warning of the approach of a train, the driver shall stop at least ten feet
before the nearest rail of the railroad track and shall remain standing there
until the train has passed over the crossing.
(1963 Code, § 40.14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.15 VIEW OBSTRUCTED.
   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any highway when his or her view is
obstructed to the front or sides or when his or her control over the mechanism
of the vehicle is interfered with by any person or goods within the vehicle,
and no passenger shall so obstruct or interfere.
(1963 Code, § 40.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 STOPPING AFTER AN ACCIDENT.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident in which a person or
property receives injury shall stop at or return to the scene of the accident,
and there shall disclose his or her name, address, driver’s license and
registration number of such vehicle, to the other person involved in such
accident and shall render assistance to any victim of such accident. In
addition to the foregoing, the driver of any vehicle involved in any accident
shall make a report to the local Police Department immediately following such
accident and in no event later than 24 hours following such accident.
(1963 Code, § 40.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on any highway at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards there existing.
(1963 Code, § 40.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 SPEED IN CITY.
   Where no special hazard exists, 30 mph shall be lawful for any vehicle to
travel, and any speed in excess of such limit shall be prima facie evidence
that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(1963 Code, § 40.18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.19 SPEED AT INTERSECTIONS AND THE LIKE.
   The driver of any vehicle shall drive at an appropriate reduced speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway
conditions.
(1963 Code, § 40.19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.20 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   Whenever any police officer finds any unattended vehicle obstructing the
traffic on any street or avenue, or obstructing the entrance of any private
driveway, or interfering with the maintenance, cleaning, repair or snow removal
on streets and avenues, he or she may remove the vehicle and hold it until the
city is reimbursed for the costs of the removal.
(1963 Code, § 40.23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.21 UNSAFE EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall drive and no owner shall knowingly permit to be driven on
any street or alley in the city in a vehicle which is in an unsafe condition so
as to endanger any person or which does not contain equipment in proper
condition and is required by the Highway Traffic Regulations Act, being M.S.
Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, of the state.
(1963 Code, § 40.24) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor
vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or
backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying throwing of sand or
gravel, or in a manner simulating a race, squealing or screeching sounds
emitted by tires, or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires is prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 6-22-1994) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the language indicates that a different meaning is intended, all the
words and phrases in this chapter shall be given the meaning as defined for
them in the Highway Traffic Regulations Act, being M.S. Chapter 169, as it may
be amended from time to time, of the state.
(1963 Code, § 40.25) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Violations of §
70.22 shall be treated as a petty misdemeanor with the maximum amount of the
fine being as set out in §
10.99.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 6-22-1994)
CHAPTER 71: IMPOUNDMENT
Section
   
71.01   Establishment
   
71.02   Location
   
71.03   Removal of vehicles
   
71.04   Abandoned vehicles
   
71.05   Storage of seized vehicles, pending sale
   
71.06   Charges
   
71.07   Lien
   
71.08   Foreclosure by sale
   
71.09   Sale
   
71.10   Papers to be filed
   
71.11   Foreclosure by action
   
71.12   Release of impounded vehicles
   
71.13   Records
§ 71.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The City Council may establish and provide one or more impounding lots for
the purpose of keeping and storing impounded motor vehicles.
(1963 Code, § 41.01)
§ 71.02 LOCATION.
   Any motor vehicles impounded shall be placed in impounding lots or other
places as the City Council shall designate.
(1963 Code, § 41.02)
§ 71.03 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   Whenever any police officer finds any unattended vehicle obstructing the
traffic on any street or avenue, or obstructing the entrance of any private
driveway, or interfering with the maintenance, cleaning, repairing or snow
removal on any streets or avenues, he or she may remove the vehicle and hold it
in the impounding lot or lots or other place as the City Council shall
designate until the city is reimbursed for all costs and charges of the removal
and storage or until the same has been disposed of as hereinafter provided.
(1963 Code, § 41.03)
§ 71.04 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   Section
71.03 shall be applicable to any motor vehicle found standing in or upon any
street or avenue where the same has not been moved or used for a period of 24
hours, regardless of the requirements set out in this chapter.
(1963 Code, § 41.04)
§ 71.05 STORAGE OF SEIZED VEHICLES, PENDING SALE.
   The Police Department may store seized motor vehicles on city property,
pending sale.
(1963 Code, § 41.05) (Am. Ord. 19-11, passed 12-9-2019)
§ 71.06 CHARGES.
   The city shall make a charge, or actual cost, whichever is greater, for
towing a motor vehicle so impounded, from the place where found to the place
where it is impounded; and shall charge as ground rent for the space on which
the motor vehicle stands.
(1963 Code, § 41.06)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 71.07 LIEN.
   The city shall have a lien upon the motor vehicle for the tow charge and for
ground use. If any sum secured by such lien be not paid within 60 days after
the motor vehicle has been impounded, the city may sell the property and out of
the proceeds of the sale there shall be paid, first, all charges and
disbursements of the sale; second, all charges paid by the city to any other
person in connection with the towing and storage of the motor vehicle; and,
third, the total indebtedness then secured by the lien. The remainder, if any,
shall be paid on demand to the owner or other person entitled thereto.
(1963 Code, § 41.07)
§ 71.08 FORECLOSURE BY SALE.
   The sale shall be made at public auction between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
where the property is situated. A notice stating the time and place of sale,
the amount which will be due on the date, of sale exclusive of the expenses of
advertising and sale, and the grounds of the lien, giving a general description
of the property to be sold, shall be served personally upon the owner of the
property if he or she can be found within the city or within the county in
which the property is stored, and if he or she cannot then it shall be mailed
to the owner at least three weeks before the time fixed for the sale if the
place of residence or post office address of the owner is known to the city
officials or with due diligence can be learned by the city authorities, and
shall be published once in each week for three successive weeks in the official
newspaper. The last publication of such notice shall be at least one week prior
to the date of sale. In case neither the place of residence nor the post office
address of such owner is known to the city authorities and cannot with
reasonable diligence be learned, the publication of notice shall be sufficient
to authorize such sale.
(1963 Code, § 41.08)
§ 71.09 SALE.
   The property sold shall be in view at the time of the sale. Under the power
of sale, any motor vehicle impounded may be sold to satisfy the amount due at
the time of sale, including expenses, and the property may be offered for sale
and sold in the form and condition that the same was received by the city. The
city, its representatives or officials, may fairly and in good faith purchase
any property sold under this section, provided the sale is conducted by the
Sheriff of the county, his or her deputy or any constable of the county where
the sale is made.
(1963 Code, § 41.09)
§ 71.10 PAPERS TO BE FILED.
   All papers had and made in connection with the sale provided for shall be
filed with the City Administrator.
(1963 Code, § 41.10)
§ 71.11 FORECLOSURE BY ACTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from foreclosing the lien by
action in the District Court and pursuant to the order of the court made in
such action.
(1963 Code, § 41.11)
§ 71.12 RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   No person shall take from the impounding lot or other place designated by
the Council any impounded vehicle without first paying all charges and liens
against the same.
(1963 Code, § 41.12)
§ 71.13 RECORDS.
   The Chief of Police shall keep a full and complete record of all motor
vehicles impounded together with a record of all charges and fees against the
same in a book provided therefor by the city.
(1963 Code, § 41.13)
CHAPTER 72: MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVER’S LICENSE
Section
   
72.01   Valid license required
   
72.02   Suspension
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 VALID LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle upon any street or
highway in this city unless he or she has a valid license as a driver, or a
valid chauffeur’s license and is operating a motor vehicle in the performance
of his or her duties as a chauffeur.
(1963 Code, § 42.01) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 SUSPENSION.
   No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle upon any street or
highway in this city while his or her license is under suspension by the
Commissioner of Highways or under revocation by the Commissioner of Highways
pursuant to authority granted state law to the Commissioner of Highways.
(1963 Code, § 42.02) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine, or by a sentence
of confinement in the county jail, or both, as set out in §
10.99.
(1963 Code, § 42.03)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING AND STORING OF VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
Section
   
73.01   Parking prohibition and exceptions
   
73.02   Abandoning a motor vehicle in rights-of-way
   
73.03   Wrecked or junked vehicles or trailers
   
73.04   Parking
   
73.05   Parking rules
   
73.06   Plowing after snowfall and other street maintenance
   
73.07   Parking prohibited on Tuesdays from November 1 to April 1 from 7:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 PARKING PROHIBITION AND EXCEPTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person owning, driving or in charge of a vehicle as
hereinafter set forth to cause or permit the parking or continuous standing of
such vehicles on any public street, alley or other public property within or
adjacent to any R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 zoned district.
   (A)   No parking shall be allowed at any time of any bus, truck, truck/
tractor or tractor/trailer combination or commercial vehicle which has a
registered gross weight of 12,000 pounds or more or which is 19 feet or more in
length.
   (B)   No parking shall be allowed at any time of any semi-trailer.
   (C)   No person shall allow any bus, truck, truck/tractor or tractor/trailer
or commercial vehicle over 12,000 pounds gross weight or which is 19 feet or
more in length to be parked on any private property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-
4 unless enclosed in a suitable enclosure, except when utilized for excavation
or construction of said property.
   (D)   Exceptions:
      (1)   A bus, truck/tractor or tractor/trailer or commercial vehicle with
a registered gross weight of 12,000 pounds or more or which is 19 feet or more
in length may be parked in any parking zone so established by City Council; and
      (2)   Said regulations shall not apply to any motor vehicle owned by a
public utility, moving company, rental company or similar company while
actually being used to service a residence, or to any motor vehicle used in
conjunction with an authorized construction site during a period that
construction is actually taking place including non-working hours and holidays.
(Ord. 14-03, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 ABANDONING A MOTOR VEHICLE IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle in the right-of-way
of streets within the city. No person shall park or leave any vehicle or
trailer in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperative condition in
the right-of-way of streets; except that a reasonable time, not to exceed 24
hours from the time of disability, shall be permitted for the removal or
servicing of a disabled vehicle in an emergency caused by an accident or sudden
breakdown of a vehicle. No person shall park or leave any non-licensed vehicle
or trailer in the right-of-way of streets.
(Ord. 14-03, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 WRECKED OR JUNKED VEHICLES OR TRAILERS.
   No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any wrecked, junked,
partially dismantled, inoperative, discarded or non-registered vehicle or
trailer to remain on such property longer than 96 hours; and no person shall
leave any such vehicle or trailer on any property within the city for longer
than 96 hours; except that this chapter shall not apply with regard to a
vehicle or trailer in an enclosed building; a vehicle or trailer on the
premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when
necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an
appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner
by the city.
(Ord. 14-03, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 PARKING.
   (A)   At any time, it shall be unlawful to permit any licensed vehicle or
trailer to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic controlling device.
   (B)   Trailers include boat trailers, snowmobile trailers, utility trailers,
flatbed trailers, campers or any other unit so designed to be pulled behind a
motorized or unmotorized vehicle, regardless of whether or not the trailer is
attached or unattached to a motorized or unmotorized vehicle at the time.
      (1)   On any street, roadway or right-of-way for a continuous period of
more than 72 hours;
      (2)   A continuous period exists until the vehicle or trailer is moved a
minimum of 300 feet. Trailer cannot be returned to the same location for 14
days;
      (3)   In any intersection;
      (4)   In a crosswalk;
      (5)   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the
approach thereto;
      (6)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of
the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the
approaching side;
      (8)   Within 30 feet of an intersection or crosswalk;
      (9)   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than 18 feet;
      (10)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant or in a fire lane;
      (11)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway;
      (12)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing;
      (13)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire department
station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station
within 75 feet of such entrance when properly signed;
      (14)   On any sidewalk parkway;
      (15)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking;
      (16)   In a designated disabled parking space located any place within
the city limits without a permit for such parking prominently displayed;
      (17)   Wrong side of street (parking against traffic);
      (18)   Loading zone, where posted or signed; and
      (19)   Night time parking, where posted or signed.
(Ord. 14-03, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 PARKING RULES.
   (A)   The parking of vehicles, not applying to §§
73.02 and
73.03, on public right-of-way or street in a R-1 and R-2 zoned area, shall be
limited in total to the number of licensed drivers residing on the premises
minus two, provided that a minimum of two vehicles per premises shall be
allowed to be parked on public right-of-way or street regardless of the number
of licensed drivers residing on the premises.
   (B)   Example: One licensed driver residing on premises, two vehicles
permitted to be parked on public right-of-way or street; two licensed drivers,
two vehicles; three licensed drivers, two vehicles; four licensed drivers, two
vehicles; five licensed drivers, three vehicles; six licensed drivers, four
vehicles and the like.
   (C)   This section is not applicable to premises where off-street parking is
not available. For purposes of this section, an alley is not considered an off-
street parking area.
   (D)   Said regulations shall not apply to any motor vehicle owned by a
public utility, moving company, rental company or similar company while
actually being used to service a residence, or to guests visiting the premises
for a limited period of time.
(Ord. 14-03, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 PLOWING AFTER SNOWFALL AND OTHER STREET MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   When deemed necessary to plow streets after a snowfall, if vehicles or
trailers are on the street after the plows pass for a period of 24 hours or
more, the vehicle may be towed at the owner’s expense. For purposes of this
section, any person who operates or allows another to operate his or her
vehicle or trailer on the public roads or streets of the city shall be deemed
to have consented to the removal and storage of said vehicle or trailer under
the terms of this section, and consent shall extend to the storage thereof
without liability for any damage to such vehicle or trailer or its contents
while being removed or stored.
   (B)   Whenever the city finds any unattended vehicle or trailer obstructing
the traffic on any street or right-of-way, or obstructing the entrance of any
private driveway, or interfering with the maintenance, garbage/recycling
collection, cleaning, repair or snow removal on streets or right-of-way, the
the city may remove the vehicle or trailer at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 14-03, passed 7-14-2014; Ord. 23-03, passed 9-11-2023)
§ 73.07 PARKING PROHIBITED ON TUESDAYS FROM NOVEMBER 1 TO APRIL 1 FROM 7:00
A.M. TO 4:00 P.M.
   No vehicle, trailer, or other equipment shall be parked along city streets
on Tuesdays from November 1 to April 1 from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
(Ord. 19-05, passed 7-8-2019; Ord. 23-03, passed 9-11-2023)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days, or
both, as set out in §
10.99.
   (B)   Parking fines.
All parking infractions unless stated below $25
Fire lane/hydrant                           $40
Handicapped parking                         $200
Late fees
   7-14 days                             $10
   14-30 days                            $10
   Over 30 days                          $10
   Maximum late fee                      $30
 
(Ord. 14-03, passed 7-14-2014)
CHAPTER 74: ALL-TERRAIN AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
All-Terrain and Recreational Vehicles
   
74.01   Definitions
   
74.02   Equipment
   
74.03   Operation
   
74.04   Exemptions
Snowmobiles
   
74.10   Definitions
   
74.11   Equipment
   
74.12   Operation
   
74.13   General regulations
 
   
74.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A Class 1 all-terrain vehicle and Class 2 all-terrain
vehicle as defined by M.S. §84.92(8).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any motorized bicycle, moped or motorcycle, motor
vehicles licensed for highway operation but used for off-road recreational
purposes.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 74.02 EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall operate an all-terrain or recreational vehicle any place
within the limits of the city unless it is equipped as follows:
   (A)   With two clear headlights and two red taillights lighted at all times;
   (B)   With a functioning stoplight;
   (C)   With standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce
the noise operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No
person shall use a cut-out, bypass, straight pipe, or similar device on an all-
terrain or recreational vehicle; and
   (D)   The vehicle shall be equipped with a rear-view mirror or left/right
side view mirrors to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind as
required by M.S. §169.70, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 74.03 OPERATION.
   (A)   All vehicle occupants must be in age-appropriate seat safety belts.
   (B)   Each vehicle must adhere to the Dilworth noise ordinance.
   (C)   The number of occupants in the vehicle may not exceed the design
occupant load.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any all-
terrain vehicle, or recreational vehicle on public lands within the city or on
private lands within the city without the express permission of the owner or
occupant of said private lands.
   (E)   No person shall operate any all-terrain or recreational vehicle on any
designated bikeway or pedestrian walkway within the city limits except when
crossing said areas by the most direct means practicable.
   (F)   All-terrain or recreational vehicles are permissible on city streets
(with the exception of Hwy 10), but must be a “side by side” driven with a
steering wheel and equipped with operator and passenger seatbelts and a roll-
over protective structure.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to operate a Class 1 all-terrain or recreational
vehicle which has a handlebar and the operator sits on a saddle type seat with
the passenger behind them,
   (H)   All operators must be at least 18-years of age and have a valid
driver’s license that would allow them to drive a motor vehicle in Minnesota.
   (I)   All operators must be insured for the vehicle they are driving.
   (J)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to utilize an all-terrain or
recreational vehicle to tow people or trailers.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 74.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, an all-terrain
vehicle may be operated contrary to regulations prescribed in this section in a
police designated emergency or by any recognized government employees involved
in performing essential services for the city, by any on duty law enforcement
officers in accordance with the performance of their duties, or by construction
or maintenance authorized by the city.
   (B)   A Class 2 all-terrain vehicle may be operated upon roadways in
accordance with M.S. §§ 84.92 to 84.928.
   (C)   An all-terrain vehicle may be used to move snow from a driveway,
parking lot, sidewalk, or boulevard.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 74.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARTERIAL SNOWMOBILE ROUTE. A route which allows for the operation of a
snowmobile from a place of storage to a designated trail system or area outside
the city limits.
   OPERATE. To ride on or be in control of the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. A person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   OWNER. A person other than the lienholder having a property interest in, or
title to the snowmobile and who is entitled to the use or possession of the
snowmobile.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 74.11 EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile at any place within the limits of the
city unless it is equipped as follows:
   (A)   Front and rear lights as required by state statute will be in
operation whenever a snowmobile is operated on public property;
   (B)   With a functioning stoplight;
   (C)   Standard muffler(s) shall be properly attached and in proper working
order. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe, or similar
device on a snowmobile motor;
   (D)   Is equipped with brakes which provide adequate control to the movement
of and to stop and hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation;
   (E)   Must be currently registered through the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources; and
   (F)   No person shall operate a snowmobile in the city without wearing a
helmet meeting the specifications set forth in Minn. Rules § 74600.0300.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 74.12 OPERATION.
   (A)   Snowmobile transit on city streets, avenues, and alleys is only
permissible when traveling to and from designated trail access and service
areas as designated by state and county snowmobile routes; or during inclement
weather when automobile travel is restricted. Operators must adhere to traffic
laws.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to carry more passengers than a snowmobile is
designed for.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 74.13 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person between the ages of 14 and 18 shall operate a snowmobile in
the city without a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the
Commissioner of Conservation of the State of Minnesota in their possession.
   (B)   Permissible hours of operation within the city shall be from 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m.
   (C)   Snowmobile operation on private property, other than the property of
the operator, without the expressed consent of the owner is prohibited.
   (D)   Crossing Hwy 10 is permissible only when crossing at right angles
(directly across).
   (E)   Parking of snowmobiles on any public right-of-way or public property
is prohibited.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile may be
operated contrary to regulations prescribed in this section in a police
designated emergency or by any recognized government employees involved in
performing essential services for the city, by any on duty law enforcement
officers in accordance with the performance of their duties, or by construction
or maintenance authorized by the city.
   (G)   No person shall operate a snowmobile on any designated bikeway or
pedestrian walkway within the city limits except when crossing said areas by
the most direct means practicable.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
(Ord. 22-05, passed 9-26-2022)
CHAPTER 75: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section
   
75.01   Custody
   
75.02   Sale of property
   
75.03   Applicability of chapter
§ 75.01 CUSTODY.
   All property which lawfully comes into the possession of the city in the
course of municipal operations and is unclaimed by the lawful owner, shall be
kept in custody by the Police Department of the city.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 9-28-2020)
§ 75.02 SALE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Sale authorized. Any property lawfully coming into the possession of
the city in the course of its municipal operations remaining unclaimed by the
lawful owner more than 60 days after such property came into the possession of
the city, may be sold at public auction or by a private sale through a
nonprofit organization that has a significant mission of community service.
   (B)   Notice of sale. Notice of a public auction to be held under the
provisions of this chapter shall be made by publication of a notice at least
ten days prior to the sale. Such notice shall set forth the date, time and
place of such sale, and shall generally describe the items to be sold.
   (C)   Conduct of sale. The public auction sale held under the provisions of
this chapter shall be conducted by the Police Department. All sales shall be
for cash to the highest bidder. A record of each item sold and the price
received for such item shall be kept and maintained by the Police Department
for a period of two years after each such sale.
   (D)   Disposition of proceeds. All monies received from a public auction
sale shall be delivered to Finance for deposit in the general fund of the city.
Such monies shall be subject to the right of the former owner to payment of the
sale price from the general fund upon proper application and satisfactory proof
of ownership at any time within six months of the date of sale.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 9-28-2020)
§ 75.03 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall not apply to the sale of impounded motor vehicles or
abandoned motor vehicles which are being disposed of in accordance with the
terms and conditions of M.S. Ch. 168B, as such chapter may be from time to time
amended, supplemented or replaced.
(Ord. 20-06, passed 9-28-2020)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
92.   TREES
      
93.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
94.   NUISANCES
      
95.   SECURING VACANT BUILDINGS
      
96.   ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Keeping animals
   
90.02   Cruelty to animals
   
90.03   Collection or removal of baited animals
   
90.04   Removal of pet waste
Licensing and Regulating the Keeping of Dogs and Cats
   
90.15   Running at large
   
90.16   License required
   
90.17   Vaccination
   
90.18   Date of payment
   
90.19   License attached
   
90.20   Nuisance
   
90.21   Impounding
   
90.22   Dangerous dogs
Prohibiting Wild Animals as Pets
   
90.35   Keeping of animals within city limits
   
90.36   Keeping of wild or exotic animals prohibited
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 KEEPING ANIMALS.
   No person shall keep any horses, cattle, pigs, sheep, goats or poultry
within the platted area of this city or within 300 feet of any platted area.
(1963 Code, § 101) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.02 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No person shall torture, beat, neglect or injure any animal or pet.
(1963 Code, § 102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03 COLLECTION OR REMOVAL OF BAITED ANIMALS.
   No person shall contact the Police Department or other city department or
official to collect or remove any animal that became entrapped in a personal
trap due to baiting.
(Ord. 21-03, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 90.04 REMOVAL OF PET WASTE.
   (A)   No owner or custodian of any animal shall cause or allow such animal
to soil, defile or defecate on any public property or upon any street,
sidewalk, public way, play area or common grounds owned jointly by the members
of a homeowners' or condominium association, or upon private property other
than that of the owner, unless such owner immediately removes and disposes of
all feces deposited by such animal in a sanitary manner.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring an animal
to cause or permit said animal to be on any public or private property not
owned or possessed by such person without having in his/her immediate
possession a device for the removal of feces and depository for the
transmission of excrement to a proper receptacle located on the property owned
or possessed by such person.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person in control of, causing or permitting any
animal to be on any public or private property not owned or possessed by such
person to fail to remove feces left by such animal and dispose of it properly
as described in division (D),
   (D)   Proper disposal of animal waste shall be limited to burial where
lawfully permitted, flushing in the toilet, bagging for disposal in the owner
or keeper's waste receptacle, and bagging for disposal in a waste receptacle in
a public park or park area.
   (E)   Disposal of animal waste in storm drains, detention/retention ponds,
or other storm water structure is prohibited.
   (F)   Disposal of animal waste in public compost is prohibited.
   (G)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the ownership or use
of any properly identified service animals, animals when used for police
activities, or tracking animals when used by or with the permission of the
appropriate authorities.
   (H)   Any person violating any provision of this section is committing a
Class II nuisance and subject to penalties as entailed in
Chapter 94.
(Ord. 22-04, passed 7-25-2022)
LICENSING AND REGULATING THE KEEPING OF DOGS AND CATS
§ 90.15 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors or
keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog
or cat which runs at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. No one shall allow
their dog or cat (or other animal) off their property without it being leashed.
(Ord. 16-11, passed 11-14-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall keep, harbor, or own any dog or cat over six months of age
in the city unless a license has first been secured. A license may be in the
form of a tag license or a microchip license. For purposes of this chapter, a
TAG LICENSE means a license for which the city issues a metal or plastic tag
bearing a reference number of the license issued to the licensee and a
MICROCHIP LICENSE means a license issued to the licensee for which the city
retains records of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the
microchip that is implanted in the dog or cat. Tag licenses and microchip
licenses shall be issued by the City Administrator upon application therefor
and payment of an applicable fee. Applications shall include at least the name
and address of the applicant; the breed, color, and sex of the dog or cat; the
date of the most recent rabies vaccination of the dog or cat; and whether the
dog or cat is neutered, spayed, or desexed. A tag license shall be issued for
one calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of the year issued. A
microchip license shall be issued for the lifetime of the dog or cat. Licenses
are not transferable from one animal to another, and no refunds shall be made
on any license fee because of the death of the animal or the owner leaving the
city before expiration of the license period.
(1963 Code, § 103.02) (Ord. passed 7-10-1972; Ord. passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 21-
03, passed 4-12-2021)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 90.17 VACCINATION.
    All dogs and cats which are licensed by the city shall have a current
vaccination against rabies. The vaccination shall have been performed only by a
person qualified to practice veterinary medicine in the state in which the dog
or cat was vaccinated.
   (A)   Tag license vaccination records. A licensee of a tag license must
supply current vaccination records at the time of application for the tag
license and each year thereafter provide current vaccination records upon
annual renewal of a tag license.
   (B)   Microchip license vaccination records. A licensee of a microchip
license must supply current vaccination records at the time of application for
a microchip license.
   (C)   Other. The Police Department may also require that a licensee (tag
license or microchip license) provide proof, at any time, that an animal has
been vaccinated for rabies. In the event that a licensee is unable to provide
proof of vaccination, the animal will be deemed unlicensed by the city and a
citation may be issued. Upon reapplication for a tag license or a microchip
license for the dog or cat, the city, in addition to requiring the usual
license fee, may require a relicensing fee.
(1963 Code, § 103.03) (Ord. passed 7-10-1972; Ord. 21-03, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 90.18 DATE OF PAYMENT.
    It shall be the duty of each person who keeps, harbors, or owns a dog or
cat to pay the license fee imposed in §
90.16 and set by the fee schedule in §
34.01 to the City Administrator on or before the applicable January 1 if
applying for a microchip license, on or before January 1 in each year if
applying for a tag license, upon acquiring ownership or possession of any
unlicensed dog or cat, or upon establishing residence in the city. If payment
of the license fee is made after January, a penalty of 50% of said fee shall be
imposed and collected upon issuance of the license, except that a person
acquiring ownership of, or possession of, unlicensed dogs or cats, or who
establishes residence in the city subsequent to January 31, has ten days after
acquiring possession or ownership of or establishing residence within the city,
to make application for a dog or cat license without payment of the penalty.
(1963 Code, § 103.04) (Ord. passed 7-10-1972; Ord. passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 21-
03, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 90.19 LICENSE ATTACHED.
    On issuing a tag license for a dog or a cat, the City Administrator shall
also issue a metal or plastic tag bearing a reference to the number of the
license issued to the licensee. The licensee shall immediately thereafter
attach the tag to a collar or harness to be worn by the dog or cat. The tag
shall be so placed on the dog's or cat's collar or harness as to be seen
readily by law enforcement officers upon inspection. On issuing a microchip
license for a dog or cat, the City Administrator shall retain the name of the
microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip that is
implanted in the dog or cat. The licensee shall immediately thereafter go to
the Police Department to allow the Police Department to scan the microchip and
retain the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the
microchip that is implanted in the dog or cat for its records. The City
Administrator shall keep records of all licenses issued.
(1963 Code, § 103.05) (Ord. passed 7-10-1972; Ord. 21-03, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 90.20 NUISANCE.
   (A)   Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined
as barking for repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one
minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
   (B)   Warrant required. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall
not enter the property of the owner of an animal described in this section
unless the officer has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or
has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
for in §
10.20, to search for and seize the animal.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.21 IMPOUNDING.
   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department and the dog
catcher of the city to capture and impound any dog or cat found unlicensed and
any dog or cat found running at large, and give notice to the owner of such dog
or cat if known, in case the owner of the dog or cat is unknown, such officers
shall post notice at the pound and at the City Hall, that if the dog or cat is
not claimed within five days of the posting of the notice, it will be killed.
If such dog or cat is not claimed, the dog catcher shall kill the dog or cat
and dispose of its carcass. An impounding fee and any other charges incurred
will be levied against the owner. Should this or any other animal owned by the
same individual be impounded the fee will be increased for each additional
offense.
(1963 Code, § 103.07) (Ord. passed 7-10-1972; Ord. passed 1-27-1982)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 90.22 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Adoption by reference. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50 to 347.565, as they
may be amended from time to time, (commonly referred to as the “Dangerous Dog
Regulations”), are adopted by reference.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has when unprovoked, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Has killed a domestic animal when unprovoked while off the
owner’s property;
         (c)   Has attacked one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
         (d)   Has been found to be potentially dangerous and after the owner
has notice of the same, the dog aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
      DOG.  Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted
as domesticated household pets.
      GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability of
death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a
permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member
or organ or other serious bodily harm.
      OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, corporation, organization, department
or association owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in,
or having care, custody or control of a dog.
      MAINTENANCE COSTS. Any costs incurred as a result of seizing an animal
for impoundment, including, but not limited to, the capturing, impounding,
keeping, treating, examining, securing, confining, feeding, destroying,
boarding or maintaining seized animals, whether these services are provided by
the city or the pound.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has when unprovoked, inflicted a bite on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;
         (b)   Has when unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private
property, other than the owner’s property, in an apparent attitude of attack;
or
         (c)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the dog from escaping and to
provide protection for the dog from the elements. A PROPER ENCLOSURE does not
include a porch, patio or any part of a house, garage or other structure that
would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in
which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only barriers
which prevent the dog from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow the egress of
the dog in any manner without human assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the
following minimum specifications:
         (a)   A minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet;
         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be
constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches, support post shall be one and one-fourth inch or larger steel pipe
buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided,
the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground;
         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls
and openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches; and
         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls and openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches. The gate shall be self-closing and self-locking. The gate shall be
locked at all times when the dog is in the pen or kennel.
      SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury that involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or that causes a temporary but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or that causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
      UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the dog is not purposely excited,
stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
   (C)   Declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   A police officer, community service officer, animal control officer
or other authorized city employee may declare a dog to be dangerous or
potentially dangerous when the officer has probable cause to believe that a dog
is dangerous or potentially dangerous. The following factors will be considered
in determining a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog:
         (a)   Whether any injury or damage to a person by the dog was caused
while the dog was protecting or defending a person or the dog’s offspring
within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault;
         (b)   The size and strength of the dog, including jaw strength, and
the animal’s propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals; and
         (c)   Whether the dog has wounds, scarring, is observed in a fight, or
has other indications that the dog has been or will be used, trained or
encouraged to fight with another animal or whose owner is in possession of any
training apparatus, paraphernalia or drugs used to prepare such dogs to fight
with other animals.
      (2)   Beginning six months after a dog is declared dangerous or
potentially dangerous, an owner may request annually that the city review the
designation. The owner must provide evidence that the dog’s behavior has
changed due to the dog’s age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience
training or other factors. If enough evidence is provided, the city may rescind
the designation.
      (3)   Exceptions.
         (a)   The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs used by law
enforcement.
         (b)   Dogs may not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if
the threat, injury or danger was sustained by a person who was:
            1.   Committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog;
            2.   Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or who
can be shown to have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the dog; or
            3.   Committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (D)   License required. The owner must annually license dangerous and
potentially dangerous dogs with the city and must license a newly declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous dog within 14 days after notice that a dog
has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous. Regardless of any appeal
that may be requested, the owner must comply with the requirements of M.S. §
347.52(a) and (c), as it may be amended from time to time, regarding proper
enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or death of the dog,
until and unless a hearing officer or court of law reverses the declaration.
      (1)   Process for dangerous dogs. The city will issue a license to the
owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   Written proof that there is a surety bond by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in the state in the sum of at least $300,000,
payable to any person injured by a dangerous dog, or receipt of a copy of a
policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state in the amount of at least $300,000, insuring the owner
for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. Such surety bond or
insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the bond or policy will
be made unless the city is notified in writing by the surety company or the
insurance company at least ten days prior to such cancellation;
         (c)   The owner has paid the annual license fee for dangerous dogs as
established in the fee schedule in §
34.01 of this code of ordinances;
         (d)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number
of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the microchip is not
implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the owner’s expense;
and
         (e)   The owner provides proof that the dog has been sterilized. If
the owner does not sterilize the dog within 30 days, the city may seize the dog
and sterilize it at the owner’s expense.
      (2)   Process for potentially dangerous dogs. The city will issue a
license to the owner of a potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents
sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   The owner has paid the annual license fee; and
         (c)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
potentially dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the
microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the
owner’s expense.
      (3)   Inspection. A pre-license inspection of the premises to insure
compliance with the city code is required. If the city issues a license to the
owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the city shall be allowed at
any reasonable time to inspect the dog, the proper enclosure and all places
where the animal is kept.
      (4)   Warning symbol. The owner of a dangerous dog licensed under this
section must post a sign with the uniform dangerous dog warning symbol on the
property in order to inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the
property. The sign will be provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
      (5)   Tags. A dangerous dog licensed under this section must wear a
standardized, easily identifiable tag at all times that contains the uniform
dangerous dog symbol, identifying the dog as dangerous. The tag shall be
provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
      (6)   License fee. The city will charge the owner an annual license fee
for a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog as established in the fee schedule
as codified in §
34.01 of this code of ordinances, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Properly restrained in proper enclosure or outside of proper
enclosure. While on the owner’s property, an owner of a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog must keep it in a proper enclosure. Inside a
residential home, there must be a secured area maintained where the dog will
stay when persons other than family members are present. If the dog is outside
the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial
chain or leash no longer than four feet and under the physical restraint of an
adult. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from
biting any person or animal, but that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.
   (F)   Notification requirements to city.
      (1)   Relocation or death. The owner of a dog that has been declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous must notify the City Administrator in
writing if the dog is to be relocated from its current address or if the dog
has died. The notification must be given in writing within 30 days of the
relocation or death. The notification must include the current owner’s name and
address, and the new owner’s name and the relocation address. If the relocation
address is outside of the city, the city may notify the local law enforcement
agency of the transfer of the dog into its jurisdiction.
      (2)   Renter’s obligations. A person who owns or possess as a dangerous
or potentially dangerous dog and who will rent property from another where the
dog will reside must disclose to the property owner prior to entering the lease
agreement and at the time of any lease renewal periods that the person owns or
possesses a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog that will reside at the
property. A dog owner, who is currently renting property, must notify the
property owner within 14 days of city notification if the owned dog is newly
declared as dangerous or potentially dangerous and the owner keeps the dog on
the property.
      (3)   Transfer of ownership into the city. No dog that has been
previously determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous by another
jurisdiction shall be kept, owned or harbored in the city unless the dog’s
owner complies with the requirements of this section prior to bringing the dog
into the city. Dogs in violation of this division (F)(3) are subject to
impoundment and destruction.
   (G)   Seizure. Animal control may immediately seize any dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog if:
      (1)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous, the dog is not validly licensed and no
appeal has been filed;
      (2)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the owner does not secure the proper liability insurance or surety coverage as
required or such required insurance is cancelled;
      (3)   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
      (4)   The dog is outside the proper enclosure and not under proper
restraint, as required by division (E) above;
      (5)   After 30 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the dog is not sterilized, as required by division (D)(1)(e) above;
      (6)   The dog’s microchip has been removed.
   (H)   Reclamation. A dog seized under division (G) above may be reclaimed by
the owner of the dog upon payment of maintenance costs, and presenting proof to
animal control that the requirements of this section have been met. A dog not
reclaimed under this division (H) within seven days may be disposed of and the
owner will be liable to the city for maintenance costs. A person claiming an
interest in a seized dog may prevent disposition of the dog by posting a
security in an amount sufficient to provide for the dog’s maintenance costs.
The security must be posted with the city within seven days of the seizure
inclusive of the date seized.
   (I)   Subsequent offenses: seizure. If a person has been convicted of
violating a provision of this section, and the person is charged with a
subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the dog may be seized. If the
owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the court may
order that the dog be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner pay
the maintenance costs. If the owner is not convicted and the dog is not
reclaimed by the owner within seven days after the owner has been notified that
the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of in manner permitted by
law.
   (J)   Notice, hearings.
      (1)   Notice. After a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous or has been seized for destruction, the city shall give notice by
delivering or mailing it to the owner of the dog, or by posting a copy of it at
the place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on
the property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice shall include:
         (a)   A description of the seized dog; the authority for and purpose
of the declaration and seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which
the dog was declared; and the telephone number and contact person where the dog
is kept;
         (b)   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing
concerning the declaration and that failure to do so within 14 days of the date
of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a hearing;
         (c)   A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of
the notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of M.S. §
347.52(a) and (c), as they may be amended from time to time, regarding proper
enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or death of the dog,
until such time as the hearing officer issues an opinion;
         (d)   A statement that if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous
dog declaration, the owner will have 14 days from receipt of that decision to
comply with all other requirements of M.S. § 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52, as
they may be amended from time to time;
         (e)   A form to request a hearing; and
         (f)   A statement that if the dog has been seized, all maintenance
costs of the care, keeping, and disposition of the dog pending the outcome of
the hearing are the responsibility of the owner, unless a court or hearing
officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not reasonably justified by
law.
      (2)   Right to hearing.
         (a)   After a dog has been declared dangerous, potentially dangerous
or has been seized for destruction, the owner may appeal in writing to the city
within 14 days after notice of the declaration or seizure. Failure to do so
within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a
hearing. The owner must pay a $100 fee for an appeal hearing.
         (b)   The appeal hearing will be held within 14 days of the request.
The hearing officer must be an impartial employee of the city or an impartial
person retained by the city to conduct the hearing.
         (c)   If the declaration or destruction is upheld by the hearing
officer, actual expenses of the hearing up to a maximum of $1,000, as well as
all maintenance costs, will be the responsibility of the dog’s owner. The
hearing officer shall issue a decision on the matter within ten days after the
hearing. The decision shall be delivered to the dog’s owner by hand delivery or
registered mail as soon as practical and a copy shall be provided to the city.
The decision of the hearing officer is final.
   (K)   Destruction of certain dogs. The Police Chief and/or hearing officer
are authorized to order the destruction or other disposition of any dog, after
proper notice is given pursuant to division (J) above and upon a finding that:
      (1)   The dog has habitually destroyed property or habitually trespassed
in a damaging manner on property of persons other than the owner;
      (2)   The dog has been declared dangerous, the owner’s right to appeal
hereunder has been exhausted or expired, and the owner has failed to comply
with the provisions of this section;
      (3)   It is determined that the dog is infected with rabies;
      (4)   The dog inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on
public or private property without provocation;
      (5)   The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation;
      (6)   The dog bit multiple human victims on public or private property in
the same attack without provocation;
      (7)   The dog bit a human on public or private property without
provocation in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack; or
      (8)   The dog poses a danger to the public’s health, safety or welfare.
In determining whether the dog poses a danger to the public’s health, safety or
welfare, the following factors may be considered:
         (a)   The dog weighs more than 20 pounds;
         (b)   The strength of the dog, including jaw strength;
         (c)   The dog’s tolerance for pain;
         (d)   The dog’s tendency to refuse to terminate an attack;
         (e)   The dog’s propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals;
         (f)   The dog’s potential for unpredictable behavior;
         (g)   The dog’s aggressiveness; and
         (h)   The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious
injury.
   (L)   Concealing of dogs. No person may harbor, hide or conceal a dog that
the city has the authority to seize or that has been ordered into custody for
destruction or other proper disposition.
   (M)   Dog ownership prohibited.
      (1)   Except as provided below, a person shall not own a dog if the
person has been:
         (a)   Convicted of a third or subsequent violation of divisions (D),
(E) or (F) above, or similar ordinance in another jurisdiction, or M.S. §§
347.51, 347.515 or 347.52, as they may be amended from time to time;
         (b)   Convicted of second degree manslaughter due to negligent or
intentional use of a dog under M.S. § 609.205(4), as it may be amended from
time to time; or
         (c)   Convicted of gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under M.S. §
609.226, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any person who owns a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and is
found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section or had owned
a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog but never achieved compliance with
this section may be prohibited from ownership or custody of another dog for a
period of five years after the original declaration. Any dog found to be in
violation, may be impounded until due process is completed, pursuant to
division (J) above.
      (3)   If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in
divisions (M)(1) or (M)(2) above, unless specifically approved with or without
restrictions by the city, no person in the household is permitted to own a dog.
   (N)   Dog ownership prohibition review. Beginning three years after a
conviction under division (M)(1) above that prohibits a person from owning a
dog, and annually thereafter, the person may request in writing to the Police
Chief that the city review the prohibition. The city may consider such facts as
the seriousness of the violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any
criminal convictions, or other facts that the city deems appropriate. The city
may rescind the prohibition entirely or rescind it with limitations. The city
also may establish conditions a person must meet before the prohibition is
rescinded, including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog training
or dog handling courses. If the city rescinds a person’s prohibition and the
person subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the city or
the person is convicted of any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or
dog attacks, the city may permanently prohibit the person from owning a dog in
this state.
   (O)   Penalties.
      (1)   Unless stated otherwise, any person who violates a provision of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person who is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
any provision of divisions (D), (E) or (F) above is guilty of a gross
misdemeanor.
      (3)   Any person who violates division (M) above, whether an owner or
household member, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
PROHIBITING WILD ANIMALS AS PETS
§ 90.35 KEEPING OF ANIMALS WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for an owner to keep chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or
other domestic fowl, cattle, horses, pigs, sheep, goats or other domestic
livestock within the limits of the city, except that licensed veterinarians may
keep such animals for the purposes of care and treatment necessary in the
practice of their profession and except for temporary presence in zoos,
circuses or auctions within the city. Any animals present in such a temporary
livestock or wildlife event shall be caged, tethered or otherwise safely
restrained to protect the public.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 11-24-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.36 KEEPING OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANIMAL. Includes any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, not to
include birds.
      PET. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
      WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon,
skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other
warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula which can normally be found
in the wild state or any other member of crocodilian, including, but not
limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans and gavials, and including such
other animal that cannot be effectively inoculated for rabies. Ferrets, non-
poisonous snakes, rabbits and laboratory rats which have been bred in captivity
and which have never known the wild shall be excluded from this definition.
   (B)   Display or exhibition. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on
his or her premises any wild or exotic animal for display or for exhibition
purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be
construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions,
circuses, schools or colleges or veterinary clinics which are properly licensed
by the federal government or state.
   (C)   Keeping as a pet. No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild
or exotic animal as a pet.
   (D)   Notice required at a place of sale. Any person who offers for sale a
wild or exotic animal as defined shall post conspicuously at the place of sale
or display the following notice:
      No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept in the City of Dilworth
any live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox,
leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous
snake or tarantula, crocodile or alligator, which can normally be found in the
wild state or any other member of the crocodilian, including, but not limited
to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans and gavials and including such other animal
that cannot be effectively inoculated for rabies.
   (E)   Notice of keeping wild or exotic animals. Upon the written complaint
of any person that a person owns or is keeping or harboring a wild or exotic
animal in violation of this section in the city, the Police Department or its
authorized designee shall forthwith cause the matter to be investigated; and if
after investigation the facts indicate that such person named in the complaint
is in fact the owner or is keeping or harboring any such animal in the city, it
shall forthwith send written notice to the person requiring such person to
safely remove the animal from the city within five days of the date of the
notice. Notice, as herein provided, shall not be required where such animal has
previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person or has escaped
and is at large, in which case the Police Department shall cause the animal to
be immediately seized and impounded, according to the provisions hereof, or
killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious
physical harm or death to any person.
   (F)   Seizure and impounding of wild or exotic animals.
      (1)   The Police Department, or its authorized designee, shall forthwith
cause to be seized and impounded any wild or exotic animal, where the person
owning, keeping or harboring such animal has failed to comply with the notice
sent pursuant to division (E) above. Upon a seizure and impoundment, the animal
shall be delivered to a place of confinement, which may be with any
organization which is authorized by law to accept, own, keep or harbor such
animals.
      (2)   If, during the course of seizing and impounding any such animal,
the animal poses a risk of serious physical harm or death to any person, such
person or persons authorized by the Police Department may render the animal
immobile by means of tranquilizers or other safe drugs; or if that is not
safely possible, then the animal may be killed.
   (G)   Enforcement. The provisions of division (B) above shall be enforced by
the Police Department or the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the
Animal Damage Control Department of the United States Department of
Agriculture, or any other person duly designated by the City Chief of Police.
   (H)   Delayed enforcement. Any person who has a wild or exotic animal in
possession at the time of the effective date of this subchapter in
contravention of this section, shall have 30 days to dispose of the animal(s)
by removal of the animal(s) from the city or by giving or selling the animal(s)
to a zoological park or other entity exempt from this section.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 11-24-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91: SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND ALLEYS
Section
Sidewalks
   
91.001   Construction and specifications
   
91.002   Obstructing sidewalks
   
91.003   Riding on sidewalks
   
91.004   Driving upon and damage to sidewalks
   
91.005   Repair
Curbs and Gutters
   
91.020   Curbs
   
91.021   City authority
   
91.022   Procedure
Snow, Ice, Trees and Rubbish
   
91.035   Snow and ice to be removed
   
91.036   Depositing snow on streets
   
91.037   Removal of snow and ice by city
   
91.038   Removal of rubbish, weeds and the like
   
91.039   Removal of rubbish, weeds and the like by city
   
91.040   Trees and weeds
Openings of Streets and Sidewalks
   
91.055   Permit required
Street Restoration
   
91.070   Procedures
   
91.071   Permit requirements/deposit
 
   
91.999   Penalty
SIDEWALKS
§ 91.001 CONSTRUCTION AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All sidewalks hereafter constructed, altered or repaired shall be a uniform
width of four feet in all residential districts, shall be built or rebuilt on
the grade now or hereafter established and the outer edge thereof shall be on a
straight line. They shall be constructed of a good grade of materials and shall
conform to specifications approved by City Council.
(1963 Code, § 70.01)
§ 91.002 OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall encumber or obstruct any sidewalk by placing or maintaining
thereon any material or object of any nature which shall obstruct such
sidewalk, except by permission of the Council.
(1963 Code, § 70.02) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall be permitted to ride upon any sidewalk with a bicycle or
motorcycle.
(1963 Code, § 70.03) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.004 DRIVING UPON AND DAMAGE TO SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall drive any vehicle, wagon or sleigh over and across any
sidewalk, except at crossings. No person shall in any manner willfully injure
or deface any sidewalk nor any public property of the city.
(1963 Code, § 70.04) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.005 REPAIR.
   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to repair any sidewalk, curb, driveway or
crossing, the City Administrator shall give written notice to the owner of the
lot involved, requiring the same to be repaired within 30 days.
   (B)   If the repairs are not so made, the city as soon thereafter as
practical may make the repairs and assess the cost against the land so
benefitted by the repair.
(1963 Code, § 70.05) Penalty, see §
91.999
CURBS AND GUTTERS
§ 91.020 CURBS.
   All curbs shall be constructed 12 feet from the property line at the outside
of the curb, shall be six inches in thickness at the top and shall conform to
other specifications prescribed by the Council.
(1963 Code, § 70.06)
§ 91.021 CITY AUTHORITY.
   The city shall have the authority to order the construction of and to
construct curbs and gutters or either of them along any lot or lots or parcels
of land adjoining any regularly laid out street in the city and to levy and
assess the costs thereof upon the lots or parcels of land abutting upon such
improvement.
(1963 Code, § 71.01)
§ 91.022 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the Council shall order the construction, repair or
reconstruction of any curb or gutter or sidewalk, a report thereon shall be
made by the City Manager or other authorized representative, which report shall
contain a list of the lots or parcels of land with the number of feet frontage
of each upon such improvement, the names of the owners of such lots, or
parcels, and an estimate of the cost of the proposed improvements.
   (B)   Upon the filing of such report, the Council shall cause to be
published for one week in the official newspaper a notice stating that such
report is on file, and open to the inspection of all persons interested
therein, and that the same will be presented to the City Council for action
thereon at a meeting to be held at a time and place specified in said notice,
which meeting shall be the regular meeting of the said Council occurring next
after one week from the publication of such notice, at which meeting or any
subsequent adjourned meeting, all parties interested therein may be heard.
   (C)   At the meeting held pursuant to such notice, or at any subsequent
adjourned meeting, the Council may order the construction, repair or
reconstruction of such curbs and gutters, or either of them, and upon
completion of said work shall assess and levy against each lot or parcel of
land abutting upon said improvement, such sum as will cover the cost of making
such improvement thereon, and cause the same to be collected in the same manner
as other taxes or assessments.
   (D)   The construction, repair or reconstruction of sidewalks may be ordered
jointly with the order to construct curbs and gutters, or either of them, and
the city may furnish such labor and materials as it may deem proper.
(1963 Code, § 71.02)
SNOW, ICE, TREES AND RUBBISH
§ 91.035 SNOW AND ICE TO BE REMOVED.
   No owner or occupant of any property in front of which or adjacent to which
a sidewalk has been constructed for use of public shall allow any accumulation
of snow or ice to remain upon said sidewalk for a period which exceeds 12 hours
after snow or ice has ceased to fall thereon.
(1963 Code, § 72.01) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.036 DEPOSITING SNOW ON STREETS.
   No person engaged to move, blow or plow snow upon or off of any private
property or city right-of-way within the city shall cause or permit any of the
snow so removed, blown or plowed to be deposited upon any street within the
city. The prohibition contained herein shall apply to the occupants of any such
property, their agents, employees or independent contractors. The occupants of
the premises or the persons requesting the snow to be removed or the persons
who are actually removing the snow shall make suitable arrangements to deposit
the removed snow in some place other than upon the city streets and snow shall
not be piled so as to interfere with the vision of motorists approaching any
intersection. Other than from adjacent sidewalks and driveways, no snow shall
be placed upon the boulevards.
(Ord. 95-3, passed 10-25-1995)
§ 91.037 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE BY CITY.
   Any snow or ice not removed in accordance with §§
91.035 and
91.036 may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner or occupant of
said adjoining lot, by assessing the necessary expenses thereof, along with an
administrative fee to be set by resolution of the City Council and applied
against said owner in the form of a special assessment.
(1963 Code, § 72.02) (Ord. 95-3, passed 10-25-1995)
§ 91.038 REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, WEEDS AND THE LIKE.
   The owner or occupant of each and every building or tract within the city,
abutting any street or alley shall remove all ashes, dirt, rubbish and weeds
from the sidewalks, street, boulevards and alleys abutting said building or
tract of land and keep said sidewalks, streets, boulevards and alleys clean and
free from all such debris.
(1963 Code, § 72.03) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.039 REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, WEEDS AND THE LIKE BY CITY.
   Failure to remove such debris within seven days after receiving written
notice from City Administrator will permit the city to remove such debris and
assess cost of same as a special assessment.
(1963 Code, § 72.04)
§ 91.040 TREES AND WEEDS.
   Every owner or occupant of property shall keep the weeds cut thereon, and
keep all trees on any abutting grass plot, between sidewalk and street trimmed
and in good condition.
(1963 Code, § 73.01) Penalty, see §
91.999
OPENINGS OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 91.055 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   When excavation is necessary through concrete paving, bituminous
paving, curb and gutter, oil surface streets or concrete walks other than
private walks, application shall be made to the City Administrator for a permit
to cut or to remove such paving, surfacing or walks.
   (B)   Any such opening shall be made in a manner as will cause the least
inconvenience to the public. No excavation or obstruction on any public street
or alley shall be left at night unless properly protected by red lights or
flares and caution taken to ensure public safety.
   (C)   In refilling a trench, the earth must be thoroughly tamped or flushed
and the street or alley left in a condition satisfactory to the City Engineer.
All excess dirt or rubbish must be removed immediately after the completion of
the work.
   (D)   Any surface, disturbed by excavation, shall be restored to as good a
condition as it was prior to the excavation. Such restoration shall be made
within 72 hours of the completion of backfilling, if such excavation is within
a berm area or an unsurfaced street unless a time extension is granted by the
City Engineer. Except by special permission of the City Engineer, excavations
within paved streets shall be temporarily patched within 16 hours of project
completion with a cold-mix asphalt and maintained for a maximum of 30 days, at
which time the cold-mix asphalt shall be removed and the permanent restoration
done.
   (E)   All resurfacing shall be done by a contractor licensed to do that
work. In the event the party responsible for the excavation does not comply
with the time requirements as set out above, the City Engineer shall order the
resurfacing done and such resurfacing shall be paid by the person who caused
the excavation to be made.
   (F)   To ensure that satisfactory work in said repairs is completed, a
deposit will be made at the time the permit application is filed with the City
Clerk.
   (G)   In addition thereto, a fee will be paid to the City Administrator. The
deposit of will be released upon the completion of all said repair work in a
condition satisfactory to the City Engineer.
   (H)   All backfill and resurfacing conditions, together with any other
requirements of the City Engineer, shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator, as though made a part of this section and shall be fully
complied with.
   (I)   Dry material will be used as fill and all material not replaced will
be deposited at a suitable location by the contractor. The City Foreperson will
be allowed to supervise all work phases.
   (J)   Public utilities are exempt from the requirements hereunder for
permits, surety bonds and insurance; however, they shall comply with division
(K) below regarding notice.
   (K)   At least 24 hours prior to an excavation for which a non-exempt person
would need an excavation permit hereunder, an exempt public utility shall give
notice to the City Administrator. The notice shall provide the name and address
of the utility, the nature, location and purpose of the excavation, and the
date of commencement and the estimated date of completion of the excavation.
This notice must be given to the City Administrator, in writing, and the City
Administrator shall keep this notice on file along with all permits granted
hereunder; such file containing notices given by exempt public utilities and
containing all permits granted to non-exempt parties, shall serve as a
reference, and all projects not filed therein shall be deemed unauthorized.
   (L)   In the event of any emergency in which a main, conduit or utility
facility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such
condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of
any individual, the person owning or controlling such main, conduit or utility
facility without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit or
giving notice hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to
cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life,
health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling
such facility shall comply with the applicable provisions of this section
within 24 hours of commencing any emergency repairs.
(Ord. 77-1, passed 3-23-1977) Penalty, see §
91.999
STREET RESTORATION
§ 91.070 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All bituminous removals shall be saw cut.
   (B)   A minimum of six inches of bituminous and six inches of MN Class 5 or
crushed concrete shall be installed on local streets and eight inches of
bituminous and eight inches of MN Class 5 or crushed concrete shall be
installed on any other street.
   (C)   Bituminous material shall be installed in minimum lifts of three
inches and shall include a two-inch wearing course lift.
   (D)   The width of bituminous removal and replacement shall extend a minimum
of two feet beyond any portion of the excavation for the utilities.
   (E)   If the existing bituminous surface is cracked or faulted within four
feet beyond any portion of the excavation for the utilities, removal and
replacement shall extend to the existing crack/fault.
   (F)   Any concrete curbing removed shall be removed and replaced to the
nearest joint.
   (G)   Any excavation within three feet of any curb shall be removed to the
curb.
   (H)   The contractor or utility company shall warranty all excavated areas
against settlement for two years.
   (I)   Backfill material shall consist of existing material that consists of
dry clay without any organic or foreign materials. If any organic or foreign
materials are present, or if compaction requirements cannot be satisfied,
backfill material will consist of controlled density fill and all excavated
material will become property of the contractor and disposed of at the
contractor’s expense.
   (J)   Backfill material shall be controlled density fill for all trenches
that are less than 12 inches wide.
   (K)   Backfill shall be installed in six inch lifts and compacted to a
minimum of 95% Standard Proctor Density (SPD).
   (L)   All piping shall be bedded with an aggregate base and covered to a
minimum depth of six inches.
   (M)   MN Class 5 road base material shall be compacted to 100% SPD and be
within 65% to 102% of optimum moisture.
   (N)   A copy of compaction testing results of the backfill from an
independent geotechnical testing laboratory shall be provided to the city to
verify that proper compaction has occurred. This does not remove the
contractor’s or utility company’s responsibility to fix any settled trenches
within the first two years.
   (O)   If a driveway is needed to be removed, it shall be removed to the back
of curb as well as the sidewalk crossing plate if the removal is within three
feet of either.
   (P)   If the excavation occurs in an area that has been seal coated within
the last four years, the contractor or utility company shall seal coat any
patched bituminous area.
   (Q)   The city has the right to change or modify any of these criteria based
on field observations.
(Ord. 09-03, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 91.071 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS/DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Any contractor, utility company or other party that does not have a
written agreement with the city that allows them to work within the city’s
right-of-way, must receive an excavation permit before work can begin. A
separate excavation permit is required per street saw cut. A deposit is
required per street saw cut and shall be held by the city for a period of two
years.
   (B)   Any party that has a written agreement with the city that allows them
to work within the city’s right-of-way must provide proper documentation to the
city on the work to be performed prior to any street excavation.
(Ord. 09-03, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any unauthorized excavation, under §
91.055, shall be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment as set out in §
10.99.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
91.070 and
91.071 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine and the costs of prosecution or imprisonment for not to
exceed 90 days, or both, as set out in §
10.99. In addition, any person found guilty of violating any provision of §§
91.070 and
91.071 shall be responsible civilly for all damages caused by such violation.
(Ord. 77-1, passed 3-23-1977; Ord. 09-03, passed 4-27-2009)
CHAPTER 92: TREES
Section
   
92.01   Purpose
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Master Street Plan may be adopted
   
92.04   Planting, care and removal of public trees and shrubs
   
92.05   City duties and powers
   
92.06   Commercial operator’s license
   
92.07   Elm firewood
   
92.08   General tree and shrub regulations
   
92.09   Authority of city to preserve or remove public trees and shrubs and
abate public nuisances
   
92.10   Interference with city prohibited
   
92.11   Conflicts
   
92.12   Tree diseases and shade tree pest control
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to regulate and
control the planting, transplanting, removal, maintenance and protection of
trees and shrubs in the city in order to control Dutch elm disease; to
eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to
persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property of the
city; to promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the city; to
prevent damage to any public utility, street, sidewalk or other public
property; to protect trees and shrubs located in public areas from undesirable
and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance practices; and to guard
all trees and shrubs within the city against the spread of disease or pests.
   (B)   It is the intent of the City Council that the provisions of this
chapter shall apply to all trees, shrubs or plants growing, or hereafter
planted in or upon any public right-of-way or other areas owned or controlled
by the city, and also to all trees or shrubs growing or planted on or upon any
private property that will threaten the lives, health, safety or welfare of the
public or of the property owned or controlled by the city.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The governing entity of the City of Dilworth, Minnesota, or its agents
to include the City Tree Inspector and Program Manager.
   PERSON. Person, firm, association or corporation.
   PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS. All trees or shrubs located or to be planted on any
park, playground or other property owned or controlled by the city or on any
public street, alley, sidewalk or highway within the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985)
§ 92.03 MASTER STREET PLAN MAY BE ADOPTED.
   The city may keep a Master Street Plan showing the location, size, varieties
and species of all trees or shrubs located or to be located on any public
right-of-way. No person hereafter shall plant, transplant or remove any of
these trees except to a location as shown on the Master Street Plan and unless
it is of size and variety specified.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 PLANTING, CARE AND REMOVAL OF PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS.
   (A)   Permit required. A written permit shall be required for any person to
plant, transplant, trim remove or do any surgery of any kind on any public tree
or shrub. The permit shall be obtained from City Hall at no charge. Exceptions
include utility companies, for the purpose of clearing its power lines. Also,
homeowners or tenants may trim their own trees or shrubs on their own property
as not to interfere with travel on the streets, avenues or sidewalks.
   (B)   Exemptions. No permit shall be required for homeowners or tenants to
water or fertilize the public trees or shrubs on the adjacent public easement.
   (C)   Requirements and conditions of permits.
      (1)   If the city determines that the proposed work is within the rules
and regulations of this chapter, and the Master Street Plan, and welfare of the
public, the location of utilities, sidewalks, streets, avenues, driveways,
street lights in which the tree or shrub is to be located, it will grant a
permit.
      (2)   In granting a permit, the city may require that the permitee
replace up to the number of trees or shrubs that he or she might remove, if the
city does require this, it will state on the permit. No permitee with such a
permit shall fail, refuse or neglect to plant specified number of trees or
shrubs of the type, size and location specified on his or her permit.
         (a)   Boulevard or public species permitted.
Alder
   - Prairie Horizon
Birch
   - Dakota Pinnacle Asian White
   - Prairie Dream Paper
Chokecherry
   - Amur
Cherry
   - Pink Flair Sargent
Corktree
   - Amur
Crab
   - Spring Snow
Dogwood
   - Snow Mantle
Elm
   - Accolade
   - Cathedral
   - Discovery
   - New Horizon
   - Princeton American
   - Prairie Expedition American
   - Valley Forge
   - Vanguard
Hackberry
   - Common
   - Delta
Hawthorne
   - Crusader
   - Snowbird
   - Thornless Cockspur
   - Toba
Honey-locust
   - Northern Acclaim
Ironwood
Lilac
   - Copper Curls
   - Ivory Silk
   - Japanese Tree
Linden
   - American
   - Boulevard
   - Dropmore
   - Front yard
   - Green Spire
   - Harvest Gold
   - June Bride
   - Littleleaf
   - Norlin
   - Pyramidal American
   - Rancho
   - Redmond
   - Shamrock
Maple
   - Amur
   - Autumn Blaze
   - Deborah
   - Embers
- Emerald Queen Lustre Norway
   - Fall Fiesta Sugar
   - Green Mountain Sugar
   - Hot Wings Tatarian
   - Northern Flare Sugar
   - Miller Superform Norway
   - Norway
   - Pattern Perfect Tatarian
   - Royal Red
   - Sienna Glen
   - Silver
Oak
   - Burr
   - Prairie Stature
Pear
   - Prairie Gem
   - Mountain Frost
   - Korean Sun
   - Autumn Blaze Callery
Plum
   - Princess Kay
Serviceberry
   - Autumn Brilliance
Walnut
   - Black
 
      (b)   Boulevard trees shall not be less than 35 feet apart and shall
conform to the alignment of the block. Boulevard trees shall not measure less
than one and one-half inches in diameter at a distance of one foot above the
ground.
      (c)   No tree plantings allowed on boulevards less than eight feet in
width.
      (d)   Trees shall be trimmed to balance. No painting of cuts are
required.
      (e)   Residents or property owners shall keep trees trimmed eight feet
above sidewalks. Trees will be kept trimmed 12 feet above alleys and streets.
      (f)   Trees must be no less than ten feet from intersections.
      (g)   Shrubs or hedges on corner lots shall be trimmed below 24 inches
above curb line for a distance of 25 feet from intersecting street and alley
lot lines. No shrubs or hedges allowed on boulevards.
      (h)   Diseased or dead boulevard trees will be removed by the city free
of charge. Boulevard plantings will be made by the property owner at his or her
own expense.
      (I)   Under no circumstances may a boulevard tree be planted within a
distance of four feet from the boulevard edge of the curb or four feet from
sidewalk or proposed sidewalk edge.
      (j)   No trees or shrubs will be allowed within five feet of an alley
property line.
   (D)   Fee. There shall be no charge for such a permit.
   (E)   Public utility. When a permit is issued to a public utility other than
Northern States Power Company, to move, trim, remove or do any other surgery on
any public tree or shrub, the city may limit the work to be done to the actual
necessities of the utilities and may assign an Inspector to supervise the work
done under conditions of his or her permit.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985; Ord. 93-3, passed
5-26-1993; Ord. 96-5, passed 9-9-1996; Ord. 07-03, passed 10-8-2007; Ord. 13-
01, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 92.05 CITY DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The city shall be authorized to regulate, direct and control all planting,
transplanting, trimming, general care and removal of public trees and shrubs,
and shall enforce the provisions of the chapter.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985)
§ 92.06 COMMERCIAL OPERATOR’S LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, for
compensation, to plant, prune, spray, trim or remove any tree or shrub in the
city without first a license therefor from the City Council.
   (B)   Application and qualifications. Applicants for a commercial tree
operator’s license shall submit such information as may be required by the
city. Such applicants shall agree in writing to comply with the following
conditions:
      (1)   He or she shall obey all ordinances, rules and regulations,
relative to the purpose for which the license is granted;
      (2)   He or she agrees to hold the city harmless in case of any accident
of on account of any danger arising from exercise of the license; and
      (3)   Bond and/or insurance.
   (C)   Granting of license. The city shall review the qualifications of such
applicants and shall recommend a license only to applicants who have met the
above requirements. All applications shall be accompanied with a receipt from
the City Administrator showing the payment of a fee for said license. The
license shall entitle the holder thereof to perform commercial tree and shrub
work within the city for the ensuing 12 months after date of issue.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985; Ord. 93-3, passed
5-26-1993) Penalty, see §
92.99
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 92.07 ELM FIREWOOD.
   (A)   The storage of elm logs with the bark intact for a period longer than
72 hours shall be unlawful during the period April 1 through September 15, and
only during the period September 16 through March 31 if a special permit is
issued, so that the location of the material is known so is not already
disposed of by April 1 it can be confiscated.
   (B)   All firewood stored either by local homeowner or dealer to be stored
on pallet excluding dealers fast-moving wood products that would be moved
within 45 days.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 GENERAL TREE AND SHRUB REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any tree or shrub on private property of adjacent to any public right-
of-way, sidewalk, street, park, playground shall be kept trimmed by the owner
or owners of the property so that the lowest branches extending over the public
street or right-of-way provide a clearance of 12 feet, and a clearance of eight
feet over public sidewalks, parks or playground, the city may waive the
requirement for small, newly planted trees or shrubs where it determines they
do not interfere with public travel, traffic signs or public utilities. Any
tree or shrub not trimmed in accordance with this section will be declared a
public nuisance.
   (B)   The city is hereby authorized and directed to remove any tree or
branch, overhanging a public street, sidewalk, park or other public right-of-
way, from a tree standing on private property, when in his or her judgment the
or branch constitutes imminent danger to any persons traveling on public
streets, sidewalks, parks or public right-of-way.
   (C)   Property owners of nuisance trees shall be notified in writing of the
existence of the nuisance and given a reasonable time for its removal. The cost
of the removal of nuisance trees existing on private property shall be borne by
the private owner.
   (D)   No person shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private or
public property any tree, bush hedge or shrub is considered to be a public
nuisance and shall be trimmed to a two-foot height or removed where found
within a distance of 20 feet from the curb line.
   (E)   It is against the provisions of this chapter to plant, transplant, to
have on any city right-of-way a hedge, shrub or bush.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 AUTHORITY OF CITY TO PRESERVE OR REMOVE PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS AND
ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   The city shall have the authority to plant, trim, spray, preserve,
renew and remove public trees and shrubs or cause such work to be done as may
be necessary to ensure the safety or preserve the symmetry and beauty of public
streets of grounds and to protect public sidewalks, streets and utilities from
damage or injury or to control the spread of disease.
   (B)   In order to secure uniform and continuous planting of trees along such
streets and avenues as may be designated by the city master street tree plan,
the city may plant trees to fill in bland planting spots in accordance with a
master plan.
   (C)   (1)   In order to secure uniform and continuous planting of trees
along streets and avenues within proposed new developments, additions to curb
and gutter assessments may be made to offset the cost of planting trees on such
streets and boulevards. The City Council upon recommendation shall order in the
planting of trees of 60% lot occupancy occurs on said streets and avenues, or
before if requested by a property owner.
      (2)   Planting of trees on streets and boulevards shall be the
responsibility of the developer or builder.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985)
§ 92.10 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the city, employees or
servants, while they are engaged in carrying out any work and activities
authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 CONFLICTS.
   Any ordinance or part thereof adopted which in any manner conflicts with any
provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985)
§ 92.12 TREE DISEASES AND SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL.
   (A)   Declaration of policy. The health of the trees in the city is
threatened by various diseases and/or pests, and the loss or ill health of
trees growing upon public and private property substantially depreciates the
value of property within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general
welfare and convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with
M.S. §§ 89.001, 89.01 and 89.51 through 89.64,as those sections may be amended
from time to time, the provisions of this section are adopted to attempt to
control and prevent the spread of these shade tree pests.
   (B)   Inspection and application of control measures.
      (1)   The Tree Inspector is authorized to inspect premises and places
within the city to determine whether tree diseases and/or pests exist thereon
and to investigate all reported incidents of tree diseases and/or pests. The
Tree Inspector is authorized to take all reasonable measures to prevent the
maintenance of public nuisances and may enforce the provisions relating to
abatement in this section. Diagnosis of tree diseases and/or pests may be by
the presence of commonly recognized symptoms or by tests as may be recommended
by the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture or the
Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or other reliable
means.
      (2)   Except in situations of imminent danger to human life and safety,
the Tree Inspector shall not enter private property for the purpose of
inspecting or preventing maintenance of public nuisances without the permission
of the owner, resident or other person in control of the property, unless the
Tree Inspector has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
      (3)   No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with the Tree
Inspector acting under his or her authority while engaged in activities
authorized by this section.
   (C)   Standard abatement procedure. Whenever a Tree Inspector determines
with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance as described by this section
is being maintained or exists on premises in the city, the Tree Inspector is
authorized to abate a public nuisance according to the following procedure.
      (1)   The Tree Inspector will notify in writing the owner of record or
occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated
or abated. The notice may be given in person or by mail. Failure of any party
to receive the mail does not invalidate the service of the notice. A copy of
the notice shall be filed with the City Clerk.
      (2)   The notice of abatement shall state that unless the public nuisance
is abated by the owner or occupant, it will be abated by the city at the
expense of the owner or occupant. The notice shall specify the control measures
to be taken to abate the nuisance, and provide a reasonable amount of time to
abate the nuisance. Property owners may appeal to the City Council; said appeal
must be submitted within the aforementioned ten-day time frame.
      (3)   If no timely appeal is submitted, and the notice of abatement and
its prescribed control measures are not complied with within the time provided
by the notice or any additional time granted, the Tree Inspector or designated
person shall have the authority to obtain permission or an administrative
search warrant, enter the property and carry out abatement in accordance with
the notice of abatement.
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 85-3, passed 11-26-1985)
CHAPTER 93: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
93.01   Findings, purpose and intent
   
93.02   Election to manage public rights-of-way
   
93.03   Definitions
   
93.04   Administration
   
93.05   Utility Coordination Committee
   
93.06   Registration and right-of-way occupancy
   
93.07   Registration information
   
93.08   Permit requirement
   
93.09   Permit applications
   
93.10   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
93.11   Permit fees
   
93.12   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
93.13   Joint applications
   
93.14   Supplementary applications
   
93.15   Other obligations
   
93.16   Denial of permit
   
93.17   Installation requirements
   
93.18   Inspection
   
93.19   Work done without a permit
   
93.20   Supplementary notification
   
93.21   Revocation of permits
   
93.22   Mapping data
   
93.23   Location and relocation of facilities
   
93.24   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
93.25   Damage to other facilities
   
93.26   Right-of-way vacation; reservation of right
   
93.27   Indemnification and liability
   
93.28   Abandoned and unusable facilities
   
93.29   Appeal
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code
relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter imposes
reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and
equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this
chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons
using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws,
Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81 and 238.086 (the “Act”), as they may be amended from time to
time, and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of
the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn.
Rules parts 7819.0050 through 7819.9950 where possible. To the extent any
provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota
Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable
statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to
limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant M.S.
§ 237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not ABANDONED
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The City of Dilworth, Minnesota. For purposes of §
93.27, CITY means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at the permittee’s option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules part 7819.1100 means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minn. Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city, or his
or her designee.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration as established by
permit.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that:
      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or
      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to
restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair or maintain facilities
in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
93.11.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS.
      (1)   The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-of-way,
including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way permit applications;
inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting,
protecting or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the
adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed
after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking
right-of-way permits.
      (2)   MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by:
         (a )   Telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-
of-way, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of
Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123, being codified at M.S. § 237.04, as
it may be amended from time to time; M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they may be
amended from time to time; or
         (b)   Any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and
costs related to appeals taken pursuant to §
93.29.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in §
93.11.
   PATCH or PATCHING.
      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature.
      (2)   A PATCH consists of:
         (a)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base; and
         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
      (3)   A PATCH is considered full restoration only when the pavement is
included in the city’s five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate or gravel.
   PERMIT. The meaning given right-of-way permit in M.S. § 237.162, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate or political.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this chapter.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified
in writing that they have been put on probation.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who:
      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any
right-of-way; or
      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-
of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and
utility easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the airwaves
above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit,
or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. §
237.162, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that
is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a
right under law, franchise or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes:
      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. §
216B.02, subds. 4 and 6, as they may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in M.S.
Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the city;
      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (6)   Water and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or
heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting
telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this
chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S. Chapter
238, as it may be amended from time to time, and telecommunication activities
related to providing natural gas or electric energy services whether provided
by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be amended from
time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under
M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to time, or a
cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may
be amended from time to time, are not TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS for
purposes of this chapter.
   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two years.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.05 UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.
   The city may create an advisory Utility Coordination Committee.
Participation on the Committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and, by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the
size of such Committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants
that have expressed a desire to assist the city.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.06 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city.
   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain
boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their
property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and
shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements
for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this
chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the M.S. Chapter 216D, Gopher One-Call Law, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration;
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the:
            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees; and
            2.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-
way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of
property.
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, worker’s compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and
      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the State Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal
agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from
said commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.08 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-
of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless:
      (1)   Such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-
way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and
      (2)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000, subpart
3 and notwithstanding division (B) above, the city shall establish and impose a
delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction,
patching or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to
time by City Council resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the city.
   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered
complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following
provisions:
      (1)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities;
      (3)   Payment of money due the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city; and
         (d)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
      (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing; and
      (5)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when the applicant requests an excavation permit to
install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.10 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.11 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.
   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Nonrefundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
93.21 are not refundable.
   (E)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.12 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
93.16.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch its own work. The
city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee’s improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules
part 7819.3000.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100 and §§
91.070 and
91.071 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee,
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under §
93.16.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.13 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees.
      (1)   Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or
excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the
obstruction or excavation permit fee.
      (2)   In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among
themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their
applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.14 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area.
      (1)   A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-
way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area
specified in the permit, except as provided herein.
      (2)   Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that
specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in
that greater area:
         (a)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional
fees required thereby; and
         (b)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.15 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws, including, but not limited to, M.S. §§ 216D.01
through 216D.09 (Gopher One-Call Excavation Notice System), as it may be
amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Chapter 7560. A permittee shall
perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules
and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including, but not limited
to, horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Chapter 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules
Chapter 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing
underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the Director.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.16 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.17 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so
far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they
may be amended from time to time. Installation of service laterals shall be
performed in accordance with Minn. Rules Chapter 7560 and these ordinances.
Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and
conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements
referenced in §
93.23(B).
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.18 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. Rules part 7819.1300.
   (B)   Site inspection. In accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances, the permittee shall make the work-site
available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at
all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of Director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director that
the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within
the required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to § 
93.21.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.19 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the
Director of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to
respond to the emergency. Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One-Call
regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply
for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the
rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency. If the city
becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant’s facilities, the city
will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected,
or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take
whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of
which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.20 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city
of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.21 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach.
      (1)   The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any
right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of
the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any
material condition of the permit.
      (2)   A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
         (a)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way
permit;
         (b)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or
deceit upon the city or its citizens;
         (c)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
         (d)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or
         (e)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
93.18.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. A permittee’s failure to so
contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, the permittee’s
failure to so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one
full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, the permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked
and the permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except
for emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.22 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules parts
7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of any work
pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director accurate maps
and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all equipment installed,
owed and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the
horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be
provided consistent with the city’s electronic mapping system, when practical
or as a condition imposed by the Director. Failure to provide maps and drawings
pursuant to this division (A) shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s
registration.
   (B)   Service laterals.
      (1)   All permits issued for the installation or repair of service
laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules part 7560.0150,
subpart 2, shall require the permittee’s use of appropriate means of
establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the Director reasonably
requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the Director
evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed service lateral
locations.
      (2)   Compliance with this division (B) and with applicable Gopher State
One-Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals install after
December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for:
         (a)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project,
including those under M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time;
and
         (b)   City approval of performance under development agreements, or
other subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (3)   The Director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of
providing such information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate
information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of
the permit issued for the work or for future permits to the offending permittee
or its subcontractors.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.23 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement, location and relocation of facilities. Placement, location
and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable
law, and with Minn. Rules parts 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the
extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors.
      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is, or pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position
at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at
the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the
registrant.
   (C)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   (D)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.24 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through
216D.09 (One-Call Excavation Notice System), as it may be amended from time to
time, before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who
has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the
horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose
facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact
location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.25 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its
facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the
city’s response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION; RESERVATION OF RIGHT.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minn. Rules part 7819.3200.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.27 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.1250.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.28 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.29 APPEAL.
   (A)   A right-of-way user may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition or
decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council, if the right-of-
way user:
      (1)   Has been denied registration;
      (2)   Has been denied a permit;
      (3)   Has had a permit revoked;
      (4)   Believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with M.S. §
237.163, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (5)   Disputes a determination of the Director regarding §
93.23(B).
   (B)   The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right-of-way user has submitted its
appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A
decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation or fee imposition
will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
provisions of §
10.99. In addition, any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be responsible civilly for all damages caused by such violation.
(Ord. 12-03, passed 3-26-2012)
CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
94.001   Public nuisances prohibited
   
94.002   Public nuisances defined
Open Burning
   
94.020   Purpose
   
94.021   Bonfires
   
94.022   Open burning
   
94.023   Recreational fires
   
94.024   Burning bans
Noise Control
   
94.035   Title
   
94.036   Noisy parties, gatherings, or person(s) keeping, maintaining a
disorderly house
   
94.037   Parental responsibility
Abandoned Shopping Carts
   
94.040   Impoundment
   
94.041   Notice to redeem
   
94.042   Redemption fee
   
94.043   Disposition of unclaimed carts
Graffiti
   
94.050   Title
   
94.051   Prohibited activity
   
94.052   Graffiti defined
   
94.053   Affirmative defense
   
94.054   Removal
   
94.055   Vandalism and graffiti detection; reward
Nuisance Penalties and Abatement
   
94.070   Declaration of policy
   
94.071   Definitions
   
94.072   [Reserved]
   
94.073   Disclosure of responsible party
   
94.074   Order to cease
   
94.075   Authorization to enter
   
94.076   Service
   
94.077   [Reserved]
   
94.078   Abatement procedure
   
94.079   Emergency abatement procedure
 
   
94.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Administrative citations and civil penalties, see
Ch. 35
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.001 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   A person must not act, or fail to act, in a manner that is or causes a
public nuisance.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.002 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (A)   Generally. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition,
or use of property which shall continue for such length of time to:
      (1)   Unreasonably annoy, injure, or endanger the safety, health, morals,
comfort, or repose of any considerable number of members of the public; or
      (2)   Interfere with, obstruct, or render dangerous for passage any
public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
      (4)   In any way renders the public insecure in life or in the use of
property.
   (B)   Public nuisances affecting health. The following are hereby declared
to be public nuisances affecting health but shall not be construed to exclude
other public health nuisances coming within the definition of division (A)
above:
      (1)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter; or
      (2)   All diseased animals running at large; or
      (3)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water; or
      (4)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death; or
      (5)   Accumulations of decaying animal or vegetable matter, trash,
manure, refuse, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal, or
other debris; or
      (6)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-
tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit
foul and disagreeable odors; or
      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal,
or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances; or
      (8)   Any weeds or grasses, whether or not noxious as defined by state
law, growing to a height greater than 12 inches, or which have gone or are
about to go to seed, regardless of height; or
      (9)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities; or
      (10)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease.
   (C)   Public nuisances offending morals and decency. The following are
hereby declared to be public nuisances offending morals and decency but shall
not be construed to exclude nuisances offending morals and decency coming
within the definition of division (A) of this section:
      (1)   Any trade, occupation, commercial activity, or business as defined
by statute not operating under local license; or
      (2)   All bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and
buildings, or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution,
promiscuous sexual intercourse, or gambling; or
      (3)   All illegal gambling devices and slot machines; or
      (4)   All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages
are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured, or rectified
without a permit or license as provided for by the city or by state laws;
      (5)   Any place or premises where the ordinances or state laws relating
to public health, safety, peace, morals, or welfare are openly, continuously,
repeatedly, and intentionally violated; or
      (6)   Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the
state or other ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety but shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances affecting peace and safety coming within
the definition of division (A) of this section:
      (1)   All unnecessary and annoying vibrations; or
      (2)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Chapter 7030, as
they may be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by
reference into this section; or
      (3)   Depositing of snow on streets as referenced in §
91.036 or the depositing of snow on someone else's property without their
permission; or
      (4)   Solid waste and recycling totes placed in the right-of-way prior to
6:00 p.m. the night before collection and containers that are not removed
before 8:00 p.m. the day of collection; or
      (5)   All buildings erected, repaired, or altered within the fire limits
of the city in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city
relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures
within said district; or
      (6)   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or devices which purport
to be or may be mistaken as official traffic-control devices places or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing; or
      (7)   All fences, walls, shrubbery, or other obstructions to vision above
30 inches from the established street grades within the triangular area formed
at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn
between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from
their point of intersection; or
      (8)   All limbs of trees or shrubs which project over a public right-of-
way or street at less than 12 feet or over a public sidewalk, park, or
playground at less than eight feet; or
      (9)   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of
the state or ordinances of the city; or
      (10)   All buildings or structures which are potentially hazardous to
persons or property, including but not limited to a structure which is in
danger of partial or complete collapse, a structure with any exterior parts
which are broken, loose, or in danger of falling, or a structure with any parts
such as floors, porches, railings, stairs, ramps, balconies, or roofs which are
accessible and which are either collapsed, in danger of collapsing, or unable
to support the weight of normally imposed loads; or
      (11)   All wires over streets, alleys, or public grounds which are strung
less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground; or
      (12)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or crosswalks and
all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by ordinance; or
      (13)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations, or unused
basements freely accessible from any public street, alley, or sidewalk; or
      (14)   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and
other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for
opening from the inside by pushing only;
      (15)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley, or sidewalk, or of a public street, alley, or sidewalk which
causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of
the streets or sidewalks; or
      (16)   Any abandoned above or underground tank whose capacity exceeds
1,100 gallons; or
      (17)   Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the city or
laws of the state; or
      (18)   Unoccupied buildings or unoccupied portions of buildings which are
unsecured, including those with broken or missing windows or doors; or
      (19)   A vacant building or portion of a vacant building which has
multiple housing code or building code violations or has been ordered vacated
by the city or which has a documented and confirmed history as a blighting
influence on the community.
   (E)   Other public nuisances. It is hereby determined that dilapidated
fences and the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, refuse,
inoperable vehicles, building materials, and demolition materials upon any
private property within the city tends to result in blighted and deteriorated
neighborhoods, the spread of vermin and disease, and is contrary to the public
peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
      (1)   Definitions. For purposes of this division (E) and this chapter,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
         BUILDING MATERIALS. Shall include, without limitation, lumber, bricks,
concrete, cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electric wiring or equipment,
heating ducks or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails,
screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure.
         DEMOLITION MATERIALS. Shall include, without limitation, debris
resulting from the demolition of buildings, such as concrete, stone, plaster,
bricks, concrete blocks, and other materials that are a result of the
demolition and construction operations.
         DILAPIDATED FENCES. Any fence, in whole or in part, which has fallen
on the ground, or because of decay or disrepair has deteriorated to such an
extent that it presents a danger of imminent collapse on its own, or as a
result of normal weather conditions.
         INOPERABLE VEHICLES. Shall include, without limitation, any vehicle
for which, for a period of at least seven days, the engine, transmission,
wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels,
transmission, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise treated
so that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power, or any
vehicle which does not display current license plates or have proof of current
registration if license and registration are required by law for the vehicle to
travel on public roads in the State of Minnesota.
         JUNK. Shall include, without limitation, parts of machinery or motor
vehicles, unused furniture, furniture which is manufactured and intended to be
used exclusively indoors but is kept outdoors, stoves, refrigerators or other
appliances, remnants of wood, metal, or any other cast off material of any
kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use.
         REFUSE. Shall include, without limitation, putrescible and non-
putrescible and combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, garbage,
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation,
serving, and consumption of food, vegetable or animal matter, offal, plant
wastes such as tree trimmings or grass cuttings, ashes or incinerator residue,
street cleanings, detached vehicle parts, furniture, or solid industrial and
market wastes.
         TRASH AND RUBBISH. Shall include any and all forms of debris not
herein otherwise classified.
      (2)   Unlawful to accumulate junk, refuse, inoperable vehicles, trash,
and rubbish. It shall be a nuisance and an offense for any person to store or
permit the storage of accumulation of junk, refuse, inoperable vehicles, trash,
or rubbish on any private property within the city, except within a completely
enclosed building or upon the business premises of a properly zoned business
and which materials which would otherwise constitute junk, refuse, inoperable
vehicles, trash, or rubbish as materials that are used in the ordinary course
of that business.
      (3)   Unlawful to dismantle automobiles or machinery; exception. It shall
be a nuisance and an offense for any person to dismantle, cut up, remove parts
from, or otherwise disassemble an automobile, whether or not the same be a junk
automobile, abandoned vehicle, or otherwise, or any appliance or machinery, or
store such parts, except in a completely enclosed building or upon the business
premises of a properly zoned business and which disassembling and storing of
parts are done in the ordinary course of that business.
      (4)   Unlawful to store spoil piles of fill, excavations, building
materials or demolition materials; exception. It shall be a nuisance and an
offense for any person to store or permit the storage or accumulation of spoil
piles of fill, excavations, building materials or demolition materials on any
private property, except in a completely enclosed building or except where such
materials are part of the stock and trade of a business located on said
property, or except when such materials are being used in the construction of a
structure on the property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by
the city, and unless that construction is completed within a reasonable period
of time.
      (5)   Unlawful to permit dilapidated fences. It shall be a nuisance and
offense for any person to allow or permit a dilapidated fence on their
property.
   (F)   State defined nuisances. Any nuisance so defined by applicable
Minnesota Statutes or by the common law of the state is also a public nuisance
under this chapter.
   (G)   Dangerous structure. It shall be a nuisance and offense for any person
to allow or permit a structure on their property which is potentially hazardous
to persons or property including, but not limited to:
      (1)   A structure which is in danger of partial or complete collapse;
      (2)   A structure with any exterior parts which are broken, loose, or in
danger of falling;
      (3)   A structure with any parts such as floors, porches, railings,
stairs, ramps, balconies, or roofs which are accessible and which are either
collapsed, in danger of collapsing, or unable to support the weight of normally
imposed loads;
      (4)   Fire hazards: any thing or condition on the property which, in the
opinion of the enforcement officer, creates a fire hazard or which is a
violation of the Fire Code;
      (5)   Hazards: any thing or conditions on the property which in the
opinion of the enforcement officer, may contribute to injury of any person
present on the property, which shall include but not be limited to, open holes,
open foundations, open wells, dangerous trees or limbs, or abandoned
appliances;
      (6)   Health hazards: any thing or condition on the property which, in
the opinion of the enforcement officer, creates a health hazard or which is a
violation of any health or sanitation law;
      (7)   Insects, rodents, or pest harborage: conditions which are conducive
to the presence, harborage, or breeding of insects, rodents, or other pests.
      (8)   Nuisance building: a vacant building or portion of a vacant
building which has multiple Housing Code or Building Code violations or has
been ordered vacated by the city or which has a documented and confirmed
history as a blighting influence on the community;
      (9)   Sight triangle obstructions: a fence, wall, shrubbery, or other
obstruction to vision above a height of 30 inches from the established street
grades within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street
right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at
a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection; or
      (10)   Unsecured unoccupied buildings: unoccupied buildings or unoccupied
portions of buildings which are unsecured. Owners may be required to replace
coverings over broken or missing windows or doors with the appropriately sized
windows or doors.
(Ord. 19-06, passed 7-8-2019; Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021; Ord. 22-07, passed
9-26-2022) Penalty, see §
94.999
OPEN BURNING
§ 94.020 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the various types of burning
within the city limits with the intent of protecting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents in the city.
(Ord. 10-04, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)
§ 94.021 BONFIRES.
   (A)   A BONFIRE is a large outdoor fire used for ceremonial purposes.
   (B)   Bonfires are not allowed within the city limits unless pre-approved by
the City Council and a permit obtained from the Fire Department.
(Ord. 10-04, passed 6-28-2010) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.022 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   OPEN BURNING is the outdoor burning of natural vegetation to dispose
of leaves, branches and natural vegetative material.
   (B)   Open burning is not allowed within the city limits unless pre-approved
by the City Council and a permit obtained from the Fire Department.
(Ord. 10-04, passed 6-28-2010) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.023 RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   (A)   RECREATIONAL BURNING consists of the outdoor burning of natural
materials which does not include yard waste, garbage, treated lumber, or
construction materials and/or debris.ver the following conditions must be
complied with.
      (1)   Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a
structure or combustible material (Minnesota State Fire Code).
      (2)   Recreational fires shall be constantly attended by a responsible
adult (18 years of age or older) until the fire is extinguished.
      (3)   A garden hose hooked to a reliable water source or a fire
extinguisher with a 4A rating must be immediately accessible.
      (4)   (a)   The fire must never exceed three feet in diameter by two feet
in height and must be contained in a small pit or commercial product made of
non-combustible material.
         (b)   If the pit is larger than three feet in diameter, it must be
modified to contain the size fire hereby specified.
      (5)   Recreational fires are not permitted when winds in the area are
more than 15 mph.
      (6)   Open-flame cooking devices (grills, charcoal burners and the like)
shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within ten feet of
combustible construction.
      (7)   The Fire Department or Police Department may order extinguishment
for any reason when determined necessary.
      (8)   It is highly recommended that a screen be placed over the fire to
help contain sparks and brands.
      (9)   The property owner shall be solely liable for any damages that may
occur as a result of the operation and use of a recreational fire within the
city limits.
(Ord. 10-04, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.024 BURNING BANS.
   All fire bans issued by the City Fire Department and/or the county officials
must be observed and followed as recommended.
(Ord. 10-04, passed 6-28-2010) Penalty, see §
94.999
NOISE CONTROL
§ 94.035 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “City of Dilworth Noise Control
Subchapter.”
(Ord. 96-9, passed - -1996)
§ 94.036 NOISY PARTIES, GATHERINGS, OR PERSON(S) KEEPING, MAINTAINING A
DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue to cause to be made,
or continue any loud, unnecessary, prolonged or unusual noise which disturbs
the peace of others, including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)    No person shall participate in any party, gathering, or be a person
(s) keeping or maintaining a disorderly house of people giving rise to noise or
disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of another person within the city;
   (B)   Loud noises from radios and the like, including persons owning,
occupying, or having charge of any building or premises, or any part thereof,
which cause or allow any loud, excessive, or unusual noise in the operation or
use of any radio, television, phonograph, or other mechanical or electrical
sound-making or reproducing device, instrument, or machine, which loud,
excessive, or unusual noise shall disturb the comfort, quiet, or repose of any
person; and
   (C)   Amplifiers, including the operation of such device in any public
street or place, or from any aircraft or in front of or outside of any
building, place, or premises, or in or through any window, doorway, or opening
of such building, place, or premises, abutting on or adjacent to any public
street or place, any device, apparatus, or instrument for the amplification of
the human voice or any sound or noise or other sound-making or sound-
reproducing device, without a permit granted by the city.
(Ord. 96-9, passed - -1996; Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.037 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly
permit a minor to violate any provision of this subchapter.
(Ord. 96-9, passed - -1996) Penalty, see §
94.999
ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS
§ 94.040 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any shopping cart found abandoned upon the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or other public property, or on private property visible from public
property, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. A shopping cart shall be
considered abandoned if the cart is not retrieved within 24 hours of the city
receiving notice of the cart's location. The failure of the owner to retrieve
the shopping cart shall be considered an abandonment of the cart. An abandoned
shopping cart may be impounded by the city.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)
§ 94.041 NOTICE TO REDEEM.
   Within seven business days of impounding a cart, the city shall provide
notice to the owner of the impounded cart, if identifiable, of the impoundment.
The notice shall set forth the number of carts that were impounded and shall
direct the owner to redeem the carts within 15 calendar days from the date of
the notice.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)
§ 94.042 REDEMPTION FEE.
   An owner who redeems an impounded cart shall pay to the city an
administrative fee per cart to cover the costs expended by the city for
retrieving the cart, notifying the owner, and storing the cart. The City
Council will establish an administrative fee by resolution or ordinance. The
fee imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other fee or penalty
that is imposed.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)
§ 94.043 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED CARTS.
   Impounded carts that are not redeemed within the time period set forth §
75.02 may be disposed of by the city. Where the owner of the cart is not
identifiable, the city may dispose of the cart 15 calendar days after the
impoundment.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)
GRAFFITI
§ 94.050 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “City of Dilworth Graffiti
Subchapter.”
(Ord. 96-8, passed - -1996)
§ 94.051 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the surface of
any structure or wall that is publicly or privately owned without the
permission of the owner of the property.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly
permit a minor to violate any provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)    It is unlawful for any owner of property to place or give permission
to place on any property, real or personal which is in public view, any
graffiti which incites violence by reference to gang or criminal activity,
depicts or expresses obscenity by referring to sexual activity, or contains
defamatory material about a public or private person or which mark out gang
jurisdiction for purposes of designating territorial rights of gangs for
criminal activity.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any owner of property to fail to remove graffiti
that has been placed on the owner’s property or fail to assign their obligation
to remove the graffiti to the Police Chief’s office within three days from the
date of the receipt of the written notice provided by the Police Chief’s
office.
(Ord. 96-8, passed - -1996; Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.052 GRAFFITI DEFINED.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, GRAFFITI shall be defined as any sign,
symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture, letter
of any other inscription or drawing applied to any surface so as to be seen by
the public including, but not limited to, the identification of a gang or gang
activity.
(Ord. 96-8, passed - -1996)
§ 94.053 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of the foregoing
provision if such activity was undertaken with the prior written consent of the
owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was aware of the content
and method of the graffiti to be placed on the structure or wall.
(Ord. 96-8, passed - -1996)
§ 94.054 REMOVAL.
    The city hereby declares graffiti to be a nuisance, which adversely affects
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the community and reduces
property value, and subject to abatement as provided herein.
   (A)   Owner obligation to remove.
      (1)   Upon written notification by the Police Chief’s office, the owner
of the property upon which graffiti has been placed shall remove the graffiti
within three days from the date of the receipt of the notice.
      (2)   The Police Chief’s office may grant an owner an additional ten days
to remove the graffiti if the owner presents sufficient evidence of one of the
following conditions:
         (a)   Weather conditions make removal impossible or a substantial
burden to the owner;
         (b)   Necessary chemical for removal are not readily available;
         (c)   The physical condition of the owner makes immediate removal
impossible or a substantial burden to the owner; or
         (d)   Such other condition which makes immediate removal impossible or
an undue hardship to the owner.
   (B)   Owner assignment of obligation. The owner of the property may assign
his or her obligation to remove the graffiti to the Police Chief’s office. The
assignment must be done within three days from the date of the receipt of the
written notification. The assignment must be in writing on a form provided by
the Police Chief’s office. The assignment will be effective only if the owner
signs a statement authorizing removal by the city and holding the city harmless
from any claims of suits brought for damages resulting from any chemicals or
from any actions taken by the city or its employees to remove the graffiti.
   (C)   Right of the city to remove. The Police Chief’s office shall remove
graffiti from the exterior of private property if an owner fails to remove the
graffiti or fails to assign the obligation to remove the graffiti to the Police
Chief’s office. Graffiti shall be removed at the property owner’s expense.
(Ord. 96-8, passed - -1996; Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.055 VANDALISM AND GRAFFITI DETECTION; REWARD.
   (A)   (1)   The city does hereby offer a reward of $25 to any person who
does not have an affirmative duty, yet supplies information leading to the
arrest and conviction of any person for violating this section.
      (2)   The reward shall not exceed $100 per incident.
   (B)   In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward
amount shall be divided by the City Attorney’s office in the manner it shall
deem appropriate.
      (1)   (a)    Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with
the City Finance Officer.
         (b)   Each claim shall:
            1.   Specifically identify the date, location, and kind of property
damaged or destroyed;
            2.   Identify by name the person who was convicted; and
            3.   Identify the court and date upon which the conviction
occurred.
      (2)   All claims for rewards must be approved by the City Attorney’s
office after a thorough investigation of the claim.
(Ord. 96-8, passed - -1996; Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021)
NUISANCE PENALTIES AND ABATEMENT
§ 94.070 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare by enactment of provisions which:
      (1)   Determine the responsibilities of owners and operators of dwellings
and property for correction of nuisance conditions.
      (2)   Provide remedies to eliminate public nuisances.
      (3)   Provide for administration, enforcement, and penalties.
      (4)   Promote the stabilization and maintenance of neighborhoods.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in the City Code, the abatement processes
in this subchapter are to be used to abate and resolve nuisance conditions
within the city.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021; Ord. 22-07, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 94.071 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. All persons appointed as enforcement personnel or
acting as inspectors for the city or any other city employee designated by the
City Administrator to enforce the provisions of the City Code.
   INTERESTED PARTY. Any owner of record, occupying tenant, or lien holder of
record.
   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS. The address shown on the records of Clay County or a
more recent address know to the enforcement officer. In the case of parties not
listed in these records, the last known address shall be that address obtained
by the enforcement officer after a reasonable search.
   MAIL. Service by mail shall mean by depositing the item with the United
States Postal Service addressed to the intended recipient at his or her last
known address with first class postage prepaid thereon.
   OWNER. Those shown to be owner or owners on the records of Clay County.
   PERSONAL SERVICE. Service by personally handing a copy to the intended
recipient or by leaving a copy at the intended recipient's residence or place
of business with a person of suitable age and discretion.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any one or more of the following: agent; assignee or
collector of rents; holder of a contract for deed; a mortgagee or vendee in
possession; receiver of executer or trustee; lessee; those known to the
enforcement officer as having an ownership interest; or other person, firm, or
corporation exercising apparent control over a property.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021; Ord. 22-07, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 94.072 [RESERVED].
§ 94.073 DISCLOSURE OF RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   Upon the request of the enforcement officer, a responsible party or owner
shall disclose the name of any other responsible party or owner known to them.
This shall include, but not be limited to, the person for whom they are acting,
from whom they are leasing the property, to whom they are leasing the property,
with whom they share joint ownership, or with whom they have any contact
pertaining to the property.
Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.074 ORDER TO CEASE.
   In the event that an enforcement officer observes a person creating or
allowing a nuisance, the officer may order that the person cease and desist
creating or allowing the nuisance.
§ 94.075 AUTHORIZATION TO ENTER.
   (A)    The enforcement officer shall be authorized to enter any property or
structure in the city for the purpose of enforcing and assuring compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter. An owner or responsible party shall, upon
the request of the enforcement officer, provide access to all interior portions
of a building in order to permit the officer to make a complete inspection.
   (B)   Failure to allow the enforcement officer full access to the property
and structure is a violation of this subchapter for which the person or persons
refusing access may be cited.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.076 SERVICE.
   When service of an order or notice is required, any one or more of the
following methods of service shall be adequate:
   (A)   By personal service;
   (B)   By certified mail, through the U.S. Postal Service;
   (C)   By U.S. Mail, unless it is a written order which gives three days or
less for the completion of any act it requires;
   (D)   If the appropriate party or address cannot be determined after
reasonable effort, by posting a copy of the order in a conspicuous place on the
property; or
   (E)   If a mailed order or notice is returned by the U.S. Postal Service, a
good faith effort shall be made to determine the correct address, unless the
order or notice orders abatement and that abatement has been completed.
§ 94.077 [RESERVED].
§ 94.078 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   Unless the nuisance is as described in §
94.079, the city may abate Class I nuisances by the procedure described below:
   (A)   Order. The enforcement officer shall serve a written order upon the
owner. The written order shall also be served upon any responsible party known
to the officer and may be served upon any party known to have caused the
nuisance. The written order shall contain the following:
      (1)   A description of the property sufficient for identification;
      (2)   A description and location of the nuisance and the remedial action
required to abate the nuisance;
      (3)   A statement that the nuisance is to be abated within seven days of
the date of the order;
      (4)   A statement that the order may be appealed and a hearing before the
City Administrator or designee may be obtained by filing a written request with
the city before the appeal deadline which shall be the abatement deadline
designated in the order or seven calendar days after the date of the order,
whichever comes first; and
      (5)   A statement that, if remedial action is not taken nor a request for
a hearing filed with the city within the time specified, the city will abate
the nuisance and charge all costs incurred therein against the owner of the
property and if cost is unpaid by the owner or responsible party the costs will
be charged against the property as a special assessment to be collected in the
same manner as property taxes.
   (B)   Setting hearing date. In the event that an appeal is filed, a notice
shall be mailed to the owner and known responsible parties, stating the date,
time, place, and subject of the hearing.
   (C)   Notice of hearing date. In the event that an appeal is filed, a notice
shall be mailed to the owner and known responsible parties, stating the date,
time, place and subject of the hearing.
   (D)   Designated hearing officer. The City Administrator or designated
hearing officer shall convene a hearing at which time the property owner shall
have an opportunity to present evidence and testimony to support the appeal of
the abatement order. The hearing officer may receive evidence and testimony
from the enforcement officer and other parties who wish to be heard. Upon
receiving the evidence and testimony, the hearing officer shall make a written
recommendation to the City Council which may confirm, modify, revoke, alter, or
cancel the order of the enforcement officer. If the City Council determination
requires abatement, the City Council shall, in the resolution, fix a time
within which the nuisance must be abated and shall provide that, if the
nuisance is not eliminated within the time specified, the city may abate the
nuisance and assess the costs of the abatement to the property.
   (E)   Abatement. If the remedial action is not taken nor an appeal filed
within the time specified, the city may abate the nuisance.
   (F)   Assessment. The city may assess charges against a property as a
special assessment, pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 429, as it may
be amended from time to time, for certification to the County Auditor and
collection together with current taxes payable in the following year.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021; Ord. 22-07, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 94.079 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   When the enforcement officer determines that a nuisance exists which
constitutes an immediate danger or hazard which if not immediately abated will
endanger the health and safety of the public, and there does not exist
sufficient time to follow the procedures of §
94.078, the city may abate the nuisance by the procedure described below:
   (A)   Order. The city shall order emergency abatement by an administrative
order to be signed by an enforcement officer.
   (B)   Notice of abatement.
      (1)   Following an emergency abatement, a notice shall be mailed to the
owner of the property and other responsible parties connected with the property
that are known to the city. The notice shall contain:
         (a)   A description of the nuisance;
         (b)   The action taken by the city;
         (c)   The reasons for immediate action;
         (d)   The costs incurred in abating the nuisance; and
         (e)   The date, time, and place of a hearing.
      (2)   Prior to the hearing, the department director who ordered the
abatement shall provide the owner with an opportunity to meet and informally
discuss the matter. The department director may make a recommendation to the
Council based on the information obtained at such a meeting.
   (C)   Hearing. If the matter is not resolved at the informal meeting, the
City Administrator or a designated hearing officer shall hear from the
enforcement officer and any other parties who wish to be heard. After the
hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the City Council
regarding payment of the costs of abatement. The City Council may adopt a
resolution levying an assessment for all or a portion of the costs incurred by
the city in abating the nuisance payable in a single payment or by equal annual
installments as the City Council may provide.
(Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021; Ord. 22-07, passed 9-26-2022)
 § 94.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be charged with a
misdemeanor and be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99 or, alternatively, may be issued an administrative citation and be
subject to the civil penalty provisions of §
35.01. Any criminal or civil penalty imposed pursuant to this section may be
imposed in addition to any costs incurred by the city for abatement.
(Ord. 96-8, passed - -1996; Ord. 96-9, passed - -1996; Ord. 10-04, passed 6-28-
2010; Ord. 21-08, passed 11-8-2021; Ord. 22-07, passed 9-26-2022)
CHAPTER 95: SECURING VACANT BUILDINGS
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Securing vacant buildings
   
95.03   Responding to the notice
   
95.04   Emergency securing of vacant buildings
   
95.05   Collection of costs
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION. An organization recognized by the city as
representing a neighborhood within the city.
   SECURE. Includes, but is not limited to, installing locks, repairing windows
and doors, boarding windows and doors, posting "no-trespassing" signs,
installing exterior lighting or motion-detecting lights, fencing the property,
and installing a monitored alarm or other security system consistent with Minn.
Stat. § 463.251.
   UNOCCUPIED BUILDING. A building which is not being used for a legal
occupancy.
   UNSECURED BUILDING. A building or a portion of a building that is open to
entry by unauthorized persons without the use of tools.
   VACANT BUILDING. A building or a portion of a building that meets one or
more of the following conditions:
      (1)   Unoccupied and foreclosed upon as identified by the county.
      (2)   Unoccupied and windows or entrances to the premises are boarded up
or closed off, or multiple window panes are broken and unrepaired.
      (3)   Unoccupied and doors to the premises are smashed through, broken
off, unhinged, or continuously unlocked.
      (4)   Unoccupied and gas, electric, or water service to the premises has
been terminated.
      (5)   Unoccupied and rubbish, trash, or debris has accumulated on the
mortgaged premises.
      (6)   Unoccupied and the police or sheriff’s office has received at least
two reports of trespassers on the premises, or of vandalism or other illegal
acts being committed on the premises.
      (7)   Unoccupied and the premises are deteriorating and are either below
or are in imminent danger of falling below minimum community standards for
public safety and sanitation.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 95.02 SECURING VACANT BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In general, if any building becomes vacant or unoccupied and is deemed
hazardous due to the fact that the building is open to trespass and has not
been secured, and the building could be made safe by securing the building, the
city council may order the building secured and shall cause notice of the order
to be served consistent with Minn. Stat. § 463.251, subd. 2. The notice must be
served upon the owner of record of the premises or the owner's agent, the
taxpayer identified in the property tax records for the parcel, the holder of
the mortgage or sheriffs certificate, and any neighborhood association for the
neighborhood in which the building is located that has requested notice. The
notice is served by delivery or mail. The notice must be in writing and must
include, at a minimum, a statement that:
      (1)   Informs the owner and the holder of any mortgage or sheriffs
certificate of the requirements found in subdivision Minn. Stat. § 463.251,
subd. 3 that the owner or holder of the certificate has six days to comply with
the order or provide the council with a reasonable plan and schedule to comply
with the order and that costs may be assessed against the property if the
person does not secure the building.
      (2)   Informs the owner and the holder of any mortgage or sheriffs
certificate that, within six days of the ordering being served, the person may
request a hearing before the governing body challenging the governing body's
determination that the property is vacant or unoccupied and hazardous.
      (3)   Notifies the holder of any sheriff’s certificate of the holder's
duty under Minn. Stat. § 582.031, subd. 1(b), to enter the premises to protect
the premises from waste and trespass if the order is not challenged or set
aside and there is prima facie evidence of abandonment of the property as
described in Minn. Stat. § 582.032, subd. 7.
   (B)   Service by mail is completed upon mailing a copy of the order to the
owner by first class mail at the last known address.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 95.03 RESPONDING TO THE NOTICE.
   (A)   The owner of the building or the holder of the sheriffs certificate of
sale has six days after the order is served to do one of the following:
      (1)   Comply with the order;
      (2)   Provide the Council with a reasonable plan and schedule to comply
with the order; or
      (3)   Request a hearing before the City Council to challenge the
Council's determination that the property is vacant or unoccupied and
hazardous.
   (B)   If the owner or holder of the sheriff’s certificate fails to take one
of these actions within the allotted time, the City Council must have the
building properly secured.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 95.04 EMERGENCY SECURING OF VACANT BUILDINGS.
   Pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 463.251, subd. 4,when the city building official,
police chief, or fire chief determines that an emergency exists with respect to
the health or safety of persons in the community and immediate boarding and
securing of a building is required, and where immediate danger will exist to
children, transients, or others members of the community without the immediate
boarding or securing of the building, the building official, police chief, or
fire chief may waive all notice requirements herein and immediately board or
otherwise secure the building, provided that:
   (A)   The conditions showing the existence of an emergency are documented in
writing by the building official, police chief, fire chief, or their designees.
   (B)   Notice is mailed immediately by the department invoking this section
to the owner of record of the premises, the taxpayer identified in the property
tax records for the parcel, the holder of the mortgage or sheriffs certificate,
and any neighborhood association for the neighborhood in which the building is
located that has requested notice.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 95.05 COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   All costs incurred by the city for securing a vacant building under this
chapter may be charged against the real property as a special assessment
pursuant to Minn. Stat. §§ 463.251, 463.21, and 463.151.
(Ord. 18-07, passed 7-9-2018)
CHAPTER 96: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
96.01   Statement of policy
   
96.02   Alarm systems utilizing taped or prerecorded messages
   
96.03   System operation and maintenance
   
96.04   Business responsibilities
   
96.05   Fees for false alarms
   
96.06   Right to notice and appeal
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   The City of Dilworth deems it necessary to provide for the special and
express regulations of alarm systems which are designed to signal the presence
of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the Police Department or
Fire Department personnel are expected to respond, in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage
alarm users to maintain the operational reliability and proper use of alarm
systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms. This chapter governs systems
intended to summon police and/or fire response, establishes fees, provides for
penalties for violations, and establishes a system of administration. This
chapter does not apply to vehicular alarms.
(Ord. 20-02, passed 1-27-2020)
§ 96.02 ALARM SYSTEMS UTILIZING TAPED OR PRERECORDED MESSAGES.
   No person may install, monitor, or use and possess an operative alarm which
utilizes taped or prerecorded messages which deliver a telephone alarm message
to the Police or Fire Department.
(Ord. 20-02, passed 1-27-2020)
§ 96.03 SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   An alarm user has the following operational and maintenance
responsibilities:
   (A)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches.
   (B)   Designate a representative to respond to the alarm system's location
within one hour when notified by the city to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm
system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the
premises.
   (C)   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (D)   Adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an
alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer
than ten minutes after being activated or 15 minutes for systems operating
under Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., standards 365 or 609.
(Ord. 20-02, passed 1-27-2020)
§ 96.04 BUSINESS RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Businesses operating an alarm system shall be responsible for the following:
   (A)   Reporting alarm signals.
   (B)   Attempting to verify every alarm signal, except a duress, hold-up, or
fire alarm activation before requesting a police/fire response to an alarm
signal.
   (C)   Communicating verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to the
city in a prompt fashion.
   (D)   Ensuring that all alarm users are given adequate training on the
proper use of equipment.
(Ord. 20-02, passed 1-27-2020)
§ 96.05 FEES FOR FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   The Police and Fire Departments will have a fee schedule for false
alarms in residential and commercial/multi-housing uses as contained in
Chapter 34 or as set by resolution.
   (B)   The Police Chief and Fire Chief are responsible for reviewing all
alarms to determine if they are chargeable. Acts of nature such as high winds,
lightening, or power outages that cause alarms to malfunction shall not be
considered chargeable.
   (C)   False alarm fees must be paid within 30 days after receiving written
notice from the city that the fee is due.
(Ord. 20-02, passed 1-27-2020)
§ 96.06 RIGHT TO NOTICE AND APPEAL.
   Written notice shall be sent to all alarm users notifying them of all false
alarm responses to the premises and their status as a chargeable fee. The alarm
user has the right to request an informal hearing before the City Administrator
to appeal the decision. This request must be done in writing, and within seven
days of their violation. If the alarm user wishes to appeal the City
Administrator's decision, it shall be done so in writing, within seven days of
the City Administrator's ruling. An independent hearing officer will be
appointed to review the alarm user's appeal.
(Ord. 20-02, passed 1-27-2020)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as set out
in §
10.99.
(Ord. 20-02, passed 1-27-2020)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSES AND PERMITS
      
111.   LIQUOR REGULATIONS
      
112.   TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTES
      
113.   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS
      
114.   PET SHOPS
      
115.   PAWNSHOPS
      
116.   GAMBLING
      
117.   SAUNAS
      
118.   HOME OCCUPATIONS
      
119.   CANNABIS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section
Used Vehicle Dealers
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License
   
110.03   Application
   
110.04   License fee
   
110.05   Application of subchapter
Amusement Machines, Pool Tables, and Other Coin Operated Games of Skill
   
110.30   Licenses required
   
110.31   License fee
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alcohol, see
Ch. 111
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
   Gambling, see
Ch. 116
   Pawnbrokers, see
Ch. 115
   Peddlers, see
Ch. 113
   Pet shops, see
Ch. 114
   Saunas; massages, see
Ch. 117
   Tobacco and e-cigarettes, see
Ch. 112
   Transient merchants, see
Ch. 113
USED VEHICLE DEALERS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   USED VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle as defined in M.S. § 168.27, subd. 1(j),
trailer as defined in M.S. § 168.002, subd. 35, motorboat as defined in M.S. §
86B.005, subd. 9, as they may be amended from time to time, or other type of
machinery or equipment, for which title has been transferred from the person
who first acquired it from the manufacturer, distributor or dealer; or which is
being resold by the original owner after it has been placed in a actual
operation.
   USED VEHICLE DEALER. Anyone engaged in the buying or selling, or in
arranging the buying or selling, of a used vehicle.
(1963 Code, § 51.01) (Ord. 94-6, passed 11-14-1994)
§ 110.02 LICENSE.
   No person shall engage in the buying or selling, or arranging the buying or
selling of used vehicles without first having obtained a license to do so in
conformance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1963 Code, § 51.02) (Ord. 94-6, passed 11-14-1994) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for a license shall be in writing to the City Council
and signed and verified by the applicant on forms to be provided by the City
Administrator.
   (B)   Such application shall state:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and all persons associated with him or
her in the business or having an interest therein;
      (2)   The place where such business is to be conducted;
      (3)   The present place of business of the applicant; and
      (4)   Proof, satisfactory to the City Council, that the applicant is:
         (a)   The possessor of a license from the state to deal in the sale of
used motor vehicles; or
         (b)   Exempt from the license provisions for the state for the sale of
used motor vehicles.
(1963 Code, § 51.03) (Ord. 94-6, passed 11-14-1994)
§ 110.04 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for such license shall be as set by the City Council.
(1963 Code, § 51.04) (Ord. 94-6, passed 11-14-1994)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 110.05 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall not apply to the sale of a used vehicle on private
property if the item for sale is properly registered or licensed in the
property owner’s name; provided, however, that the sale of more than two such
items at any given time shall be subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 94-6, passed 11-14-1994)
AMUSEMENT MACHINES, POOL TABLES, AND OTHER
COIN OPERATED GAMES OF SKILL
§ 110.30 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate, maintain or install, in a public place, an
amusement machine, pool table, or other coin operated game for the purpose of
music, entertainment, or skill without first obtaining a license.
(1963 Code, § 57.01) (Ord. 19-12, passed 12-23-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.31 LICENSE FEE.
   The application shall be submitted to the City Administrator who shall bring
it to the Council at its next regular meeting for its action. Such application
shall be accompanied by the payment of the license fee which shall be as set by
the City Council.
(1963 Code, § 57.02)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of §§
110.01 through
110.05 shall be a petty misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in accordance with §
10.99. A violation of §§
110.01 through
110.05 shall be a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with §
10.99, when preceded by two or more convictions under §§
110.01 through
110.05 within the immediate preceding 12-month period.
(Ord. 94-6, passed 11-14-1994)
CHAPTER 111: LIQUOR REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
111.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
111.03   Definitions
   
111.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
   
111.05   Consumption in public places
Licensing
   
111.20   Number of licenses which may be issued
   
111.21   Term and expiration of licenses
   
111.22   Kinds of liquor licenses
   
111.23   License fees; pro rata
   
111.24   Council discretion to grant or deny a license
   
111.25   Application for license
   
111.26   Description of premises
   
111.27   Applications for renewal
   
111.28   Transfer of license
   
111.29   Investigation
   
111.30   Hearing and issuance
   
111.31   estrictions on issuance
   
111.32   onditions of license
   
111.33   ours and days of sale
   
111.34   inors on premises
   
111.35   estrictions on purchase and consumption
   
111.36   uspension and revocation
   
111.37   Issuance of other licenses
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of
the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Chapter 340A are hereby
adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time
this chapter is adopted.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter:
   LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or “3.2% malt,” includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt
liquor.
   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a RESTAURANT as
defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state
as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet
the definition of either a “small establishment,” “medium establishment” or
“large establishment” as defined in M.S. § 157.16, subd. 3(d), as it may be
amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that
receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is
heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of
this chapter unless it meets the definitions of “small establishment”, “medium
establishment” or “large establishment.”
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   (C)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by
law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or
3.2% malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil penalty under the
provisions of §
111.99(B).
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in a public
park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public
place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this
chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where
the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
LICENSING
§ 111.20 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue.
However, the number of licenses which may be granted under this chapter is
limited to the number of licenses which were issued as of the effective date of
this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are authorized by law or
election. The Council in its sound discretion may provide by ordinance that a
larger number of licenses may be issued up to the number of licenses authorized
by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. If a larger
number of licenses in a particular category has been authorized by a referendum
held under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.413, subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time, but not all of them have been issued, the larger number of
licenses is no longer in effect until the Council by ordinance determines that
any or all of the licenses may be issued. The Council is not required to issue
the full number of licenses that it has available.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.21 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses,
except temporary licenses, shall expire on May 31 of each year. Temporary
licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and display permits
issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the accompanying city consent
to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.22 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
   The Council of a city is authorized to issue the following licenses and
permits, up to the number specified in §
111.20.
   (A)   3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf
courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks. Licensees holding a 3.2% malt liquor license do not
need a license for Sunday on-sales.
   (B)   3.2% malt liquor off-sale license.
   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a
club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization for their organization’s
fundraising events. Clubs, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organizations
are prohibited from serving alcohol at other group’s events.
   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to
exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off-sale license which was
first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off-sale intoxicating
liquor license established by the Council under §
111.23 shall not exceed $240 or a greater amount which may be permitted by M.S.
§ 340A.408, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the
following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers,
theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, and
exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by the
Council under §
111.23 shall not exceed the amounts provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 2
(b), as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound
discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor
off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(b), as it may be amended from time
to time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(a), as it may be amended from time
to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating
liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event
being held on the premises.
   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization
to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as provided by M.S.
§ 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in §
111.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least
30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which
serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food. The maximum fee for
this license, which shall be established by the Council under the provisions of
§
111.23, shall not exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. §
340A.504, subd. 3(b), as it may be amended from time to time.
   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses are issued
to the same licensee.
   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with
a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit
organization that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for
longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12
days worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.
Clubs, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organizations are only allowed to
provide 3.2% malt or on-sale intoxicating liquor for their organization’s
fundraising events. Clubs, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organizations
are prohibited from serving alcohol at other group’s events.
   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety to: restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at
one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may be
amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant in §
111.03; and to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in
M.S. § 340A.4011, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time and to
theaters that meet the criteria in M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 1(b). The fee for an
on-sale wine license established by the Council under the provisions
of §
111.23 shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also
holds an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor
with a content over 3.2% (strong beer) without an additional license.
   (J)   One day consumption and display permits with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a
social activity in the city sponsored by the organization. The approved permit
is valid for the day indicated on the permit. The fee for the permit may not
exceed $25. Not more than ten permits may be issued in any one year.
   (K)   Consumption and display permits are approved and issued by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The annual fee for issuance of this permit is
$250. The maximum amount of the additional fee which may be imposed by the
Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and display permit under
the provisions of §
111.23 shall not exceed $300, or the maximum amount permitted by M.S. §
340A.414, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time. Consumption and
display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.
   (L)   Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business
establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which
payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The
license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class,
at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine
or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for
consumption on the licensed premises only.
   (M)   Temporary off sale wine licenses, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued for the off sale of wine at an
auction. A license issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale of only
vintage wine of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale
by any wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine
for not more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of
wine are sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms, including
license fee, imposed by §
111.23.
   (N)   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued
to brewers who operate a restaurant in the place of manufacture and who meet
the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(d) and 7, as it may be
amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on sale may not exceed
3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed under this section possesses a
license for off-sale under division (O) below, the brew pubs total combined
retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year,
provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.
   (O)   Brew pub off-sale intoxicating liquor license, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee
under division (N) above or that produces fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt
liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria established as M.S. §
340A.301, subd. 6(d) and 7(b), as it may be amended from time to time. Off sale
of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off sale at exclusive
liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off sale must be removed from the
premises before the applicable off sale closing time at exclusive liquor
stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in the manner
required by M.S.§ 340A.285 as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under
this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year. If a brewer licensed under
this section possesses a license under division (N) above, the brewer’s total
retail sales at on sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year,
provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.
   (P)   Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued,
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers who
manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale
of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the brewer.
   (Q)   Brewer taproom license, may be issued to the holder of a brewer’s
license under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i) or (j) as it may amended from
time to time. A brewer’s taproom license authorizes on-sale of malt liquor
produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one
brewery location owned by the brewer. A brewer may have only one taproom
license and may not have an ownership interest in a brewer licensed under M.S.
§ 340A.301, subd. 6(d) as it may be amended from time to time. A brewer taproom
license may not be issued to a brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of
malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of
wine annually. Within ten days of issuing a brewer taproom license the City
Clerk will inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of the licensee’s name,
address, trade name and the effective date and expiration date of the license.
The City Clerk will inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of a license
transfer, cancellation, suspension, or revocation during the license period.
   (R)   A microdistillery cocktail room license may be issued to the holder of
a microdistillery license under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6A. A microdistillery
cocktail room license authorizes on-sale of distilled liquor produced by the
distiller for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to the distillery
location owned by the distiller. The holder of a microdistillery cocktail room
license may also hold a license to operate a restaurant at the distillery. No
more than one cocktail room license may be issued to any distiller and a
microdistillery cocktail room license may not be issued to any person having an
ownership interest in a distillery licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(a).
No single entity may hold both a microdistillery cocktail room and taproom
license and a microdistillery cocktail room and taproom license may not be co-
located. Within ten days of the issuance of a microdistillery cocktail room
license, the city shall inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of the
licensee’s name and address and trade name, and the effective date and
expiration date of the license. The city shall also inform the Commissioner of
Public Safety of a microdistillery cocktail room license transfer,
cancellation, suspension, or revocation during the license period.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.23 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time, for a liquor license.
   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time in the ordinance
establishing fees and charges the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws
and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing
mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees
at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is
filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only
if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (F)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in
their annual license fee by the amount specified in M.S. § 340A.408 if at the
time of initial application or renewal they:
      (1)   Agree to have a private vendor approved by the city train all
employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to
the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the
responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
      (2)   Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons
appearing to be 30 years old or less;
      (3)   Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award
employees who catch underage drinkers and a penalty program to punish employees
in the event of a failed compliance check; and
      (4)   Failure to abide by the provisions of this division may result in
suspension of the license until the conditions of the fee reduction are met and
may result in suspension and/or revocation of the license pursuant to §
111.36 of this chapter.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.24 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application
for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has
a right to a license under this chapter.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.25 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to the applicant's
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant
is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from
time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times
effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the
license.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.26 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may
not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.27 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
   At least 60 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision
whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have their license renewed.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.28 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval
of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.29 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial
application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in
the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so,
on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may
contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The
applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of $500 which
shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary
investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be returned to the
applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either
conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public
Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be
$500, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation
is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid for the
initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The
unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the
application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation
and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable
in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive
investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the
application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine
license.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.30 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license
shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved
by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.31 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued
within the city to any one person.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under state law.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.32 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   (A)   Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving
liquor in an establishment which has an “on-sale” license shall receive
training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. Proof of
training shall be provided by the licensee, upon request of the Council.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally
with the employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee
during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and
of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
   (F)   Failure by an off-sale intoxicating liquor licensee who has received a
fee reduction pursuant to §
111.23(F) of this chapter to abide with the provisions of §
111.23(F).
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.33 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City Council
may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours than state
law allows.
   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (C)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container
containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon any table,
bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes
after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on
the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale
can legally occur.
   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.34 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed
as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services
in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building
serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment
except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor
is not sold.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.35 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of
business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it
may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and
no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.36 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating
to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. § 14.57 to 14.69, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of
Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation
which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any
rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time:
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor, or
violation of §
111.04, the license shall be revoked.
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under
division (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable
statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as
follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year period, at least
one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed.
         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year period, at least
three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year period, at least
seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which the license
will be suspended.
   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten days.
Any suspension under this division (C) shall continue until the Council
determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state law and this
chapter have again been met.   
   (D)   The provisions of §
111.99 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in
lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.37 ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.
   On-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. The Council may issue
in its sound discretion on-sale licenses to those listed in M.S. § 340A.404,
subd. 1(4), as it may be amended from time to time. The number of on-sale
licenses issued under this section is governed by M.S. § 340A.413, as it may be
amended from time to time, as limited by the provisions of this chapter.
Pursuant to a ballot question in the November 5, 1996 general election, the
number of permitted on-sale licenses under this section may exceed that of what
is listed in M.S. § 340A.413, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Chapter
340A as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that
chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each
violation of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of
this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in
order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69, as it may be amended
from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the
Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty
and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds
for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum
schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to
any suspension unless the license is revoked:
      (1)   For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.
      (2)   For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.
      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year
period, $2,000.
   (C)   The term “violation” as used in this section includes any and all
violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as
they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be
determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-
year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a violation for
which revocation is imposed.
(Ord. 17-02, passed 7-26-2017)
CHAPTER 112: TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTES
Section
   
112.01   Title
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   License
   
112.04   Basis for denial of license
   
112.05   Prohibited sales
   
112.06   [Reserved]
   
112.07   [Reserved]
   
112.08   Other prohibited acts
   
112.09   Business owner responsibilities
   
112.10   Compliance checks
   
112.11   Violations
   
112.12   Exceptions and defenses
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Dilworth Tobacco and E-Cigarette
Chapter.”
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHILD-RESISTANT PACKAGING. Packaging that meets the definition set forth in
16 C.F.R. § 1700.15(b), as in effect on January 1, 2015, and was tested in
accordance with the method described in 16 C.F.R. § 1700.20.
   CIGAR. Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in tobacco leaf or in any other
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, which is not
a cigarette as defined in M.S. § 297F.01, subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell licensed products are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of
persons under the age of 21 who purchase or attempt to purchase licensed
products. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of persons under age 21 who
attempt to purchase licensed products for educational, research and training
purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be
conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate
federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices.
   DELIVERY SALE. The sale of any licensed product to any person for personal
consumption and not for resale when the sale is conducted by any means other
than an in-person, over-the-counter sales transaction in a licensed retail
establishment. DELIVERY SALE includes but is not limited to the sale of any
licensed product when the sale is conducted by telephone, other voice
transmission, mail, the internet, or app-based service. DELIVERY SALE includes
delivery by licensees or third parties by any means, including curbside pick-
up.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic, intended for
human consumption through inhalation of vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component part of such a product whether or not
marketed or sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any
nicotine cessation product that has been authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to be marketed and for sale as "drugs," "devices," or
"combination products," as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   FLAVORED PRODUCT. Any licensed product that contains a taste or smell, other
than the taste or smell of tobacco, that is distinguishable by an ordinary
consumer either prior to or during the consumption of the product, including,
but not limited to, any taste or smell relating to chocolate, cocoa, menthol,
mint, wintergreen, vanilla, honey, fruit, or any candy, dessert, alcoholic
beverage, herb, or spice. A public statement or claim, whether express or
implied, made or disseminated by the manufacturer of a licensed product, or by
any person authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate
public statements concerning such products, that a product has or produces a
taste or smell other than a taste or smell of tobacco will constitute
presumptive evidence that the product is a FLAVORED PRODUCT.
   INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50% of
the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of
the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other
physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent.
   LICENSED PRODUCTS. The term that collectively refers to any tobacco,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery product.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to single cigarettes, cigars, and any
other licensed products that have been removed from their original retail
packaging and offered for sale. LOOSIES do not include premium cigars that are
hand-constructed, have a wrapper made entirely from whole tobacco leaf, and
have a filler and binder made entirely of tobacco, except for adhesives or
other materials used to maintain size, texture, or flavor.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, kiosk, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for
sales transactions.
   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY DEVICES. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a
product, that is not tobacco or an electronic delivery device as defined in
this section.NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT does not include any nicotine
cessation product that has been authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to be marketed and for sale as "drugs," "devices," or
"combination products," as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where licensed products are
available for sale to the general public. The phrase shall include but not be
limited to grocery stores, tobacco product shops, convenience stores, liquor
stores, gasoline service stations, drug stores, bars, and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY. Open displays of licensed products in any manner where
any person shall have access to the licensed products without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee and where a physical
exchange of the licensed product from the licensee or the licensee's employee
to the customer is not required in order to access the licensed products.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated product made or derived
from nicotine, tobacco, marijuana, or other plant, whether natural or
synthetic, that is intended for inhalation. SMOKING also includes carrying or
using an activated electronic delivery device.
   TOBACCO. Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component,
part, or accessory of a tobacco product, including but not limited to
cigarettes; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp
cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish;
plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse
scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms
of tobacco. TOBACCO does not include any nicotine cessation product that has
been authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to be marketed and for
sale as "drugs," "devices," or "combination products," as defined in the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Any pipes, rolling papers, wraps, or other device
intentionally designed or intended to be used with tobacco products. TOBACCO-
RELATED DEVICES shall include accessories or components of tobacco-related
devices which may be marketed separately. TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES may or may
not contain tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses licensed products upon the insertion of money, tokens or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the licensed product.
   YOUTH-ORIENTED FACILITY. For the purpose of this chapter, a youth-oriented
facility is defined to include any school, place of worship, or facility with
residents, customers, visitors, or inhabitants of which 25% or more are
regularly under the age of 21 or which primarily sells, rents, or offers
services or products that are consumed or used primarily by persons under the
age of 21.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)
§ 112.03 LICENSE.
    No person shall sell or offer to sell licensed products without first
having obtained a license to do so from the city.
   (A)   Application. An application for a license to sell licensed products
shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the
full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses
and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is
sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt
of a completed application, the City Administrator shall forward the
application to the Council for action at its next regularly scheduled Council
meeting. If the City Administrator shall determine that an application is
incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant with notice of
the information necessary to make the application complete.
   (B)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete
any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If
the City Council should approve the license, the City Administrator shall issue
the license to the applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the
denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's
right to appeal the Council's decision.
   (C)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of issue.
   (D)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in §
112.11 and §
112.99.
   (E)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. The transfer of any license to another location or
person is prohibited.
   (F)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses are eligible to be licensed
under this chapter.
   (G)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public in the retail establishment.
   (H)   Renewal. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days, but no more than 60 days, before the
expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license under this chapter
shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and
shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
   (I)   Fees. The fee for a tobacco license shall be set, and from time to
time amended, by the City Council.
   (J)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this section shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute
right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal
of the license.
   (K)   Smoking. Smoking shall not be permitted, and no person shall smoke
within the indoor area of any establishment with a retail tobacco license.
Smoking for the purposes of sampling licensed products is prohibited.
   (L)   Samples prohibited. No person shall distribute samples of any licensed
product free of charge or at a nominal cost. The distribution of licensed
products as a free donation is prohibited.
   (M)   Proximity to certain institutions. It shall be unlawful for any person
to sell, offer to sell, give away or deliver tobacco, tobacco-related devices,
electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery products within
300 feet of any youth-oriented facility, as measured by the shortest line
between the space to be occupied by the proposed licensee and the occupied
space of the youth-oriented facility, unless that person has been in the
business of selling such products in that location before the date this section
was enacted into law for at least one year.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 112.04 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)    The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of
a license under this chapter:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other
regulation relating to licensed products;
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products revoked
within the preceding 12 months of the date on the application;
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information; and/or
      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law,
ordinance or other regulation, from holding such a license.
   (B)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be
revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under
this section.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)
§ 112.05 PROHIBITED SALES.
   In general. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell
or offer to sell any licensed products:
      (1)   By means of any type of vending machine;
      (2)   By means of self-service display. All licensed products must be
stored behind the sales counter, in a locked case, in a storage unit, or in
another area not freely accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling
licensed products at the time this chapter is adopted must comply with this
section within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter;
      (3)   By means of loosies as defined in §
112.02;
      (4)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, belladonna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process; and/or
      (5)   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision or
other regulation.
   (B)   Legal age. No person shall sell any licensed product to any person
under the age of 21.
      (1)   Age verification. Licensees must verify by means of government-
issued photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth that
the purchaser is at least 21 years of age. Verification is not required for a
person over the age of 30. That the person appeared to be 30 years of age or
older does not constitute a defense to a violation of this division.
      (2)   Signage. Notice of the legal sales age, age verification
requirement, and possible penalties for underage sales must be posted
prominently and in plain view at all times at each location where licensed
products are offered for sale. The required signage, which will be provided to
the licensee by the city, must be posted in a manner that is clearly visible to
anyone who is or is considering making a purchase.
   (C)   Electronic delivery devices containing flavored products. No person
shall sell or offer for sale (in person or by delivery) any electronic delivery
devices containing flavored products.
   (D)   Cigars. No person shall sell or offer to sell:
      (1)   Any cigar unless it is within a package containing a minimum of
five cigars; and
      (2)   Any package of cigars for a sales price of less than $15 per
package, after any discounts are applied and before sales taxes are imposed.
This provision does not prohibit the sale of a single cigar with a sales price
of at least $4, after any discounts are applied and before sales taxes are
imposed.
   (E)   Liquid packaging. No person shall sell or offer to sell any liquid,
whether or not such liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human
consumption and use in an electronic delivery device, in packaging that is not
child-resistant. Upon request by the city, a licensee must provide a copy of
the certificate of compliance or full laboratory testing report for the
packaging used.
   (F)   Coupon and price promotion. No person shall accept or redeem any
coupon, price promotion, or other instrument or mechanism, whether in paper,
digital, electronic, mobile, or any other form, that provides any licensed
products to a consumer at no cost or at a price that is less than the non-
discounted, standard price listed by a retailer on the item or on any related
shelving, posting, advertising, or display at the location where the item is
sold or offered for sale, including all applicable taxes.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06 RESERVED.
§ 112.07 RESERVED.
§ 112.08 OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal
guardian to knowingly permit a minor to violate this chapter.
   (B)   Minnesota Clean Indoor Act. It shall be unlawful for any person to use
licensed products anywhere smoking is prohibited by the Minnesota Clean Indoor
Act, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Use where prohibited. It is a violation of this chapter for any person
to use licensed products in an area where prohibited by this chapter, or to use
licensed products in an area where prohibited by a private policy established
by the proprietor or other person in charge of the area.
   (D)   Proprietors. It is a violation of this chapter for the proprietor,
person, or entity that owns, leases, manages, operates, or otherwise controls
the use of an area in which the use of licensed products is prohibited under
this chapter to knowingly fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.09 BUSINESS OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or an employee of an
establishment to knowingly permit violations of this chapter. Every act or
omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent or
employee of any business owner shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
business owner. All licensees are responsible for the actions of their
employees regarding the sale, offer to sell, and furnishing of licensed
products on the licensed premises. The sale, offer to sell, or furnishing of
any licensed product by an employee shall be considered an act of the licensee.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 21-01, passed 5-10-2021)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS.
    All licensed premises must be open to inspection by law enforcement or
other authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city will conduct compliance checks. In
accordance with state law, the city will conduct a compliance check that
involves the participation of a person at least 17 years of age, but under the
age of 21, to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase licensed
products. Prior written consent from a parent or guardian is required for any
person under the age of 18 to participate in a compliance check. Persons used
for the purpose of compliance checks will be supervised by law enforcement or
other designated personnel.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)
§ 112.11 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator
shall be issued an administrative notice that sets forth the alleged violation
and which shall inform the alleged violator of their right to be heard on the
accusation.
   (B)   Hearings.
      (1)   Upon issuance of a citation, a person accused of violating this
chapter may request in writing a hearing on the matter. Hearing requests must
be made within ten business days of the issuance of the citation and delivered
to the City Clerk or other designated city officer. Failure to properly request
a hearing within ten business days of the issuance of the citation will
terminate the person's right to a hearing.
      (2)   The City Clerk or other designated city officer will set the time
and place for the hearing. Written notice of the hearing time and place will be
mailed or delivered to the accused violator at least ten business days prior to
the hearing.
   (C)   Hearing Officer. The City Council shall serve as the Hearing Officer.
If the citation is upheld by the Hearing Officer, the city's actual expenses in
holding the hearing up to a maximum of $1,000 shall be paid by the person
requesting the hearing.
   (D)   Decision. If the Hearing Officer determines that a violation of this
chapter did occur, that decision, along with the Hearing Officer's reasons for
finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under §
112.99, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the
accused violator. Likewise, if the Hearing Officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be
recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
   (E)   Appeals. An appeal of any decision made by the Hearing Officer shall
be filed in the County District Court.
   (F)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section prohibits the city
from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for an alleged second violation of
this chapter by a person 21 years of age or older within five years of a
previous conviction under this chapter.
   (G)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)
§ 112.12 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco or tobacco
related device to a person under age 21 as part of a lawfully recognized
religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense
to the violation of this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on
proof of age as described by state law.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Licensees. Any licensee cited for violating this chapter, or whose
employee has violated this chapter, will be charged an administrative fine of
$300 for a first violation; $600 for a second offense at the same licensed
premises within a 36-month period; and $1,000 for a third or subsequent offense
at the same location within a 36-month period. Upon the third violation, the
license will be suspended for a period of not less than 30 consecutive days and
may be revoked. Upon a fourth violation within a 36-month period, the license
will be revoked.
   (B)   Employees of licensees and other individuals. Other individuals, other
than persons under age 21, found to be in violation of this chapter may be
charged an administrative fine of $50.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 3-25-1998; Ord. 15-09, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. 21-01, passed
5-10-2021)
CHAPTER 113: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS
Section
Transient Merchants
   
113.01   Purpose and intent
   
113.02   Definition
   
113.03   Procedure for operating as a transient merchant
   
113.04   Required conditions
 
   
113.99   Penalty
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 113.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum guidelines for
transient (i.e., temporary, mobile) merchants wishing to conduct business
within the city. This subchapter provides requirements that promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and establish
reasonable and uniform regulations for transient merchants.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 7-14-2014)
§ 113.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT/BUSINESS. Includes any person, individual, co-
partnership, limited liability company and corporation, both as principal and
agent, who engage in, do or transact any temporary and transient business in
the city, either in one locality, or in traveling from place to place within
the city selling goods, wares and merchandise; and who, for the purpose of
carrying on such business, hire, lease, occupy or use a building, structure,
vacant lot or railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise. The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT does not include a seller or exhibitor
in a firearms collector show involving two or more sellers or exhibitors.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 7-14-2014)
§ 113.03 PROCEDURE FOR OPERATING AS A TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
   (A)   Anyone wishing to operate a transient merchant must first obtain a
permit from City Hall. No person shall operate as a transient merchant in the
city without an issued permit.
   (B)   The permit will be reviewed by city staff to ensure zoning compliance.
   (C)   If during the time the permit is in effect the transient merchant
fails to maintain the required conditions, the city may revoke the permit and
the transient merchant activity shall be terminated.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 7-14-2014; Ord. 20-04, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 113.04 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   Approval of a transient business permit is subject to the following
conditions.
   (A)   Transient merchants are permitted in all commercial and industrial
zoning districts (C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2).
   (B)   A copy of a lease agreement, deed or similar document from the
property owner is required.
   (C)   All signage must comply with the Chapter 26 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Transient merchants may not be permitted at a location more than 90
days per calendar year. The owner/operator may reapply for a permit at the end
of their duration, but the transient merchant must be relocated at a minimum of
1,000 feet (measured in radial distance) from the prior location.
   (E)   A site plan must be submitted for review and approval. The site plan
shall include a mapped location of the proposed business, including existing
parking spaces, roadways, sidewalks and buildings; it should also entail
measurements of distance from proposed display/enclosure to nearby parking
spaces, roadways, sidewalks, setbacks and buildings. Aerial photography,
existing surveys or plat will suffice for this purpose. The site plan shall
include any photography of tents, trailers, stands and the like that will be
used. The city has the right to review and/or reject any site plan submitted.
Once approved by the city, all site plans must be maintained by the transient
merchant with the duration of the permit. Any deviation from the site plan by
the transient merchant may result in revocation of the permit and the business
activity shall be terminated.
   (F)   If a transient merchant distributes or prepares food products, a copy
of a permit issued by the County Environmental Health is required to be kept on
file. Revocation of the permit will constitute revocation of the transient
merchant license.
   (G)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any general sale,
fair, auction, Loco Daze or bazaar sponsored by any religious, education,
public service or charitable organization.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 7-14-2014; Ord. 20-04, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as set out
in §
10.99.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 3-9-2020)
CHAPTER 114: PET SHOPS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Unlawful to operate without a license
   
114.03   Sale or display of artificially colored birds or animals prohibited
   
114.04   License to operate pet shops issued annually; fee; application form;
city to promulgate regulations
   
114.05   Inspection of licensed premises
   
114.06   Cruelty to pet birds, animals and fowl prohibited
   
114.07   Pet birds or animals shall be provided with clean and proper food and
water
   
114.08   Licenses; termination, suspension, revocation
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PET ANIMALS. Includes any species of animals, except fish and worms, leeches
or the like sold for fishing bait.
   PET SHOP. Any person, firm, company or corporation maintained separately or
in connection with another commercial enterprise which keeps, handles, breeds,
sells, offers for sale, or exchanges pet animals for the purpose of wholesale
or retail sale. The term PET SHOP shall not include a person, firm, company or
corporation which sells, offers for sale or exchanges less than 25 pet animals
in any single calendar year, nor which keeps lost or homeless pet animals for
the purpose of locating the existing owner of the pet animals or a new owner
and which recoups solely expenses incurred in caring for said pet animal.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997)
§ 114.02 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a pet shop unless a license is first
obtained from the City Administrator.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 SALE OR DISPLAY OF ARTIFICIALLY COLORED BIRDS OR ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No artificially colored birds or animals shall be sold or displayed by any
person at any time.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 LICENSE TO OPERATE PET SHOPS ISSUED ANNUALLY; FEE; APPLICATION FORM;
CITY TO PROMULGATE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The license mentioned in §
114.02 shall be issued annually, January 1, by the City Administrator after an
inspection by a city official, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   The annual fee therefor shall be as set by the City Council and
applicants shall fill in and sign an application form furnished by the City
Administrator.
   (B)   The city is authorized to promulgate regulations creating minimum
standards for pet shops pertaining to the facilities for housing and
maintenance of animals, requirements for feeding and watering animals, sanitary
conditions for animals, disease control and medical care, record keeping
requirements and minimum age requirements of animals to be sold, which
regulations may be enforced by the city employees after they are approved by
the City Council.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997) Penalty, see §
114.99
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 114.05 INSPECTION OF LICENSED PREMISES.
   The members of the City Council, the Chief of Police or any officer or
employee of the Health or Police Department may, at any reasonable time, enter
upon any licensed premises for the purpose of police inspection or to determine
whether the licensed premises are in compliance with any and all ordinances of
the city, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997)
§ 114.06 CRUELTY TO PET BIRDS, ANIMALS AND FOWL PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to beat, injure,
mistreat or otherwise abuse inhumanely, unnecessary or cruelly any baby chicks,
ducklings, canaries, parakeets, rabbits or other pet birds or animals.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.07 PET BIRDS OR ANIMALS SHALL BE PROVIDED WITH CLEAN AND PROPER FOOD AND
WATER.
   All pet birds or animals kept for sale or display or any other purpose shall
be provided with suitable sanitary housing with clean and proper food and water
available at all times.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 LICENSES; TERMINATION, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION.
   (A)   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter, unless
otherwise specifically provided, shall terminate on December 31 following the
date of issuance; provided, however, that any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter may, under certain circumstances, be terminated,
suspended or revoked by the Council.
   (B)   The Council may, in its discretion, suspend or revoke for cause any
license issued under the provisions of this chapter. The grounds for suspension
or revocation shall, among others, include the following:
      (1)   The licensee has filed a petition in bankruptcy;
      (2)   An individual licensee, one of the partners in a partnership
licensee, or one of the officers in a corporation licensee, or any individual
in active management of the licensed business is convicted of violating any of
the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   The licensee has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
United States or under the laws of one of the several states;
      (4)   The licensee has made any false statement in his or her application
for a license; and
      (5)   The licensee has violated one or more of the regulations created
pursuant to §
114.04.
   (C)   The grounds enumerated in division (A) above shall not be deemed to be
exclusive and any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Council for any other reason deemed by the Council
to be sufficient in order to promote and protect the health, safety and humane
treatment of animals in the care of the licensees. When any license is
suspended or revoked by the Council pursuant to the provisions of this section,
or when the licensee voluntarily ceases business, no portion of the license fee
previously paid shall be returned to the licensee or to anyone claiming under
or through him or her.
   (D)   (1)   No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
suspended or revoked for cause by the Council without a public hearing. In the
event that the Council intends to consider the suspension or revocation of any
license for cause, it shall direct the City Administrator to notify the
licensee of its intention to consider the same. The notice shall specify the
time and place of the suspension or revocation hearing and shall be served upon
the licensee or his or her managing agent in the same manner as provided by law
for the service of a summons in a civil action. No suspension or revocation
hearing shall be held before the expiration of 15 days after the date of the
service of the notice upon the licensee.
      (2)   If, upon such hearing, it appears to the Council that sufficient
cause exists for the suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, the Council shall make its order suspending or
revoking the said license.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Every person, firm, company or corporation convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of §§
114.02 through
114.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance
with §
10.99.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-24-1997)
CHAPTER 115: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
115.01   Pawnbroker defined
   
115.02   License required
   
115.03   Application; investigation
   
115.04   Records
   
115.05   Weapons
   
115.06   Minors
   
115.07   Stolen goods
   
115.08   Residency
   
115.09   Term of license
   
115.10   Revocation
   
115.11   Violations
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 PAWNBROKER DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER.
      (1)   Any person who:
         (a)   Loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other
valuable things;
         (b)   Deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable
things, on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price; or
         (c)   Loans money, secured by chattel mortgage, or security agreement
on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged.
      (2)   The term PAWNBROKER shall include within its meaning a corporation
or partnership or other association.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker without having
first obtained a license therefor as is herein provided, or in violation of any
of the provisions herein contained.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.03 APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Application for a pawnbrokers license shall be made on forms
prescribed by the city and shall be filed with the City Administrator and shall
contain thereon the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and date of birth of applicant;
      (2)   Address of the place of business;
      (3)   Name under which the business is to be conducted;
      (4)   Address of applicant for the ten years immediately preceding the
filing of the application;
      (5)   Name and address of all persons having a financial interest in
applicant’s business, including ownership or financing interests;
      (6)   Applicant’s employment record for the ten years preceding the
application with the name and address of all employers; and
      (7)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the
proposed resident manager who shall be a resident of the city and the address
of such resident manager for the ten years immediately preceding the filing of
the application, his or her employment record for each ten year period and his
or her date of birth.
   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by a fee to cover the city’s
cost of investigation as hereinafter set forth, and each application shall be
accompanied by the annual fee for a pawnbroker’s license which shall be as set
by the City Council. No license shall be issued or reissued until the fees
prescribed by this chapter have been paid.
   (C)   Each application shall be forthwith delivered by the City
Administrator upon receipt with the required fees to the Police Commissioners
of the City Council. The Police Commission shall request the Police Department
of the city to conduct a background investigation of each applicant for such
pawnbroker’s license. When such investigation shall be completed, the
investigation shall be transmitted to the Police Commissioners and the
Commission shall consider the investigation report and give an opportunity to
the applicant to be heard upon his or her application and to respond to
questions the Commission may have in connection with the information contained
in the investigation report. Thereafter, the Police Commissioners shall make
their recommendation for issuance or denial to the full City Council. No person
who has been convicted of any felony offense in any jurisdiction, including but
not limited to the receiving or possessing of stolen property, burglary or
robbery of any type, shall receive a pawnbroker’s license, or be approved as
resident manager for any pawnbroker’s license.
   (D)   The City Council shall act upon the recommendation of the Police
Commissioners of the City Council and issue or deny the license.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 115.04 RECORDS.
   Every pawnbroker licensed to do business in the city shall keep a record of
every article pledged with him or her or sold to him or her and these records
shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during normal
hours of business, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances. Such records shall include on consecutively
numbered tickets an accurate description of the merchandise, property or other
thing of value pledged with him or her or sold to him or her, each ticket to
contain a thumbprint of the person delivering the item to him or her. Copies of
all such tickets shall be delivered on a daily basis to the Police Department
by 3:00 p.m. on the next day following delivery of the item to the pawnbroker.
All items sold or pledged must be retained for a minimum period of 48 hours by
the pawnbroker after the delivery of such tickets to the Police Department.
Every pawnbroker shall keep records of the name and address of the person to
whom any pawned merchandise is sold.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.05 WEAPONS.
   No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol,
blackjack or sawed-off shotgun, and weapons, and no pawnbroker shall display in
his or her window or shop any such weapons for sale.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.06 MINORS.
   No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any
person less than 18 years of age, except with the written consent of the parent
or guardian of such minor for each particular transaction. No pawnbroker’s
license shall be issued to any person who is not 18 years of age or over and no
pawnbroker shall employ a person of less than 18 years of age to assist him or
her in his or her business.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.07 STOLEN GOODS.
   It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the Police Department
any article pledged with him or her or sought to be pledged with him or her, or
sold to him or her or sought to be sold to him or her if he or she shall have
any reason to believe that said article was stolen. A pawnbroker shall forfeit
all rights to any property or thing of value pledged or sold to him or her if
such item shall be found to have been stolen.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.08 RESIDENCY.
   (A)   No pawnbroker license shall be issued to any individual who is not a
resident of the city.
   (B)   No person shall be approved as resident manager if not a resident of
the city.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.09 TERM OF LICENSE.
   Each license granted and issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a term
of one year commencing July 1 of each year and expiring June 30 of the
following year, except that the initial license period for a license issued
hereunder shall run from the time of issuance to the next succeeding June 30.
Each licensee shall be required to submit to the City Administrator in writing
prior to May 1 of each year a request for reissuance of his or her license,
such request to be accompanied by the annual fee for said license. In no event
shall a renewal license be approved without the payment in full of the fee
required by this chapter.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.10 REVOCATION.
   Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the City Council at any time for a violation of this chapter. A conviction of a
violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the violation and
may be a sole cause for the revocation of this license. The City Council may
also revoke the license for violations reported to the City Council, after
proper hearing allowing the licensee to appear and contest written allegations
of violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.11 VIOLATIONS.
   Nothing in this section shall in any way affect the right of the city to
proceed to obtain an injunction or restraining order preventing further
violations or to revoke the license of the pawnbroker for violations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 85-2, passed 9-25-1985)
CHAPTER 116: GAMBLING
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   License information
   
116.03   Fee
   
116.04   Period of license
   
116.05   Suspension or revocation of license
   
116.06   Use of profits
   
116.07   Participation in connection with operation of gambling device or
conduct of raffle
   
116.08   Records
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GAMBLING DEVICES. A contrivance the purpose of which is that for a
consideration a player is afforded an opportunity to obtain something of value,
other than free plays, automatically from the machine or otherwise, the award
of which is determined principally by chance, whether or not the contrivance is
actually played (eg. paddlewheels, tipboards). GAMBLING DEVICE also includes a
video game of chance, as defined in M.S. § 609.75, subd. 8.
   MINNESOTA GAMBLING CONTROL BOARD. The Board is an entity which regulates the
lawful (charitable) gambling industry to ensure the integrity of operations and
provide for the lawful use of net profits. Charitable gambling is conducted
only by registered nonprofit organizations. The five forms of lawful gambling
are bingo, paddlewheels, pull-tabs, raffles, and tipboards.
   PROFIT. The gross receipts from the operation of gambling devices and the
conduct of raffles less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local licensing
fees, taxes and maintenance costs for the devices.
   TRADE AREA. As used in this chapter, means the City of Dilworth, City of
Moorhead, Moorhead Township, Oakport Township, and Glyndon Township.
   VIDEO GAME OF CHANCE. A video game of chance is a game or device that
simulates one or more games commonly referred to as poker, blackjack, craps,
hi-lo, roulette, or other common gambling forms, though not offering any type
of pecuniary award or gain to players. The term also includes any video game
having one or more of the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is primarily a game of chance, and has no substantial elements
of skill involved; and
      (2)   It awards game credits or replays and contains a meter or device
that records unplayed credits or replays. A video game that simulates horse
racing that does not involve a prize payout is not a video game of chance.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 116.02 LICENSE INFORMATION.
   (A)   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city provided it is conducted
in accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.763, inclusive, as they may be
amended from time to time; M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23, inclusive, as they
may be amended from time to time; and this chapter.
   (B)   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23,
inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted
unless approved by the Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and
state law.
   (C)   No license for operation of a gambling device shall be issued to any
organization other than a fraternal, religious, veteran or other non-profit
organization covered by M.S. § 290.05, subd. 1, clause (i) or (k), as it may be
amended from time to time. Any such organization must have been in existence
for at least three years prior to filing of the application for gambling
license and must have at least 15 active members at the time of issuance of the
license, and thereafter the organization must have at least 13 members eligible
to vote on gambling matters.
   (D)   Any organization seeking to obtain a permit from the Board shall file
with the City Clerk at least 60 days prior to an event an executed or complete
duplicate of the following:
      (1)   City of Dilworth Gambling Permit;
      (2)   State gambling application for each event held; and
      (3)   Proof of organization’s current non-profit status.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 116.03 FEE.
   The city reserves the right to charge a fee for a gambling license. The fee
for a gambling license shall be as set by the City Council in city code §
34.01. The license fee for a gambling device shall not be modified more than
once in any calendar year. Any change in license fees shall not apply or
pertain to any applications then pending. State fees will also apply.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 116.04 PERIOD OF LICENSE.
   Each license granted by the City Council shall be valid for a period of one
year unless, prior thereto, the license shall be suspended or revoked as
hereafter provided.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 116.05 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Grounds for suspension or revocation. The City Council may, by
resolution, suspend or revoke the gambling license of any organization on the
following grounds:
      (1)   Violation of M.S. § 349.26, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Violation of M.S. § 349.31, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   Violation of any other law or ordinance relating to the operation
of gambling devices or establishments selling liquor;
      (4)   Fraudulent or dishonest gambling devices or any other deceptive or
misleading practice by persons or the organization engaged in the operation of
the gambling devices;
      (5)   Improper record keeping, failure to supply receipts;
      (6)   Failure to allow police officers or other government officials to
examine records or business establishment; or
      (7)   Allowing a person who has been convicted of a violation of this
chapter to participate in the operation of any gambling device or conduct of
raffle within five years from the date of conviction.
   (B)   Procedure for suspension or revocation.
      (1)   Upon direction of the City Council, the City Administrator shall
send to the organization named in the application or gambling manager named in
the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice that, at
the next regular meeting of the City Council of the city, which shall be not
less than ten days from the date of mailing of the notice, the Council shall
consider the suspension or revocation of the gambling license.
      (2)   The notice shall include reasonable notice to the applicant for the
grounds of suspension or revocation.
   (C)   Hearing. At the time of the hearing on the suspension or revocation of
the gambling license, the City Attorney shall present reliable evidence which
shall satisfy the City Council by preponderance of the evidence of a violation
of the state law or local ordinance pertaining to gambling devices. The
applicant may be represented by counsel and shall have the right of cross-
examination of all witnesses called by the city to testify. Reliable evidence
as used herein shall include reliable hearsay, opinion, testimony. After
presentation of the evidence on behalf of the city, the applicant shall have
the right to present such relevant testimony as he or she desires. Upon
submission of the applicant’s testimony, the city shall have the right to
present rebuttal. After conclusion of the testimony, the Council shall, by a
majority vote, decide whether to suspend or revoke the gambling license. In the
event of suspension, the Council may establish such reasonable conditions for
reinstatement as it deems necessary. In addition, the Council may establish a
period of suspension for a period of not less than 30 days.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 116.06 USE OF PROFITS.
   The profits from the operation of gambling devices or the conduct of raffles
shall be used solely for lawful purposes as defined in M.S. § 349.12, subd. 6,
as it may be amended from time to time, and as authorized by a majority vote at
a regular meeting of the organization.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 116.07 PARTICIPATION IN CONNECTION WITH OPERATION OF GAMBLING DEVICE OR
CONDUCT OF RAFFLE.
   No person who is not an active member of an organization or its auxiliary or
the spouse or surviving spouse of an active member may participate in the
organization’s operation of a gambling device or conduct of a raffle.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 116.08 RECORDS.
   Each organization shall maintain records in writing of the operation of
gambling devices or conduct of raffles consistent with the provision of M.S. §
349.26, subd. 13, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Notwithstanding anything heretofore provided for the suspension or
revocation of the gambling license, any person or persons violating or aiding
and abetting, counseling, hiring or directing the violation of this chapter or
any part thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set
out in §
10.99. No person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall serve or be
allowed to participate in the operation of any gambling device or conduct of a
raffle for any organization for a period of five years. Any organization
allowing participation of a person within that time period shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of license.
(Ord. 79-2, passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 17-01, passed 2-13-2017)
CHAPTER 117: SAUNAS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Massage distinguished
   
117.03   License required
   
117.04   Granting or denial of licenses
   
117.05   Revocation or suspension of license
   
117.06   Restrictions and regulations
   
117.07   Construction and maintenance requirements
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE.  The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body
with the hands, for the exclusive purposes of relaxation, physical fitness, or
beautification, and for no other purposes.
   MASSEUR. A male person who practices massage.
   MASSEUSE. A female person who practices massage.
   SAUNA. Any commercial establishment in which is located a steam or heat
bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent.
§ 117.02 MASSAGE DISTINGUISHED.
   (A)   The practice of massage is declared to be distinct from the practice
of medicine surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry,
and persons duly licensed or registered in this state to practice medicine,
surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry, nurses who
work solely under the direction of any such persons, athletic directors, and
trainers are expressly excluded from the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Beauty culturists and barbers who do not give, or hold themselves out
to give, massage treatments, as defined herein, other than is customarily given
in such shops or places of business, for the purpose of beautification only,
are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 117.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to engage in the business of operating a sauna either
exclusively or in connection with any other business enterprise which offers
massage as part of its service without being licensed as provided in this
section.
   (B)   Application for a license must be made in writing, filed with the City
Clerk on the form prescribed by the Licensing Division and verified by the
applicant or if the applicant is a corporation by one of its officers having
knowledge of the facts. At the time of filing an application the applicant must
pay the license fee set forth by the City Council.
   (C)   License fees are in the amount set by the Council from time to time. A
separate license will be obtained for each place of business. The licensee must
display the license in a prominent place on the licensed premises at all times.
The license, unless revoked, canceled or suspended, is for the calendar year or
part thereof for which it has been issued. The license is not transferable and
should ownership change during the license year, the new owner must immediately
apply for a new license and pay the license fee and a new investigation fee as
set forth in division (B) of this section.
   (D)   If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the applicant must
designate a person as the manager and responsible and in charge of the
business. The person must remain responsible for the proper conduct of the
business until another suitable person has been designated in writing by the
applicant and approved by the City Manager.
(Ord. 16-09, passed 8-22-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.04 GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSES.
   License applications must be reviewed by the Police Department, Planning
Department, Health Department and such other department as the City Manager
shall deem necessary. The investigation reports must be submitted to the City
Council who will grant or deny the license applications subject to the
provisions of this section. Renewal licenses must be approved by the City
Council.
§ 117.05 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Manager is hereby empowered to revoke or suspend any sauna
license issued pursuant to this section. The licensee may appeal to the City
Council from the Manager's decision. The following are grounds for revocation
or suspension of the sauna license:
      (1)   Violation by the licensee or any of the licensee's employees of any
of the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The sale or consumption, on the premises, by employees or customers
of alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs.
      (3)   Any conduct or activity contrary to the public health, safety,
morals or welfare.
   (B)   If any license is revoked pursuant to this section, the licensee is
not entitled to make application for a new license for a period of five years
commencing with the date of revocation by the City Manager.
§ 117.06 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Licenses may be granted only for lands in the B-3 General Business
District as set forth in the zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Licenses are granted only to establishments which can meet the safety
and sanitary requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   It is grounds for denial of a license application that the applicant
or persons in the applicant's employ are not complying with or have a history
of noncompliance with any state or municipal regulations relating to health,
safety or morals.
   (D)   A license is not to be granted to a person of bad repute or to a
partnership or to a corporation who has in its employ or is owned by any
persons of bad repute.
   (E)   Saunas will not be opened for business nor will patrons be permitted
on the premises between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the same day.
   (F)   It is unlawful for an employee of the sauna to agree to perform or
perform any of the activities ordinarily incident to the enterprise at any
place other than the licensed premises.
   (G)   It is unlawful for a person under the age of 18 years to be employed
in a sauna requiring a license under the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Upon demand by any police officer, any person engaged in providing
services in any licensed premises must provide identification, giving the
person's true legal name and correct address.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.07 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All sauna rooms and all restrooms and bathrooms used in connection
therewith must be constructed of materials which are impervious to moisture,
bacteria, mold or fungus growth. The floor to wall and wall to wall joints must
be constructed to provide a sanitary cove with a minimum radius of one inch.
   (B)   All restrooms used in connection with saunas must be provided with
mechanical ventilation of two CFM per square foot of floor area, a minimum of
30 foot candles of illumination, a hand washing sink, equipped with hot and
cold running water under pressure, sanitary towels and a soap dispenser.
   (C)   Each sauna establishment must have a janitor's closet which must
provide for the storage of cleaning supplies. The closets must have mechanical
ventilation with two CFM per square foot of floor area and a minimum of 30 foot
candles of illumination. The closet must include a mop sink.
   (D)   Walls, floors and equipment in sauna rooms and in restrooms and in
bathrooms used in connection therewith must be kept in a state of good repair
and clean at all times. Linens and other materials must be stored at least 12
inches off the floor. Clean towels and wash cloths must be made available for
each customer.
   (E)   Individual lockers must be made available for use by patrons. The
lockers must have separate keys for locking.
   (F)   The establishments must provide adequate refuse receptacles which must
be emptied as required.
   (G)   In addition to the requirements contained in this section the licensed
premise must conform in all ways to all of the applicable rules, regulations
and codes of the city.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 118: HOME OCCUPATIONS
Section
   
118.01   Purpose and intent
   
118.02   Applicability
   
118.03   General provisions
 
   
118.99   Penalty
§ 118.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means through the establishment
of specific standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted
in residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health, safety and
general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 118.02 APPLICABILITY.
   Subject to the nonconforming use provision of this chapter, all occupations
conducted in the home shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. This
chapter shall not be construed, however, to apply to home occupations accessory
to farming.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 118.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No home occupation shall produce light glare, noise, fumes, odor or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
neighboring properties;
   (B)   No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be used
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the
premises;
   (C)   Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises. Not more than 25% of the main floor of the
dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the conduct of the
home occupation. It should not change the residential character thereof, and
shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding
residential uses;
   (D)   No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or
involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations;
   (E)   There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or material used in
the home occupation, except personal automobiles used in the home occupation
may be parked on the site;
   (F)   The home occupation shall meet all applicable ordinances, fire and
building codes;
   (G)   There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior
display or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling unit with
the exception of directional and identification/business signs to the extent
authorized by the provisions of Chapter 26 of this code relating to signs;
   (H)   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. unless said occupation is contained entirely within the principal
building and will not require any on- street parking facilities;
   (I)   Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that
which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is parked
closer than 15 feet from the curb line or edge of paved surface;
   (J)   Not more than one person other than those who customarily reside on
the premises shall be employed;
   (K)   The home or occupation shall not involve any of the following: small
engine or auto repair or reconditioning or manufacturing, or sales of THC
products or manufacturing or sales of cannabis, hemp, and/or cannabinoid
products; and
   (L)   All permitted home occupations must be conducted entirely within a
building and must comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-9-2020; Ord. 23-01, passed 4-24-2023; Ord. 24-09, passed
8-26-2024)
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as set out
in §
10.99.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 3-9-2020)
CHAPTER 119: CANNABIS REGULATIONS
Section
   
119.01   Purpose and intent
   
119.02   Definitions
   
119.03   Prohibition of cannabis use in public places
   
119.04   Registration of retail cannabis business
   
119.05   Compliance checks
   
119.06   Location change
   
119.07   Renewal of registration
   
119.08   Suspension of registration
   
119.09   Requirements for cannabis businesses
   
119.10   Performance requirements
   
119.11   Temporary cannabis events
 
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The city recognizes that, based on the most reliable and up-to-date
scientific evidence legalized adult-use cannabis products present a significant
potential threat to the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of
the city, and particularly to youth.
   (B)   The city has the opportunity to be proactive and make decisions that
will mitigate this threat and reduce exposure of young people to cannabis and
related products, and improve compliance among cannabis users.
   (C)   Therefore, this chapter is promulgated to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the residents of Dilworth, and is in accordance with M.S.
Chapter 342, Cannabis, regarding local authority and state requirements
regulating cannabis consumption, cultivation, manufacturing, transport and
retail.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 8-14-2023; Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.02 DEFINITIONS.
   All definitions in this section shall have the meanings as defined in M.S. §
342.01 (enacted under Minnesota Laws 2023).
   CANNABIS FLOWER, CANNABIS PRODUCTS, LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLES, AND HEMP
DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS. Shall have the meanings as defined in M.S. § 342.01
(enacted under Minnesota Laws 2023).
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Private residences, including curtilage and yard, not
generally accessible by the public; unless a person is explicitly prohibited
from consuming cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles
or hemp derived consumer products on the property by the owner of the property.
Usage must be in accordance with M.S. § 342.09.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Property that is generally open or accessible to the public,
except those premises licensed by the state to permit on-site consumption.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property real or personal, that is owned, managed, or
controlled by the city,
including, but not limited to: city buildings and all land therein, parking
lots, parks, golf courses, pathways and trails, and city rights of way
consisting of the traveled portion and abutting boulevard, sidewalks and
trails, and any city personal property, such as motor vehicles, city equipment
and the like.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 8-14-2023; Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.03 PROHIBITION OF CANNABIS USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-
potency hemp edibles and hemp derived consumer products in public places or
public property in the city.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Private property as defined in this chapter.
      (2)   The premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit on-
site consumption of cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles or hemp-derived consumer products.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 8-14-2023)
§ 119.04 REGISTRATION OF RETAIL CANNABIS BUSINESS.
   (A)   Registration required. No individual or entity may operate a state-
licensed cannabis retail business within the city without first registering
with the city.
   (B)   Fees. A registration fee shall be charged for initial registrations,
changes in locations and renewal registrations as listed in the city fee
schedule. The initial registration fee shall include the fee for the first year
of registration renewal. Fees shall be in accordance with M.S. Chapter 342. The
initial registration fee is non-refundable once a completed application is
accepted by the city for processing.
   (C)   Application submittal. An applicant for a retail registration shall
fill out an application form provided by the city. Said form shall include, but
is not limited to the following information:
      (1)   Full name of the applicant and property owner.
      (2)   Address, email address, and telephone name of the applicant.
      (3)   The address and parcel ID for the property which the retail
registration is sought.
      (4)   Additional standards as determined by the city, in accordance with
M.S. Chapter 342.
      (5)   The applicant shall include with the form the application fee and a
copy of the valid state license or written notice of Office of Cannabis
Management (OCM) license preapproval.
   (D)   Compliance check prior to retail registration. Prior to issuance of a
cannabis retail business registration, the city may conduct a preliminary
compliance check to ensure compliance with local ordinances. No business may be
registered that is not in compliance with the zoning requirements of
Chapter 153 and local ordinances, and if applicable, that the business applying
for registration is current on all property taxes and assessments.
   (E)   Application processed. Once the application is considered complete,
the city shall inform the applicant of such and process the application.
Applications shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration to
approve or deny the request. An application for registration by a state-
licensed cannabis retailer shall not be approved if the applicant is unable to
meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   Certification of approval or denial of registration. In accordance
with M.S. Chapter 342, within 30 days of receiving a completed application and
a copy of a state license application from the Office of Cannabis Management
(OCM) or notice of OCM license pre-approval, the city shall process the
application for registration and certify approval or denial on a form provided
by the OCM, whether a proposed cannabis retail business complies with local
ordinances, zoning requirements, and applicable state building and fire codes.
   (G)   Violation of registration requirement. Any state-licensed cannabis
retail business that sells to a customer or patient without valid retail
registration shall incur a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation.
(Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.05 COMPLIANCE CHECKS.
   (A)   Annual compliance check. The city shall complete at minimum one
compliance check per calendar year of every cannabis retail business to assess
if the business meets age verification requirements, as required by M.S.
Chapter 342, and local ordinances. The Police Department shall conduct at a
minimum one unannounced age verification check per calendar year.
   (B)   Age verification check. Age verification checks shall involve persons
at least 17 years of age but under the age of 21 who, with the written consent
of a parent or guardian if the person is under the age of 18, attempt to
purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use products, lower-potency edibles,
or hemp derived consumer products under the direct supervision of a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   Any failures under this section shall be reported immediately to the
Office of Cannabis Management. The city reserves the right to revoke its
registration of the failed business. In the case of a failed compliance
inspection, the city shall wait to reinstate the retail registration until a
determination is made by the Office of Cannabis Management. Other actions by
the city shall be in accordance with M.S. § 342.22 and §
119.08 of this code.
(Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.06 LOCATION CHANGE.
   A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be required to submit a new
application for registration if it seeks to move to a new location in the city.
Initial registration fees shall be required. An existing registered cannabis
business in good standing shall have the initial registration fees for a new
location reduced based on proration of the current paid registration fee.
(Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.07 RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   The applicant shall complete and submit to the city a renewal of
registration form 30 calendar days prior to the termination date of its current
registration. Registration renewals and timelines shall be in accordance with
state license renewals. The renewal of registration shall be processed as per
the application for registration process in §
119.04. The city shall charge a renewal fee for the registration starting at
the second renewal, as established in the city fee schedule and in accordance
with M.S. Chapter 342.
(Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.08 SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION.
   The city may suspend a cannabis business's registration if it violates this
chapter or local ordinances, or poses an immediate threat to the health and
safety of the public. The city will immediately notify the cannabis retail
business and Office of Cannabis Management of the suspension and grounds for
the suspension in accordance with M.S. § 342.22. The Office of Cannabis
Management will provide the city a response to the complaint and perform any
necessary inspections. The suspension of a cannabis retail business
registration may be up to 30 days, unless the Office of Cannabis Management
suspends the license for a longer period. The Office of Cannabis Management may
order reinstatement of retail registration. The cannabis business shall not
make sales to customers if their retail registration is suspended.
(Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.09 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Location requirements. A cannabis retail business shall not be located
within 1,000 feet of a school, and within 500 feet of: an athletic or ball
field, community center, church, day care facility, library, park, playground,
residential treatment facility or facility offering youth activities or
programming. New cannabis retail businesses shall not be located within 300
feet of an existing cannabis retail business.
   (B)   Zoning requirements. A cannabis or hemp business as defined in M.S. §
342.01 and regulated by the Office of Cannabis Management or other state
agency, shall be located and regulated in accordance with Chapter 153.
(Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.10 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   The following performance requirements are required for cannabis and hemp
businesses or uses.
   (A)   State licensing. State licensing, as applicable, is required prior to
the establishment of any cannabis or hemp use. State licensing must be
maintained by registered cannabis and hemp businesses.
   (B)   Taxes and assessments. As applicable, to maintain valid registration,
the cannabis or hemp business must be current with property tax payments and
special assessments.
   (C)   Nuisances. The use must not establish a nuisance in the form of noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odor, lighting or electrical interference detectable
off site. The use must be in accordance with Chapter 94.
   (D)   The cultivation and manufacturing of cannabis and cannabis-related
products is subject to the following performance standards:
      (1)   Cultivation plan. A business licensed or authorized to cultivate
cannabis and hemp for cannabis-related products must prepare, maintain and
execute an operating plan and a cultivation plan, which must include but is not
limited to: water usage, recycling, solid waste disposal, and pest control.
Pest control must include a pest management protocol that incorporates
integrated pest management principles to control and/or prevent the
introduction of pest to the cultivation site.
      (2)   Facility and operation plans. A business licensed or authorized to
manufacture cannabis and cannabis-related products must prepare, maintain, and
execute a facility and operations plan, which must include:
         (a)   Security. Provisions for fencing, lighting, personnel and video
monitoring.
         (b)   Wastewater. In accordance with M.S. § 342.28, subd. 3.
         (c)   Ventilation and filtration. In accordance with M.S. § 342.24,
subd. 4.
         (d)   Solid waste. A plan to destroy all cannabis material and
cannabis byproduct to render it unusable. Waste material must be stored in a
secure location.
      (3)   Retail sales business plan. A retail business licensed and
registered to sell cannabis and cannabis-related products must prepare,
maintain, and execute a business plan, which must include, but is not limited
to:
         (a)   Compliance. Must be in compliance with M.S. § 342.27.
         (b)   Hours of operation. Monday through Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. and Sunday, 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
         (c)   Building conditions. In accordance with M.S. § 342.27, subd. 8.
         (d)   Security. In accordance with M.S. § 342.27, subd. 9.
         (e)   Lighting. In accordance with M.S. § 342.27, subd. 10.
         (f)   Deliveries. In accordance with M.S. § 342.27, subd. 11.
         (g)   Wastewater. Cannabis mezzobusinesses must comply with M.S. §
342.28, subd. 3.
         (h)   Ventilation and filtration. In accordance with M.S. § 342.24,
subd. 4.
         (i)   Solid waste. A plan to destroy all cannabis plant material and
cannabis byproduct to render it unusable. Waste material must be stored in a
secure location.
      (4)   Lower-potency hemp edible retailer. A retail business licensed and
registered to sell only lower-potency hemp edibles must be in conformance with
M.S. § 342.46.
         (a)   Sales of lower-potency edibles is permitted in places that admit
persons 21 years of age or older, unless they are a holder of an on-sale liquor
license.
         (b)   Sales of low-potency hemp beverages are permitted in places that
meet the requirements of M.S. § 342.46.
         (c)   On-site consumption. A lower-potency hemp edible retailer may
permit on-site consumption of lower-potency edibles on a portion of its
premises if it has an on-site consumption endorsement. It shall comply with
M.S. § 342.46, subd. 8.
         (d)   A lower-potency hemp retailer shall maintain its premise in a
clean and sanitary condition, free from infestation by insects, rodents or
other pests and in compliance with state and local building, fire and zoning
codes, requirements or regulation in accordance with M.S. § 342.46, subd. 10.
(Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.11 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   License required. A permit, in conformance with M.S. § 342.40 and
Chapter 113 is required to be issued and approved prior to holding a temporary
cannabis event. A cannabis event organizer is limited to two events a year in
the city.
   (B)   Registration fee. A registration fee, as established in the city's fee
schedule, shall be charged to applicants for temporary cannabis events.
   (C)   Application submittal and review. The city shall require an
application for temporary cannabis events.
      (1)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the city. Said form shall include, but is not
limited to:
         (a)   Full name of the applicant and property owner.
         (b)   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant.
         (c)   Other application and information requirements, in conformance
Chapter 113 and this chapter.
      (2)   The applicant shall include with the form:
         (a)   The application fee. The application fee is non-refundable once
the application is processed.
         (b)   A copy of the OCM event license and/or license application,
submitted pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, subd. 2. A state license is required to be
filed with the city prior to the event.
      (3)   The application shall be submitted to the city for review. If the
application is incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant
with the notice of deficiencies.
      (4)   Once the application is deemed complete, the city shall inform the
applicant as such, process the application fees and forward the application
with a staff review to the City Council for approval or denial.
   (D)   Application and event standards. The application shall address all
areas of the cannabis event and operations and be in conformance with M.S. §§
342.39 and 342.40.
      (1)   Site plan, including event parking areas, vehicle access/egress,
product display areas, customer access/egress, use of buildings or temporary
structures, and fencing type/location to restrict access.
      (2)   Event operations addressed in the application shall include:
security, access limitations, sales, product sampling, transportation of
product, on-site consumption and waste.
      (3)   Event dates and times; hours of operation. Events may be held
Monday through Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and Sunday, 10:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. The event shall be limited to no more than four consecutive days.
      (4)   Emergency plans. The applicant shall provide plans for emergencies
(fire prevention, emergency medical, severe weather, etc.).
      (5)   Sound and noise. The applicant shall address any potential nuisance
situation regarding event sound and noise.
(Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Registration violation penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, subd. 5
(e), the city may impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of
this chapter for violation(s) by a registered cannabis retail business.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. Unless stated herein, the penalty for violation of
the provisions of this chapter is a petty misdemeanor and fined up to $300 or
the maximum amount for a petty misdemeanor as allowed by state law.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 8-14-2023; Ord. 24-10, passed 8-26-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   MINORS
      
132.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct
   
130.02   Offenses against public property
   
130.03   Loitering
   
130.04   Illegal assaults
   
130.05   Dangerous weapons
   
130.06   Trespass over property to which the public has implicit right of
access
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   The following acts are declared to be disorderly conduct and against good
order of the city.
   (A)   Indecent exposure. Any person who shall appear in nude condition or
expose his or her person in an indecent manner in any public place shall be
guilty of any indecent, obscene or lewd act or behavior.
   (B)   House of ill fame. No person shall keep or have within city limits a
house of ill fame, or assignation or prostitution or a room or place for a
person or persons to visit for unlawful intercourse or indecent purpose or any
disorderly house where peace and decency of the neighborhood is disturbed. No
person shall visit or frequent a disorderly house or house of ill fame for any
unlawful, immoral or lewd purpose or behavior.
   (C)   Disturbances. No person shall make or aid in making any improper
noises or disturbances or to commit any act constituting a breach of the peace.
   (D)   Delaying or obstructing police officer. No person shall willfully
delay or obstruct a police officer in discharge of his or her duties.
   (E)   Weapons. It is unlawful for anyone to carry a concealed weapon of any
kind or any dangerous instrumentality as is or may be used in the attack or
defense of a person, or in the destruction of property.
   (F) Discharging weapons. No person shall discharge any gun, firearms or
fireworks except by consent of the Council.
(1963 Code, § 60.03) (Ord. passed 4-8-1985) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall deface or injure any building or structure owned, occupied
or used by the city or injure or damage any tree, shrub or public property.
(1963 Code, § 60.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 LOITERING.
   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person
an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by
requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her
presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this
section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if
it had been believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled
the alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a
loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay
in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the
suspect's escape.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a
police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to
loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk,
street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private
property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the
free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any
person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
§ 130.04 ILLEGAL ASSAULTS.
   Whoever does any of the following commits an assault and is in violation of
this section:
   (A)   Does an act with intent to cause fear in another of immediate bodily
harm or death; or
   (B)   Intentionally inflicts or attempts to inflict bodily harm upon
another.
(1963 Code, § 61.01) (Ord. passed 6-12-1972) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   Whoever does any of the following is in violation of this section.
   (A)   Recklessly handles or uses a gun, pistol or other dangerous weapon or
explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;
   (B)   Intentionally points a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing
a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;
   (C)   Possesses any gun, pistol, switchblade knife, machete or any other
dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used unlawfully as a
weapon against another. For the purposes of this section, possession of a
switchblade knife or machete or other substance of like nature which has no
recognized commercial or household value shall be prima facie evidence that
said possession is for the purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against
another;
   (D)   Sells or has in his or her possession any device designed to silence
or muffle the discharge of a firearm; or
   (E)   Without the parents’ or guardians’ consent, and the written consent of
the City Police Department, furnishes a child under 15 years of age with a
firearm or other dangerous weapon or explosive or any ammunition or explosive.
(1963 Code, § 60.07) (Ord. passed 4-11-1977) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 TRESPASS OVER PROPERTY TO WHICH THE PUBLIC HAS IMPLICIT RIGHT OF
ACCESS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow an owner of real
property to which the public has some implicit right of access to exclude a
person from that property if the person has committed a crime on the property
or has violated the properly posted or otherwise provided rules of conduct for
the property.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COVERED PREMISES. Any improved real property, or portion thereof, within
the city, to which the public has an implicit right of access, including, but
not limited to, places of worship, shopping malls, retail sales facilities,
hotels, motels, nursing homes, restaurants, multiple dwellings, hospitals,
medical and dental offices, clubs, lodges, office buildings, banks and
financial institutions, transit stations, athletic and recreational facilities,
personal service establishments, theaters and day care facilities.
      PRIVATE AREAS. Areas within the covered premises not normally accessible
to members of the public without explicit permission of the person in direct
control of the area, including, but not limited to, individual apartment units,
employee rest areas and facilities, banquet halls, meeting rooms and private
offices.
      PRIVATE COMMON AREAS. Other common areas within the covered premises
normally within the exclusive control of a tenant but subject to reasonable
regulations by the property manager, including, but not limited to, sales
floors, store restroom facilities accessible to customers or clients, checkout
lanes and customer service areas.
      PROPERTY MANAGER. Any owner of a covered premises, or the agent of the
owner or any tenant who is authorized by the owner to exercise control over the
covered premises, including its public common areas.
      PUBLIC COMMON AREAS. All areas of the covered premises, other than
private common areas, maintained for the common use of its tenants or of the
general public incidental to normal and legitimate activities upon the covered
premises, including, but not limited to: the curtilage; parking lots and ramps;
private roadways, sidewalks and walkways; recreational facilities; reception
areas; rotundas; waiting areas; hallways; restroom facilities; elevators;
escalators; and staircases.
      TENANT. Any authorized occupant of a covered premises, or the agent
thereof, but excluding an occupant of a domestic use, such as a renter or
lessee of a dwelling or apartment, resident in a nursing home or a hotel or
motel guest.
      TRESPASS NOTICE. A written notice that contains minimally the following
information:
         (a)   Verbatim copies of this section;
         (b)   The name, date of birth and address of the person to whom the
notice is issued and the name of the person’s custodial parent or guardian if
the person is a juvenile;
         (c)   A description of the specific conduct that forms the basis for
the issuance of the notice;
         (d)   A description of the specific covered premises or portion
thereof to which the notice applies;
         (e)   The period during which the notice is in effect, including the
date of its expiration;
         (f)   The name, title, address and telephone number of a person with
authority to modify, amend or rescind the notice; and
         (g)   The method by which the notice was served upon the person to
whom it was issued.
   (C)   Issuance of trespass notice. A property manager or tenant may issue a
trespass notice to a person only if there is probable cause to believe the
person has, no more than 30 days before the issuance of that notice:
      (1)   Committed an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance
while on the covered premises; or
      (2)   Violated any rule of conduct for the covered premises that has been
conspicuously posted at all public entrances to the covered premises or that
the property manager or tenant has provided to the person in writing.
   (D)   Coverage of trespass notice.
      (1)   If issued by a property manager, a trespass notice is effective
only as to those public common areas and private areas within the property
manager’s exclusive control, except that a trespass notice may also cover
private areas provided the tenant or tenants in control of such areas have
agreed in writing to be precluded from inviting onto the premises any person to
whom a trespass notice has been issued under this section. Such a trespass
notice must state that the tenant or tenants of the covered premises are
precluded from inviting onto the covered premises any person to whom a trespass
notice has been issued under this section.
      (2)   If issued by a tenant, the trespass notice is effective only as to
those private common areas and private areas over which the tenant has control.
      (3)   A notice broader in coverage than authorized by this section shall
not be invalid, but shall be valid to the extent authorized by this section.
   (E)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall trespass in or upon any covered premises of another
and, without claim of right, refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the
property manager or a tenant authorized to exercise control over the covered
premises or portion involved.
      (2)   No person served with a trespass notice in conformity with this
section shall enter in or upon the premises described therein during its
effective period without the written permission of the notice issuer, agent or
assign.
      (3)   No person shall enter any public facility, utility or grounds
thereto, or any covered premises or portion thereof in violation of
conspicuously posted signs prohibiting or restricting access thereto,
including, but not limited to, the following: “No Trespassing,” “Authorized
Personnel Only,” “Private,” “Employees Only,” “Emergency Exit Only.”
   (F)   Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
is guilty of an infraction.
   (G)   Additional provisions.
      (1)   No trespass notice shall be effective for more than one year.
      (2)   All trespass notices issued pursuant to this section must be
properly served upon the person named therein as follows:
         (a)   Personal service documented by either a receipt signed by the
person to whom it was issued or an affidavit of the issuer; or
         (b)   If the person is arrested or detained by a police officer, the
officer may personally serve the notice on behalf of the property manager or
tenant and document service in the officer’s official police report detailing
the incident.
(Ord. 99-1, passed 2-8-1999) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating §
130.04 may be sentenced in accordance with §
10.99.
(1963 Code, § 61.01)
   (C)   Any person violating §
130.05 is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 6-12-1972; Ord. passed 4-11-1977)
CHAPTER 131: MINORS
Section
   
131.01   Curfew for minors
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or Fire Department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food,
clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the minor. The person
providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city
time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work;
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a
civic organization, school, religious institution or similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor’s parent,
guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor;
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew;
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly or freedom of religion;
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence; and
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian or
other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section applies.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (I)   Arrest. A law enforcement officer must look into whether a minor has
an affirmative defense before making an arrest.
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of §
131.01 may be adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to the dispositional
alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260B.198, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of §
131.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 132: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
   
132.01   Offenses related to drug paraphernalia
   
132.02   Definition
   
132.03   Drug paraphernalia guidelines
   
132.04   Forfeiture
§ 132.01 OFFENSES RELATED TO DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to use or to
possess drug paraphernalia. Any violation of this section is a petty
misdemeanor.
   (B)   A person may not deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or
manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, if that person knows or
should reasonably know that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, enhance, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended
from time to time. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 12-01, passed 1-23-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2) below, DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA means all equipment, products and materials of any kind, which
are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, enhancing,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA does not include the possession, manufacture,
delivery or sale of hypodermic needles or syringes.
      (3)   The term PARAPHERNALIA includes, without limitation:
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant, which is a controlled
substance;
         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, including quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, grinders and mixing devices
used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding, manufacturing,
producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;
         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or products or materials
used or intended for use in manufacturing, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         (k)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, including:
            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
            2.   Water pipes;
            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            5.   Objects, sometimes commonly referred to as roach clips, used
to hold burning material, for example, a marijuana cigarette, that has become
too small or too short to be held in the hand;
            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            7.   Chamber pipes;
            8.   Carburetor pipes;
            9.   Electric pipes;
            10.   Air-driven pipes;
            11.   Chillums;
            12.   Bongs; and
            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.
         (l)   Ingredients or components to be used or intended or designed to
be used in manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing or
analyzing a controlled substance, whether or not otherwise lawfully obtained,
including anhydrous ammonia, nonprescription medications, methamphetamine
precursor drugs or lawfully dispensed controlled substances.
(Ord. 12-01, passed 1-23-2012)
§ 132.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA GUIDELINES.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
   (A)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
   (C)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this section;
   (D)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   (E)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   (F)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of any
person in control of the object, to deliver the object to another person whom
the owner or person in control of the object knows, or should reasonably know,
intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. The
innocence of an owner, or of any person in control of the object, as to a
direct violation of this chapter may not prevent a finding that the object is
intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
   (G)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning the
object’s use;
   (H)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object, which explain or depict
the object’s use;
   (I)   National and local advertising concerning the object’s use;
   (J)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   (K)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, for example, a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
   (L)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   (M)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
   (N)   Expert testimony concerning the object’s use; and
   (O)   The actual or constructive possession by the owner or by a person in
control of the object or the presence in a vehicle or structure where the
object is located of written instructions, directions or recipes to be used, or
intended or designed to be used, in manufacturing, producing, processing,
preparing, testing or analyzing a controlled substance.
(Ord. 12-01, passed 1-23-2012)
§ 132.04 FORFEITURE.
   All drug paraphernalia as defined in this chapter are subject to forfeiture
under M.S. §§ 609.531 to 609.5318, as they may be amended from time to time.
All drug paraphernalia possessed, transferred, sold or offered for sale, in
violation of this chapters are hereby defined as contraband for purposes of
M.S. § 609.5316, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 12-01, passed 1-23-2012)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
152.   RENTAL UNITS
      
153.   ZONING ORDINANCE
      
154.   SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Code
   
150.01   Adoption of Building Code
   
150.02   Organization and enforcement
   
150.03   Permits, inspections and fees
   
150.04   Plumbing plans for new or remodeled construction projects
   
150.05   Lock box requirement for buildings
 
   
150.99   Penalty
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The Minnesota State Building Code as such code may be from
time to time amended, supplemented or replaced in the future, pursuant to M.S.
§§ 326B.101 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time, and any
Minnesota Rules thereunder is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in
this subchapter as if set forth in full as the Building Code for the city. One
copy of said code as it may be from time to time amended, supplemented or
replaced under the above statutes and rules shall be on file in the office of
the City Administrator.
   (B)   Title. The Minnesota State Building Code, commonly referred to as the
SBC and may be cited as such and may be referred to as “this code” or “the
code.”
   (C)   Purpose. To provide uniform minimum standards regulating the design,
erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, quality of
materials, location of building, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or
structures in the city.
   (D)   Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all construction,
alterations, moving, demolition, repair and use of any building or structure
including the components therein and including certain equipment specifically
regulated therein, according to the laws of the state, except work located
primarily in a public way, public utility towers and poles, mechanical
equipment not specifically regulated in this code, and hydraulic flood control
structures, within the city.
   (E)   Administration required. The chapters of the Minnesota State Building
Code listed below shall be administered by the city in accordance with M.S. §§
326B.101 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time, and any Minnesota
Rules thereunder as such statutes and rules may be from time to time amended,
supplemented or replaced. In the event said statutes and rules require in the
future any of the below chapters to be deleted or additional chapters to be
added, such chapters shall automatically be deleted from or added to this
chapter and administered by the city accordingly:
      (1)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1300 - Administration of the Minnesota State
Building Code;
      (2)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1301 - Building Official Certification;
      (3)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1302 - State Building Code Construction
Approvals;
      (4)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1303 - Minnesota Provisions;
      (5)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1305 - Adoption of the 2000 International
Building Code;
      (6)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1307 - Elevators and Related Devices;
      (7)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1309 - Adoption of the International
Residential Code;
      (8)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1311 - Adoption of the Guidelines for the
Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings;
      (9)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1315 - Adoption of the National Electrical
Code;
      (10)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1325 - Solar Energy Codes;
      (11)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1330 - Fallout Shelters;
      (12)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1335 - Flood Proofing Regulations;
      (13)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1341 - Minnesota Accessibility Code;
      (14)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1346 - Adoption of the Minnesota State
Mechanical Code;
      (15)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1350 - Manufactured Homes;
      (16)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1360 - Prefabricated Structures;
      (17)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1361 - Industrialized/Modular Buildings;
      (18)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1370 - Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home
Parks);
      (19)   Minn. Rules Chapter 4715 - Minnesota Plumbing Code; and
      (20)   Minn. Rules Chapter 1322, 1323, 1325 and 4215 - Minnesota Energy
Code.
   (F)   Administration optional. In addition to those items listed above,
certain appendices, standards and supplemental materials referenced as an
optional part of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference in the building code of the city as if set forth in full: Minn. Rules
Chapter 1335 - Flood Proofing Regulations, parts 1335.0600 to 1335.1200.
(Ord. 04-01, passed 3-8-2004)
§ 150.02 ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The application, administration and enforcement of the code shall be
in accordance with Minn. Rules part 1300 subpart 1 and 2 and as modified by
Minn. Rules Chapter 1305.
   (B)   The code shall be enforced within the incorporated limits of the city,
within such extraterritorial limits as may be permitted the city by M.S. §
326B.121, as it may be from time to time amended, supplemented or replaced, and
within any jurisdiction entering into a joint powers agreement with the city.
      (1)   The Building Codes Division shall be the enforcement agency of the
city.
      (2)   The City Council shall designate the Building Official for the
jurisdiction of the city who shall be a state certified building official in
accordance with M.S. § 326B.133, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, and any other state rules or regulations thereunder, as said statutes and
rules or regulation may be amended, supplemented or replaced from time to time.
(Ord. 04-01, passed 3-8-2004)
§ 150.03 PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Authorization. Permits, inspections and collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 326B.121 subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time,
and as provided in Minn. Rules Chapter 1300 of the Minnesota State Building
Code, as such edition, chapter and rules therein may be from time to time
amended, supplemented or replaced.
   (B)   Building permit fees. The determination of value or valuation under
any of the provisions of this section must be made by the Building Official.
The value to be used in computing the building permit fee is the total value of
all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish
work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning,
elevators, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment.
   (C)   Building, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning permit
fee schedule. The fees for building, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air-
conditioning permits shall be as set by resolution of the City Council, which
resolution and fee schedules shall be on file in the office of the City
Administrator. The city may from time to time amend and change the permit fees
by an amendment of the resolution or passage of a subsequent resolution.
   (D)   Surcharge. In addition to the permit fees required by division (B)
above, an applicant for a permit shall pay a surcharge to be remitted to the
Minnesota Department of Administration as prescribed by M.S. § 326B.148, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 04-01, passed 3-8-2004)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 150.04 PLUMBING PLANS FOR NEW OR REMODELED CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.
   In accordance with M.S. § 326B.44, as it may be from time to time amended,
supplemented or replaced, the city is hereby authorized to review and approve
plumbing plans on new or remodeled construction projects that serve the public
or that serve any considerable number of persons, said review and approval to
be made in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code as adopted in this
chapter, as a part of the State Building Code, and in particular 7 MCAR § 1.139
Plumbing; provided, however, that the following buildings must have plumbing
plans reviewed by the state rather than the city:
   (A)   All buildings defined by the building code as group A, B, E, F-1, I
and H occupancies;
   (B)   All buildings defined by the building code as M occupancies that
exceed two stories without a basement or one story with a basement or that
contain more than 25 fixture units;
   (C)   All buildings defined by the building code as F-2 occupancies that
exceed two stories without a basement or one story with a basement or that
contain more than 25 fixture units or that contain refrigeration equipment;
   (D)   All buildings defined by the Building Code as R-1 and R-2 occupancies
that exceed two stories without a basement or one story with a basement or that
contain more than 100 fixture units;
   (E)   All buildings containing sprinkler systems, low pressure steam
boilers, hot water boilers over 400,000 BTU input or buildings with uses
involving the preparation or serving of food or drink; and
   (F)   Buildings which, because of the special nature of their plumbing
installation, as determined by the Building Official, are beyond the expertise
of the codes staff.
(Ord. 04-01, passed 3-8-2004)
§ 150.05 LOCK BOX REQUIREMENT FOR BUILDINGS.
   (A)   All commercial buildings, multi-family residential buildings with a
shared hallway, or multi-family buildings of 12 units or more, shall provide a
city-approved lock box and access keys at the owners' expense for emergencies
and/or inspection. If new construction, the city-approved lock box shall be
required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Owners will acquire the appropriate lock box as instructed by the city
and will provide the appropriate security key(s) and installation.
   (C)   This section is not to be construed as a request or requirement for
the owner of such property to place within the security box any master building
or complex key. Owners of properties who choose to place master building or
complex keys in the security box do so at their own risk.
   (D)   Private parties who wish to provide key access to emergency personnel
through the use of a key lock box may do so with the understanding that
providing this access in no way indicates any special right or privilege, and
no contract is implied indicating additional service will be provided.
(Ord. 21-06, passed 7-26-2021; Ord. 24-01, passed 2-12-2024)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
150.01 through
150.04 shall, upon conviction, be subject, in accordance with the Uniform
Building Code § 205 and M.S. §§ 412.231, 609.033 and 609.034, as they may be
amended from time to time. Said penalty and imprisonment provisions shall be
automatically amended, supplemented or replaced by any amendment, supplement or
replacement to the penalty or imprisonment provisions of M.S. §§ 412.231,
609.033 and 609.034, as they may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the within and foregoing penalty, the city may
apply to the District Court for the county for injunctive relief against any
person violating any provision of §§
150.01 through
150.04.
(Ord. 04-01, passed 3-8-2004)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purpose
   
151.001   Statutory authorization
   
151.002   Findings of fact
   
151.003   Statement of purpose
General Provisions
   
151.015   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.016   Establishment of official zoning map
   
151.017   Regulatory flood protection elevation
   
151.018   Interpretation
   
151.019   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.020   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.021   Severability
   
151.022   Definitions
   
151.023   Annexations
Establishments of Zoning Districts
   
151.035   Districts
   
151.036   Compliance
Floodway District (FW)
   
151.050   Permitted uses
   
151.051   Standards for floodway permitted uses
   
151.052   Conditional uses
   
151.053   Standards for floodway conditional uses
Flood Fringe District (FF)
   
151.065   Permitted uses
   
151.066   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses
   
151.067   Conditional uses
   
151.068   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses
   
151.069   Standards for all flood fringe uses
Subdivisions
   
151.080   Land suitability review criteria
   
151.081   Removal of special flood hazard area designation
Utilities, Railroads, Roads and Bridges
   
151.095   Public utilities
   
151.096   Public transportation facilities
   
151.097   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems
Manufactured Homes/Travel Trailers and Travel Vehicles
   
151.110   New manufactured homes
   
151.111   Replacement manufactured homes; existing parks
   
151.112   Recreational vehicles
Administration, Nonconforming Uses and Amendments
   
151.125   Zoning Administrator
   
151.126   Permits, certification requirements and record keeping
   
151.127   Appeals and variances; duties of the Board of Adjustment
   
151.128   Conditional uses; standards and evaluation procedures
   
151.129   Nonconforming uses
   
151.130   Amendments
 
   
151.999   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE
§ 151.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in M.S. Chapter 103F and M.S. Chapter 462,
as they may be amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City Council does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Generally. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This chapter is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
   (C)   National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This chapter is adopted
to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program codified as 44 C.F.R. parts 59 through 78, as amended, so as to
maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize those losses described in §
151.002(A) by provisions contained herein.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.015 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city
shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.016 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The Official Zoning Map together with all materials attached thereto is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study for Clay County,
Minnesota and Incorporated Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map panels therein
numbered 27027C0338E, 27027C0339E, 27027C0340E, 27027C0342E, 27027C0343E,
27027CG480E, 27027C0481E, 27027C0482E and the Flood Insurance Rate Map Index
(Map Number 27027CIND2A), all dated April 17, 2012 and prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the
office of the City Administrator and Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.017 REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.018 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
   (B)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the
decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the
necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the
site at the time the community adopted its initial flood plain ordinance or on
the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area
within the 100-year flood plain if earlier, and other available technical data.
Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustment and to
submit technical evidence.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.019 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.020 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or
land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.021 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.022 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASEMENT (RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL). Any area of a structure,
including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level)
on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or Building Codes and upon a finding that:
      (1)   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist; and
      (2)   The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use
plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. FLOOD
FRINGE is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the Flood Insurance
Study for Clay County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas.
   FLOOD PLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOOD PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term “recreational vehicle.”
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood plain which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris earned by such water.
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a REACH.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be synonymous
with the term TRAVEL TRAILER/TRAVEL VEHICLE.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term BASE FLOOD used
in a flood insurance study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than one foot
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in §
151.112 of this chapter and other similar items.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an
“historic structure.” For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure”
shall be as defined in 44 C.F.R. §
   VARIANCE. A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this chapter to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only
as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship,
practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a
community’s respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.023 ANNEXATIONS.
   The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into §
151.016 may include flood plain areas that lie outside of the corporate
boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this chapter. If any of these
flood plain land areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of
this chapter, the newly annexed flood plain lands shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of annexation into the
city.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
ESTABLISHMENTS OF ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 151.035 DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in §
151.016.
   (B)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those
areas designated as floodway fringe. The Flood Fringe District shall include
those areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as adopted in §
151.016 as being within Zones AE being located outside of the floodway.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.036 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure
shall be constructed, located, extended, converted or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within
the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses
or conditional uses in §§
151.050 through
151.053 and
151.065 through
151.069 that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited.
   (B)   In addition, a caution is provided here that:
      (1)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter and specifically §§
151.110 through
151.112;
      (2)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair or repair after damage to existing nonconforming
structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the
general provisions of this chapter and specifically §
151.129; and
      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must
be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be designed
and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified
in the general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in §§
151.125 through
151.128 of this chapter.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
§ 151.050 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting;
   (B)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and airport landing
strips;
   (C)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails; and
   (D)    Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.051 STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAY PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
   (B)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one
exists.
   (C)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.052 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in §
151.050 and the uses listed in divisions (B) through (H) below.
   (B)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel and other materials;
   (C)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control
structures;
   (D)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines;
   (E)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials;
   (F)   Placement of fill or construction of fences;
   (G)   Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in
existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds,
subject to the exemptions and provisions of §
151.112; and
   (H)   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency
flood event.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.053 STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAY CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill
for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment
or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase
in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood
damages in the reach or reaches affected.
   (B)   Procedures and standards. All floodway conditional uses shall be
subject to the procedures and standards contained in §
151.128.
   (C)   Permissible. The conditional use shall be permissible in the
underlying zoning district if one exists.
   (D)   Fill.
      (1)   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
      (2)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
      (3)   As an alternative, and consistent with division (D)(2) above,
dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-
site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to
the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the governing body
has
received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials from
the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. The conditional use
permit must be title registered with the property in the office of the County
Recorder.
   (E)   Accessory structures.
      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
      (2)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed
on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
flood waters:
         (a)   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
         (b)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately
on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry
flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing
classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at
its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be
used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:
         (a)   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
         (b)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
flood proofed; and
         (c)   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at
least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no
higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using
human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy
this requirement for automatic openings.
   (F)   Storage of materials and equipment.
      (1)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
      (2)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
   (G)   Structural works for flood control. Structural works for flood control
that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or
public waters shall be subject to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 103G, as it
may be amended from time to time. Community-wide structural works for flood
control intended to remove areas from the regulatory flood plain shall not be
allowed in the floodway.
   (H)   Levee, dike or floodwall. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in
the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and
the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both
sides of a stream.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
§ 151.065 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as permitted
uses in the underlying zoning use districts. If no pre-existing, underlying
zoning use districts exist, then any residential or non-residential structure
or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe
District provided such use does not constitute a public nuisance. All permitted
uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe District permitted uses
listed in §
151.066 and the standards for all flood fringe uses listed in §
151.069.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.066 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD FRINGE PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15
feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
   (B)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its
largest projection may be internally flood proofed in accordance with §
151.053(E)(3).
   (C)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to
the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (D)   The provisions of §
151.069 shall apply.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.067 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in accordance
with §
151.066(A) and (B) and or any use of land that does not comply with the
standards in §
151.066(C) and (D) shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application
for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and
evaluation procedures specified in §§
151.068,
151.069 and
151.128.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.068 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD FRINGE CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Alternative elevation methods.
      (1)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts,
pilings, parallel walls and the like, or above-grade, enclosed areas such as
crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall
be considered above-grade and not a structure’s basement or lowest floor if:
         (a)   The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the
structure;
         (b)   It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood
resistant materials; and
         (c)   It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage.
      (2)   The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards.
         (a)   Design and certification. The structure’s design and as-built
condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building
Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
         (b)   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed areas. Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be
designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
            1.   A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be a minimum
of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade. The automatic openings
shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The
automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters without any form of human intervention; and
            2.   That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles
or storage.
   (B)   Residential basement. Residential basements, as defined in §
151.022 may be constructed below the regulatory flood protection elevation if
in compliance with the FP-1 flood proofing classification (i.e., a W1 space) of
the State Building Code and in accordance with the following minimum
requirements, consistent with 44 C.F.R. § 60.6(c).
      (1)   Flood depth: flood depths shall not be more than five feet for
developable lots that are contiguous to land above the base flood elevation
(100-year flood) or three feet for other lots.
      (2)   Flood velocity shall be limited to five feet per second.
      (3)   Flood warning time shall be at least 12 hours. Flood warning time
of two hours or greater may be approved if the community demonstrates that it
has flood warning system and an emergency plan in operation that is adequate to
ensure safe evacuation of affected residents.
      (4)   Basement structural requirements:
         (a)   Basements shall be designed and constructed so that any basement
area, utilities and sanitary facilities below the flood proofed level would be
flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 flood proofing classification (e.g.,
watertight with walls impermeable to the passage of water without human
intervention);
         (b)   Basement walls shall be built with the capacity to resist the
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads as well as the effects of buoyancy resulting
from flooding to the flood proofed design level, and shall be designed so that
minimal damage will occur from floods exceeding that level; and
         (c)   Flood proofing design level shall be an elevation no lower than
the regulatory flood protection elevation where the difference between the 100-
year flood and the 500-year flood levels is three feet or less and two feet
above the 100-year flood level where the difference between the 100-year flood
and 500-year flood levels is greater than three feet.
      (5)   The top of basement floor shall be no lower than five feet below
the 100-year flood level.
      (6)   Fill:
         (a)   The area surrounding the structure must be filled to the 100-
year flood level or higher on all four sides;
         (b)   Fill must be compacted; and
         (c)   Slopes must be protected by a vegetative cover.
      (7)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or
review the building’s structural design, specifications and plans, including
consideration of depth, velocity and duration of flooding and type and
permeability of soils at the building site, and certify that the basement
design and methods of construction proposed are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this division (B)(7).
      (8)   The community Building Inspector or authorized representative shall
inspect the structure to verify that it meets the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Flood non-residential basements. Flood non-residential basements, as
defined by §
151.022, may be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation
provided the basement is flood proofed in accordance with the structurally dry
flood proofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry
flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the
State Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with
the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-
4 classification shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Fill. When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or
other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site
storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge
spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation
control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state
approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state approved
shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to
stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or
regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the governing
body. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the
material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
   (E)   Storage of materials and equipment.
      (1)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
      (2)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
   (F)   Applicable standards. The provisions of §
151.069 shall also apply.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.069 STANDARDS FOR ALL FLOOD FRINGE USES.
   (A)   Generally. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at
or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board
of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
   (B)   Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks
and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in
feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four upon
occurrence of the regional flood.
   (C)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and
parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
division (B) above. In considering permit applications, due consideration shall
be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be located in
flood plain areas.
   (D)   Fill. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria
for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
   (E)   Flood plain developments. Flood plain developments shall not adversely
affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment
limit has not been specified on the Official Zoning Map.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Standards for recreational vehicles are
contained in §
151.112.
   (G)   Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse
and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
SUBDIVISIONS
§ 151.080 LAND SUITABILITY REVIEW CRITERIA.
   No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots
within the flood plain districts shall be able to contain a building site
outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities
that comply with the provisions of this chapter and have road access both to
the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet
below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the
flood plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory
flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall
be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.081 REMOVAL OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA DESIGNATION.
   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES
§ 151.095 PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer and water
supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.096 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES.
   Railroad tracks, roads and bridges to be located within the flood plain
shall comply with §§
151.050 through
151.053 and
151.065 through
151.069. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be
provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would
result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are
essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or
railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption
of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.097 ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Where public utilities are not provided:
      (1)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
      (2)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject
to impairment or contamination during times of flooding.
   (B)   Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state’s
current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be
determined to be in compliance with this section.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
MANUFACTURED HOMES/TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES
§ 151.110 NEW MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by §§
151.080 and
151.081.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.111 REPLACEMENT MANUFACTURED HOMES; EXISTING PARKS.
   (A)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in
flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only
if elevated in compliance with §§
151.065 through
151.069. If vehicular road access for preexisting manufactured home parks is
not provided in accordance with §
151.069(A), then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the
property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the
governing body.
   (B)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.112 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified in division (B) below shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (D) and (E) below.
   (B)   Exemption: recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in division (C)
below and further they meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Have current licenses required for highway use;
      (2)   Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system,
are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used
in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the recreational vehicle has
no permanent structural type additions attached to it; and
      (3)   The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in
any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
   (C)   Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles:
      (1)   Individual lots or parcels of record;
      (2)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds; and
      (3)   Existing condominium type associations.
   (D)   Recreational vehicles exempted in division (B) above lose this
exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural
addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an accessory
structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and
all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure
and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing requirements and the use
of land restrictions specified in §§
151.050 through
151.053 and
151.065 through
151.069. There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or
attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the
recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur.
   (E)   New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of
any existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be
subject to the following:
      (1)   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said recreational vehicle and its
contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and
proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with §
151.069(A). No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this
section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood; and
      (2)   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the
criteria of division (E)(1) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a
conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and the
provisions of §
151.128. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of
all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared
by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that
adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall
demonstrate the provisions of divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above will be met.
All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement recreational
vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or
contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with §
151.097.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
ADMINISTRATION, NONCONFORMING USES AND AMENDMENTS
§ 151.125 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the governing body
shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the
procedures stated in §
151.999.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.126 PERMITS, CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS AND RECORD KEEPING.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance
and repair) or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof; prior
to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land; prior to the
construction of a dam, fence or on-site septic system; prior to the change or
extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has
been damaged by flood, fire, tornado or any other source; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials or the storage of materials or
equipment within the flood plain.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
   (C)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator
shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal
permits.
   (D)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered or nonconforming
use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
   (E)   Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans,
permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits, conditional
use permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and
punishable as provided by §
151.999.
   (F)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification
by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Flood proofing measures shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
   (G)   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
flood plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
flood proofed.
   (H)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner
of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a
permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to M.S. Chapter 103G, as
it may be amended from time to time, this shall suffice as adequate notice to
the Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also
be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
   (I)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease the
100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes
by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.127 APPEALS AND VARIANCES; DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of
business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such Boards by state
law.
   (B)   Administrative review. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as will
not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as
hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for
planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of
such variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the
specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this
chapter, any other zoning regulations in the community, and in the respective
enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance. No variance
shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that
district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area or permit standards lower than
those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
   (D)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal from a
decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a variance, the
Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board of Adjustment
shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the
application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten days’ notice of the hearing.
   (E)   Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall arrive at a decision on such
appeal or variance within 60 days. In passing upon an appeal, the Board of
Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the
findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance the
Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as
those specified in §
151.128(G), which are in conformity with the purposes of this chapter.
Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter punishable under §
151.999. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of such action.
   (F)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Adjustment may be
made, and as specified in this community’s official controls and also by
Minnesota Statutes.
   (G)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained
with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.128 CONDITIONAL USES; STANDARDS AND EVALUATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Generally. The Planning Commission shall hear and decide applications
for conditional uses permissible under this chapter. Applications shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall forward the application to City
Council for consideration.
   (B)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Zoning Administrator an application for
a conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten days’ notice of the hearing.
   (C)   Decisions. The City Council shall arrive at a decision on a
conditional use within 60 days. In granting a conditional use permit the City
Council shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those specified in division (G) below, which are in conformity with the
purposes of this chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable under §
151.999. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be
forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of
such action.
   (D)   Procedures to be followed by the City Council in passing on
conditional use permit applications within all flood plain districts.
      (1)   Require the applicant to furnish such of the following information
and additional information as deemed necessary by the City Council or Zoning
Administrator for determining the suitability of the particular site for the
proposed use:
         (a)    Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures and the relationship of the
above to the location of the stream channel; and
         (b)   Specifications for building construction and materials, flood
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
      (2)   Transmit one copy of the information described in division (D)(1)
to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to
flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the
adequacy of the plans for protection and other technical matters.
      (3)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the City Council shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site
and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood
hazard.
   (E)   Factors upon which the decision of the City Council shall be based. In
passing upon conditional use applications, the City Council shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments;
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other
hydraulic structures;
      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
      (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use;
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
flood plain management program for the area;
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (12)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
   (F)   Time for acting on application. The City Council shall act on an
application in the manner described above within 60 days from receiving the
application, except that where additional information is required pursuant to
division (D) above. The City Council shall render a written decision within 60
days from the receipt of such additional information.
   (G)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. Upon consideration of
the factors listed above and the purpose of this chapter, the City Council
shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
      (2)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation;
      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions;
      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees and other protective measures; and
      (5)   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code
and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing measures
are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.129 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions. Historic structures, as defined in §
151.022, shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (B)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way
that increases its nonconformity.
   (C)   Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection
elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood proofing
techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FF-4 flood proofing classifications) allowable in
the State Building Code, except as further restricted in divisions (D) and (G)
below.
   (D)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of
the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include
all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure, then the structure
must meet the standards of §§
151.050 through
151.053 and
151.065 through
151.069 for new structures depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
   (E)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
   (F)   If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in §
151.022, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new
structures in §§
151.050 through
151.053 and
151.065 through
151.069 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
   (G)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in §
151.022 of this chapter, from any combination of a building addition to the
outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation,
reconstruction, alteration or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an
existing nonconforming building, then the building addition and the existing
nonconforming building must meet the requirements of §§
151.050 through
151.053 and
151.065 through
151.069 for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.130 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be
removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is
in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the
regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the
flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources if he or she determines that, through other
measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the Official
Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) technical conditions and criteria
and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of
Natural Resources must be given ten-day written notice of all hearings to
consider an amendment to this chapter and said notice shall include a draft of
the amendment or technical study under consideration.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions
may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program;
      (2)   When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to
the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources’ and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with
the community’s plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible;
      (3)   (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of
the requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature
and extent of the suspected violation of these controls.
         (b)   If the structure and/or use is under construction or
development, the Zoning Administrator may order the construction or development
immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the
community. If the construction or development is already completed, then the
Zoning Administrator may either:
            1.   Issue an order identifying the collective actions that must be
made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into
compliance with the official controls; or
            2.   Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30
days.
      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall
be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse
of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 2-27-2012)
CHAPTER 152: RENTAL UNITS
Section
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Registration requirements
   
152.04   Exemptions
   
152.05   Registration renewal
   
152.06   Transfer of property
   
152.07   Posting of registration
   
152.08   Fees
   
152.09   Maintenance of records
   
152.10   Maintenance standards
   
152.11   Inspections and investigations
   
152.12   Compliance order
   
152.13   Action plan
   
152.14   Right of appeal
   
152.15   Board of Appeals decision
   
152.16   Restriction on transfer of ownership
   
152.17   Failure to correct compliance orders
   
152.18   Execution of compliance orders by public authority
   
152.19   Alternative sanctions
   
152.20   Conduct on registered premises
   
152.21   Failure to grant registration, revocation, suspension or failure to
renew a registration
   
152.22   Summary action
   
152.23   Applicable laws
   
152.24   Violations, injunctive relief
   
152.25   Effective date
   
152.26   Lock-boxes required
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the community at large and the residents of
rental dwellings in the city.
   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of this chapter that a permanent mode of
protecting and regulating the living conditions of citizens of the city be
established; and that uniform standards be established and applicable for all
rental dwellings in the city.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPLIANCE OFFICER. Any licensed peace officer, city official, city
employee, or agent of the city designated by the City Administrator to perform
inspections pursuant to §
152.11.
   DWELLING. Any building, including a manufactured home (mobile home) as
defined in M.S. § 327.31, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time,
which is intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
   RENTAL. The leasing of a rental unit to a non-owner for a fixed or non-fixed
period of time, and shall include lease to buy, contract for deed, installment
sales, purchases and other similar arrangements whereby nonpayment of a
periodic payment means the occupants may be evicted without the necessity of
either a statutory mortgage foreclosure procedure, a statutory termination of
contract for deed procedure or a statutory repossession procedure.
   RENTAL UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995; Ord. 97-3, passed 7-23-1997; Ord. 22-03, passed
4-11-2022)
§ 152.03 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied or let to
another person for occupancy any rental unit within the city for which a rental
unit registration has not been issued by the City Administrator.
   (B)   An application for registration shall be made upon forms furnished by
the city for such purpose and shall specifically require the following minimum
information:
      (1)   Name, address, phone number and fax number (if owner has one) of
the property owner;
      (2)   Name, address, phone number and fax number (if manager has one) of
the designated local property manager. There must be an owner or local property
manager residing within Clay County, Minnesota, or Cass County, North Dakota;
      (3)   The street address of the rental property;
      (4)   The number and types of units within the rental property (dwelling
units or sleeping rooms);
      (5)   The maximum number of occupants permitted for each dwelling unit or
sleeping room; and
      (6)   The name, phone number, fax number and address of the person
authorized to make or order made repairs or services for the property if in
violation of city or state codes, if the person is different than the owner or
local manager.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995) Penalty, see 10.99
§ 152.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to campus dormitory and campus residence units,
hospital units, nursing home units, retirement home units, nor other similar
units which are otherwise licensed by the state or city.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.05 REGISTRATION RENEWAL.
   Registration shall be required for each calendar year and be issued prior to
January 1 of each year. The city shall be required annually to mail renewal
forms to the property owner or designated local manager on or before October 1
of each year, and such renewal forms may be returned by mail, at the property
owner or designated local manager’s risk, to the City Administrator.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.06 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Every new owner of a rental unit (whether as fee owner or contract
purchaser) shall be required to furnish to the City Administrator the new
owner’s name, address and phone number, and the name, address and phone number
of the owner’s designated local manager before taking possession of the rental
property upon closing of the transaction.
   (B)   No registration fee shall be required of the new owner during the year
in which possession takes place, provided that the previous owner has paid all
registration fees and has complied with all requirements of this chapter and
any violations of health, zoning, fire or safety codes of the city.
   (C)   If any change in the type of occupancy as originally registered is
contemplated by the new owner, a new registration application will be required.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.07 POSTING OF REGISTRATION.
   Each registration holder may post the annual registration issued by the city
in a conspicuous spot near the front entrance to the rental unit, a public
corridor, hallway or lobby of the rental dwelling for which it is issued.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.08 FEES.
   (A)   The fees for registration, a registration renewal, a late fee and
inspection fees shall be in the amount set by the City Council as referenced in
Chapter 34 (Fee Schedule).
   (B)   Whenever any person fails to pay the registration fees and other fees
associated with this chapter, the city may assess these fees against the
property for which they were assessed and such assessed fees shall be certified
as other taxes are certified.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995; Ord. 21-05, passed 4-26-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 152.09 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   All records, files and documents pertaining to the Rental Registration and
Rental Unit Inspection Program shall be maintained by the City Administrator
and made available to the public as allowed or required by state law or city
ordinance.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.10 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
    Every rental unit and dwelling as a whole shall be maintained in accordance
with the building standards of the city and the state and in a manner so as not
to create a nuisance pursuant to the city code.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995; Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.11 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)    Compliance officers are hereby authorized to make inspections
reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   All compliance officers shall have the authority to enter, at all
reasonable times, any rental dwelling or rental unit which is registered
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995; Ord. 21-05, passed 4-26-2021; Ord. 22-03, passed
4-11-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.01
§ 152.12 COMPLIANCE ORDER.
   Whenever a compliance officer determines that any building or portion
thereof, or the premises surrounding either of these, fails to meet the
provisions of this chapter, a compliance order setting forth the violations of
the chapter and ordering the owner, occupant, or agent to correct such
violations shall be issued. This compliance order shall:
   (A)   Be in writing;
   (B)   Describe the location and nature of the violations of this chapter;
   (C)   Establish a reasonable time for the correction of such violation;
   (D)   Notify the owner, occupant, or agent of the ability to appeal a
compliance order; and
   (E)   Be served upon the owner, occupant, or agent, as the case may require.
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, occupant, or
agent if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Served upon the owner, occupant, or agent personally; or
      (2)   Sent by first class mail to his/her/its last known address; or
      (3)   Upon failure to effect notice through (E)(1) or (2), posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the building, or portion thereof, that is
affected by the notice.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.13 ACTION PLAN.
   The compliance officer may require an owner, occupant, or agent to complete
an action plan within a designated time frame that indicates the steps that he/
she/it will take to correct the identified violations and the measures he/she/
it will take to ensure ongoing compliance with the city code of ordinances.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.14 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   When it is alleged by any person or entity to whom a compliance order is
directed that such compliance order is based upon an erroneous interpretation
of this chapter, such person or entity may appeal the compliance order to the
City Council sitting as a Board of Appeals. Such appeals must be in writing,
specify the grounds for the appeal, be accompanied by a filing fee, in cash or
cashier's check, in an amount set per City Council ordinance or resolution, and
be filed with the City Administrator within five business days after service of
the compliance order. The filing of an appeal will stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed unless such a stay would cause imminent
peril to life, health, or property as determined by the City Administrator. The
City Administrator will notify an appellant when proceedings are not being
stayed.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.15 BOARD OF APPEALS DECISION.
   Upon at least five business days' written notice to the appellant of the
time and place for hearing the appeal, and within 30 calendar days after said
appeal is filed, the Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing thereon. The Board
of Appeals may reverse, modify, or affirm, in whole or in part, the compliance
order and may order return of all or part of the filing fee if the appeal is
upheld. In issuing its decision to affirm or modify the compliance order, the
Board of Appeals shall set a designated time frame in which the appellant has
to correct the identified violations.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.16 RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building, or portion thereof, upon
whom a pending compliance order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease, or otherwise dispose thereof to another person or entity until the owner
has complied with the compliance order, unless such owner has furnished a true
copy of any notice of a compliance order to the grantee, lessee, or mortgagee
and obtained and possesses a receipt from the grantee, lessee, or mortgagee
acknowledging receipt of such notice. Anyone receiving an interest in the
building, or portion thereof, who has received notice of the existence of a
compliance order shall be bound by the same without further service of notice
and shall be liable to all penalties and procedures provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.17 FAILURE TO CORRECT COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   Any person who fails to comply with a compliance order within the time set
forth therein is subject to the penalty set forth in § 152.99. Nothing in this
chapter, however, is deemed to limit other remedies or civil penalties
available to the city under this code of ordinances or state law. Each day of
such failure to comply shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.18 EXECUTION OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS BY PUBLIC AUTHORITY.
   Upon failure to comply with a compliance order within the time set forth
therein and no appeal having been taken, or upon failure to comply with the
time set forth in a compliance order following an affirmation or modification
on appeal, the criminal penalty established hereunder notwithstanding, the City
Council may, by resolution, following a hearing upon not less than ten calendar
days' written notice to the landowner, cause the cited deficiency to be
remedied as set forth in the compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall be
a lien against the subject real property and may be levied and collected as a
special assessment in the manner provided in M.S. Chapter 429, but the
assessment shall be payable in a single installment.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.19 ALTERNATIVE SANCTIONS.
   Notwithstanding the availability of the foregoing compliance order
procedures and penalties, whenever the compliance officer determines that any
building, or portion thereof, or the premises surrounding any of these, fails
to meet the requirements set forth in this chapter, the compliance officer may
issue a violation tag summoning the responsible person into court or request
the issuance of a criminal complaint and arrest warrant. Additionally, license
suspension, revocation, or non-renewal may be undertaken by the city whether a
compliance order or violation tag has been issued.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.20 CONDUCT ON REGISTERED PREMISES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that persons occupying
the licensed premises conduct themselves in such a manner as not to cause the
premises to be disorderly.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a premises is disorderly at which any of
the following activities occur:
      (1)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of the city code relating to
the city public nuisance ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of the city code and state
statute relating to noisy parties and other unnecessary and loud noises;
      (3)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of laws relating to the
possession of controlled substances, as defined in M.S. §§ 152.01 et seq., as
they may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of the city code relating to
disorderly conduct or creating a breach of the peace, or violation of laws
relating to disorderly conduct as defined in M.S. § 609.72, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (5)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of the city code relating to
minor possessing or consuming alcohol relating to providing alcohol to minors,
or violation of M.S. § 340A.701 and M.S. § 340A.702, as they may be amended
from time to time, relating to sale of intoxicating liquor;
      (6)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of the city code relating to
prostitution and indecent exposure, or a violation of laws relating to
prostitution or acts related to prostitution as defined in M.S. §§ 609.321
though 609.324, as they may be amended from time to time;
      (7)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of the city code relating to
weapons, or laws relating to unlawful use or possession of a firearm as defined
in the M.S. § 609.66, as it may be amended from time to time, on the registered
premises;
      (8)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of the city code relating to
assaults, including domestic assaults, as defined in M.S. § 609.224, as it may
be amended from time to time;
      (9)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of laws relating to
contributing to the need for protection or services or delinquency of a minor,
as defined in M.S. § 260B.007, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (10)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of any other federal law,
state law or local ordinance which would be likely to threaten, annoy or harass
other tenants or other neighbors to the residential rental unit.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall be responsible for administration of this
section. The authority to take any action authorized under this section may be
delegated to the City Administrator authorized designee or designees.
   (C)   Upon determination by the City Administrator or his or her designee
that a rental unit registered premises was used in a disorderly manner, as
described in the city ordinance, the City Administrator or his or her designee,
shall give notice to the registration holder and the renters of the rental unit
affected, of the violation and direct the registration holder to take steps to
prevent further violations. This section does not apply to the property owner
who has taken action to prevent disorderly use of the premises as described in
division (H) below.
   (D)   If another instance of disorderly use of the rental unit registered
premises occurs within three months of an incident for which a notice in
division (C) above was given, the City Administrator, or his or her designee,
shall notify the registration holder and the renters of the affected unit of
the violation and shall request the registration holder to take action. This
action will be asked to be submitted to the City Administrator, or his or her
authorized designee, within five days of receipt of the notice of disorderly
use of the premises, and shall detail all actions taken by the registration
holder in response to all notices of disorderly use of the premises within the
preceding three months.
   (E)   (1)   If another instance of disorderly use of the rental unit
registered premises occurs within three months after any two previous instances
of disorderly use for which notices were given to the registration holder, and
the renters of the affected unit, pursuant to this section, and the rental
property owner has not taken action to prevent disorderly use of the premises,
the rental dwelling license for the premises may be denied, revoked, suspended
or not renewed. An action to deny, revoke, suspend or not renew a license under
this section shall be initiated by the City Administrator who shall give to the
licensee written notice of a hearing before the City Council to consider such
denial, revocation, suspension or non-renewal. Such written notice shall
specify all violations of this section, and shall state the date, time, place
and purpose of the hearing. The hearing shall be held no less than 30 calendar
days after giving such notice.
      (2)   Following the hearing, the Council may deny, revoke, suspend or
decline to renew the license for all or any part or parts of the licensed
premises or may grant a license upon such terms and conditions as it deems
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.
      (3)   No adverse license action shall be imposed where the instance of
disorderly use of the licensed premises occurred during the pendency of
eviction proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within 30 calendar days of notice
given by the licensee to a tenant to vacate the premises where the disorderly
use was related to conduct by that tenant or by other occupants or guests of
the tenant’s unit. Eviction proceedings shall not be a bar to adverse license
action, however, unless they are diligently pursued by the licensee. Further,
an action to deny, revoke, suspend or not renew a license based upon violations
of this section may be postponed or discontinued at any time if it appears that
the licensee has taken appropriate action which will prevent further instances
of disorderly use.
   (F)   A determination that the registered premises have been used in a
disorderly manner as described in division (A) above shall be made upon a fair
preponderance of the evidence to support such a determination. It shall not be
necessary that criminal charges be brought in order to support a determination
of disorderly use, but the incident must have resulted in the police being
called to the rental unit registered premises and a police report being
prepared.
   (G)   For purposes of this chapter, DISORDERLY USE OF THE RENTAL UNIT
REGISTERED PREMISES shall mean disorderly use in the particular rental unit by
the renters, occupants or guests or conduct by the tenants which constitutes
disorderly use anywhere on the property of the apartment building, or home or
mobile home park in which the rental unit is situated.
   (H)   (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, participation and compliance by
the rental property owner to the provisions of the Minnesota Crime Free Housing
Program shall meet requirements for the rental owner “taking action to prevent
further disorderly use of the premises.”
      (2)   The City Administrator shall determine compliance of rental owners
to the Minnesota Crime Free Housing Program and thereby taking action to
prevent further disorderly use of the premises.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other language of this section to the contrary,
conduct which otherwise constitutes disorderly use for purposes of this section
will not be deemed to be disorderly use for purposes of this section if the
police discovered the domestic abuse or other conduct as a result of a call by
a tenant of the rental unit in which the disorderly use is occurring, or if the
use is occurring outside the specific rental unit, by a tenant of the rental
unit which would have otherwise received notice of disorderly use pursuant to
the terms of this section.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-28-1998; Ord. 22-02, passed
2-28-2022; Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.21 FAILURE TO GRANT REGISTRATION, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR FAILURE TO
RENEW A REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The city reserves the right not to register a unit unless the rental
unit or units for which registration is sought complies with the requirements
of this chapter.
   (B)   Any registration issued under this chapter is subject to the right,
which is hereby expressly reserved by the city, to suspend, revoke or fail to
renew the same should the registration holder or their agents, employees,
representatives or lessees directly or indirectly operate or maintain the
rental dwellings contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the city or any special permit issued by the city, or the laws of
the state; provided, however, registration shall not be suspended, revoked or
failed to be renewed if the registration holder complies with a compliance
order or orders in a timely manner.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall notify, in writing, the applicant that
his or her registration has been denied, or the registration holder that his or
her registration is being suspended, removed or non-renewed. The suspension,
revocation or non-renewal shall occur 35 calendar days after the date of the
order, or at such later date as set out in the order. The notice shall be
served by mailing a copy of the order to the property owner, and the designated
local property manager, if any, as indicated in the records on file in the City
Administrator’s office.
   (D)   If the order is appealed to the City Council, the registration holder
shall receive at least seven days’ written notice of the hearing date before
the Council and, at that hearing, the registration holder, the local managing
agent or an attorney representing the registration holder may present evidence.
After the hearing, the Council may uphold the decision of the City
Administrator, reverse the decision of the City Administrator or enter a
different order with different conditions if the City Council deems it
necessary to protect the public health, sanitation, safety or general welfare
of the community at large or the residents of rental units in the city. The
City Council shall issue written findings of fact and its order within 20
calendar days of the hearing.
   (E)   The decision of the City Council may be appealed by the registration
holder by filing an appeal or an appropriate writ with the Clay County District
Court within 15 calendar days of the date of the order of the City Council.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995; Ord. 22-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 152.22 SUMMARY ACTION.
   (A)   When the conduct of any registration holder or his or her agent,
representative, employee or lessee, or the condition of his or her rental
dwelling or rental unit is detrimental to the public health, sanitation, safety
and general welfare of the community at large, or residents of the rental units
so as to constitute a nuisance, fire hazard or other unsafe or dangerous
condition and, thus, give rise to an emergency, the City Administrator shall
have the authority to summarily condemn or close off individual rental units or
such areas of the rental dwelling as necessary. Notice of summary condemnation
shall be posted at the units or areas affected and shall indicate the units or
areas affected. No person shall remove the posted notice, other than the Fire
Marshal, City Administrator or their designated representative. Any person
aggrieved by the decision or the action of the City Administrator or Fire
Marshal set out in this division (A) may appeal the decision following the
procedures set out in the city code. The hearing shall be conducted in the same
manner as if the aggrieved person had not received summary action; however, the
date of the hearing may be expedited with the consent of the registration
holder.
   (B)   The decision of the City Administrator set forth in division (A) above
shall not be voided by the filing of such appeal. Only after the hearing by the
City Council has been held will the decision or action of the City
Administrator be affected.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.23 APPLICABLE LAWS.
   Registration holders shall be subject to all of the ordinances of the city
and state relating to rental dwellings, and this chapter shall not be construed
or interpreted to supersede or limit any other such applicable ordinance or
law.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.24 VIOLATIONS, INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking affirmative
action under any of its city fire, housing, zoning or other health safety codes
for violations thereof to seek either injunctive relief or criminal prosecution
for such violations in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
particular ordinance or code under which the city would proceed against the
property owner, designated property manager or occupant of any residential
rental dwelling unit covered by this registration and inspection ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city from seeking
injunctive relief against a property owner or designated property manager who
fails to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter on registration
to obtain an order closing such rental units until violations of this
particular chapter have been remedied by the property owner or designated
property manager.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.25 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall not become effective until September 1, 1995, and prior
to that date the current city code shall remain in full force and effect;
provided, however, that the registration application and issuance sections of
the chapter shall become effective immediately, and all rental units must be
properly registered prior to the effective date of this chapter or be held to
be in violation of this chapter. The initial rental registration shall cover a
period from the date of its issue through December 31, 1996.
(Ord. 95-2, passed 7-26-1995)
§ 152.26 LOCK-BOXES REQUIRED.
   All multi-family residential buildings shall provide a city approved lock
box and access keys at the owners' expense for emergencies and/or inspection,
pursuant to §
150.05.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 7-23-1997; Ord. 24-01, passed 2-12-2024)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor and be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.
(Ord. 21-05, passed 4-26-2021)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING ORDINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Purpose and intent
   
153.002   Application of district regulations
   
153.003   Definitions
Administrative
   
153.020   Administrative; enforcement and fees
   
153.021   Nonconforming lots; uses and structures
   
153.022   Conditional use and interim use permit
   
153.023   Rezone requests and ordinance amendments
   
153.024   Variances
   
153.025   Decision making bodies and appeals
   
153.026   Zoning districts; dimensional requirements and permitted uses
Zoning Districts; Dimensional Requirements and Permitted Uses
   
153.040   Transition Zone District (TZ)
   
153.041   Single-Family and Limited Two-Family Residential District (R-1)
   
153.042   Single-Family and Two-Family Residential District (R-2)
   
153.043   Limited Multiple-Family Residential District (R-3)
   
153.044   Multiple-Family District (R-4)
   
153.045   Manufactured Housing Residential District (R-5)
   
153.046   Neighborhood Business District (C-1)
   
153.047   Central Business District (C-2)
   
153.048   General Business District (C-3)
   
153.049   Light Industrial District (I-1)
   
153.050   Heavy Industrial District (I-2)
   
153.051   Traditional Mixed-Use District (MU1)
   
153.052   Rail Mixed-Use District (MU2)
Supplementary Regulations
   
153.060   Off-street parking requirements and standards
   
153.061   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
   
153.062   Planned Unit Development (PUD) overlay
   
153.063   Moving/re-location of buildings
   
153.064   Signs
   
153.065   Fences and screening
   
153.066   Day care facilities
   
153.067   Regulation of towers; antennas and wireless communication
   
153.068   General yard; lot area and building regulations
   
153.069   Garages; Accessory structures; uses in residential zoning districts
   
153.070   Home occupations
   
153.071   Transient merchant regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Title. The official title of this chapter is the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Dilworth, Minnesota. This Zoning Ordinance shall become effective
on December 13, 2010 and is referred to within this chapter as either the
"Zoning Ordinance" or "ordinance". The City Council hereby expresses that
neither this Zoning Ordinance, nor any decision under it, may be challenged on
the basis of any alleged nonconformity with any other planning documents,
including the Dilworth Comprehensive Plan dated February 1998 or Dilworth
Growth Area Plan dated January 2006.
   (B)   Purpose. This is a chapter for the purpose of promoting the public
health, safety, and general welfare, and to implement the Comprehensive Plan.
This is achieved by regulating the location and size of buildings and other
structures; the percentage of each lot which may be occupied; the size of yards
and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the uses of
buildings and structures for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public
activities, or other purposes; and the use of land for trade, industry,
residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, soil conservation, water supply
conservation, conservation of shore lands, flood control or other purposes, and
establishing standards and procedures regulating such uses. As residential
development is considered the cornerstone of development in the city, this
Zoning Ordinance will ensure the availability of an ample supply of land to
meet the diverse housing needs of all residents in a compact and orderly
manner. As housing growth occurs, the opportunity for commercial and light
industrial development must also be accommodated.
   (C)   Intent. To protect the public such provisions are intended to provide
for adequate light and air, safety from fire and other danger; prevent
unhealthy concentrations of population; provide ample parking facilities;
regulate the location and operation of businesses, industries, dwellings and
buildings for other specified purposes; preserve and stabilize property values
by providing for orderly and compatible development of the various land uses;
provide for administration of the chapter; provide for amendments hereto;
provide for official recording of the chapter and all amendments hereto.
   (D)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare and to implement
the Comprehensive Plan.
   (E)   Existing law and conflicting provisions.
      (1)   General. This chapter is intended to compliment other local, state
and federal regulations that affect zoning and land use. This chapter is not
intended to revoke or repeal any other public law, ordinance, regulation or
permit. However, where conditions, standards or requirements imposed by any
provision of this chapter are either more or less restrictive than comparable
standards imposed by other public law, ordinance or regulation, the provisions
that are more restrictive or that impose higher standards or requirements, as
determined by the City of Dilworth, shall govern.
      (2)   Private agreements. This chapter is not intended to revoke or
repeal any easement, covenant or other private agreement. However, where the
regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, then the
requirements of this chapter shall govern. Regulations within this chapter
shall not be construed to modify or repeal any private covenant, deed
restriction or agreement; however, such private covenant, restriction or
agreement shall not provide a means to avoid compliance with this chapter. The
City of Dilworth is not obligated in any manner to enforce or administer
provisions established within private covenants, agreements or restrictions.
   (F)   Severability.
      (1)   If any section or provision of this chapter is declared by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part,
thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
      (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the application
of any provision of this chapter, then such judgment shall not affect the
application of that provision to any other building, structure or use not
specifically included in that judgment.
      (3)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any condition
attached to the approval of a development application, then such judgment shall
not affect any other conditions or requirements attached to the same approval
that are not specifically included in that judgment.
   (G)   Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with this chapter, or inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this
chapter full force and effect.
   (H)   Relation to the adopted Comprehensive Plan. Enforcement, amendment,
and administration of this chapter will be accomplished with due consideration
of the recommendations contained in the Comprehensive Plan for the City of
Dilworth, Minnesota, as adopted and periodically amended by the Planning
Commission and City Council. The City Council recognizes the Comprehensive Plan
as the principle guidance for regulating land use and development in accordance
with the policies and purpose set forth in this chapter.
   (I)   Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority granted by
the Municipal Planning Act, M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.363.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.002 APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. Zoning Map. Zoning
districts are identified on the official Zoning Map for the City of Dilworth.
The district designations are established within this chapter and are duly
coordinated with boundaries as shown on the official Zoning Map. In the event
of uncertainty regarding the exact boundaries of a district, the following
rules shall apply:
      (1)   Streets. Boundaries indicated that approximately follow the center
lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines;
      (2)   Lot lines. Boundaries indicated that approximately follow platted
lot lines, property lines, section lines or other surveyed boundaries shall be
construed to follow such lines;
      (3)   City limits. Boundaries indicated that approximately follow city
limits shall be construed to follow city limits;
      (4)   Railroads. Boundaries indicated as following railroad tracks shall
be construed to be midway between the main tracks;
      (5)   County drains. Boundaries indicated that approximately follow the
center lines of county drains or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines;
      (6)   Extensions. Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of,
features indicated in divisions (1) - (5) above shall be construed accordingly.
Distances not specifically indicated on the official Zoning Map shall be
determined by the scale of the map or field survey; and
      (7)   Vacated right-of-way (ROW) or public easement. Whenever any street,
alley, or other public way is vacated in the manner authorized by law, the
zoned district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall
be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all included in
the vacation shall then, and henceforth, be subject to all regulations of the
extended districts.
   (B)   Compliance required.
      (1)   No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, converted, enlarged, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered, and no land shall be used for any purpose nor in any
manner, unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for
the district in which it is located and without a permit being issued when
required by this chapter.
      (2)   No lot of record (platted property) that did not exist on December
13, 2010 shall be created, by subdivision, deed or otherwise, that does not
conform to the applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and any other
subdivision regulations or other provisions as established by the City of
Dilworth. Additionally, no lot shall be reduced in size or otherwise altered
below the minimum requirements set forth within this chapter.
      (3)   Any permit issued by the city that directly violates any provision
within this Code, whether erroneously issued or not, is deemed void.
   (C)   Territorial applicability. As of December 13, 2010, the use of all
land and every structure within the incorporated limits of the City of Dilworth
shall be subject to the provisions within this chapter. Additionally, any
properties identified within the two mile extraterritorial limits of the city,
joint powers agreements and/or orderly annexation agreements may be subject to
regulations established within this chapter or subdivision regulations as
adopted by the City of Dilworth.
   (D)   Classification of uses not defined within district(s). If a certain
use is not specifically permitted within a zone district, the use shall be
considered prohibited. Any use not specifically identified or permitted within
a district may be reviewed by the City Administrator for compliance/
compatibility with zoning districts and/or applicability of conditional use
regulations. In certain cases, the Council or the Planning Commission, on their
own initiative or upon request of the City Administrator or applicant, may
conduct a study to determine if the use is acceptable and if so, what zoning
district would be most appropriate and also the determination of conditions and
standards relating to the development of the use. This review process may also
require processing pursuant to provisions for conditional uses as set forth
within this chapter. The Council, Planning Commission, or property owner, upon
receipt of the staff study shall, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to this
chapter to provide for the particular use under consideration or shall find
that the use is not compatible for development in the city.
   (E)   Zoning upon annexation. All territory which may hereafter be annexed
to the city shall be considered to be zoned Transition Zone (TZ) until such
time as the zoning designation is changed by action of the City Council.
   (F)   Official Zoning Map.
      (1)   According to the provisions of this chapter, the city is hereby
divided into districts as shown on the official Zoning Map, which together with
all related and supporting information is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this Zoning Ordinance. The official Zoning Map shall be
posted and made available for examination at the Dilworth City Hall. The
official Zoning Map shall be the final authority as to the current zoning
status of land, buildings, and other structures located in the city.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Officer to maintain
and update the official Zoning Map and to record each amendment thereto within
30 days after the official publication of an ordinance approving an amendment.
No unauthorized changes shall be made to the official Zoning Map or information
shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this
chapter.
      (3)   The official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor, attested by the City Administrator, and bearing the seal of the City of
Dilworth under the following words: "This is the official Zoning Map of the
City of Dilworth, Minnesota", together with the date of adoption of this
chapter.
      (4)   In the event that the official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of
changes and additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new official
Zoning Map. The new Map may correct drafting errors or omissions which may have
appeared in the prior Map, but such corrections shall not have the effect of
amending or changing the original Zoning Ordinance or any subsequent amendment.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
PERSON includes an owner or representative of the owner, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an
individual. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular includes
the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory;
the word "may" is permissive.
   ABUTTING. Making contact with another property.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A building or use which, at minimum, meets the
following:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and serves an existing principal building or
principle use;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building
or use; and
      (3)   Is located on the same legal lot, parcel or property as the
principal use. For additional requirements on accessory buildings and accessory
uses, see §
153.069 or district specific regulations.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit either attached to a single-family
principal dwelling unit or located on the same lot and having an independent
means of access.
   ADDITION. A physical enlargement of an existing structure.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any establishment in which an adult use comprises more
than 20% of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located, or more
than 20% of the gross receipts in any month for the entire business operation,
or any business that engages in any adult use, which may include, but not
limited to: body painting studios, bookstores, cabaret, car wash, companion
establishment, massage parlor, health clubs, mini-motion picture theater,
modeling studio, motion picture arcade, motion picture theater, novelty
business, sauna, bathhouse facility or other uses that relate to sexual
oriented activities.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural
activities.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access
to the side or rear of those properties whose principle frontage is on the
street.
   AMUSEMENT PARK. The permanent use for the purpose of providing a variety of
amusement facilities to the public for compensation either in the form of
admission fees and/or fees for use of separate amusement facilities.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any lot or premises, not a kennel, in which strayed or
abandoned animals are cared for on a temporary basis until claimed, adopted or
euthanized.
   ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such
as whip antennas.
   APARTMENT. A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms
which is designed for, intended for, or used as a residence by a single family
or an individual, and is equipped with cooking facilities. Includes dwelling
unit and efficiency unit.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. Three or more dwelling units or apartments grouped in
one building.
   APPLICANT. The owner, their agent or person having legal control, ownership
and/or interest in land for whom the provisions of this chapter are being
considered or reviewed.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A facility which offers a service or package of
services pursuant to M.S. § 144G that meets the minimum requirements set forth
within M.S. § 144G.03. These services may include assistance with self-
administration of medication, assistance with daily living activities (bathing,
grooming, dressing, eating, transferring, continence care or toileting), 24
hour access to health professionals and other specific requirements established
under law.
   AUTOMOBILE OR MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR (MAJOR). Repairs that include rebuilding/
reconditioning engines, frame or fender straightening/repair, collision
services, overall automobile paint services and any service provided under
AUTOMOBILE OR MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR (MINOR). Motor vehicles not licensed/
registered to a patron of the business shall not remain on the premises for
more than 30 days. See SALVAGE YARD for additional information.
   AUTOMOBILE OR MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR (MINOR). Minor repairs, incidental body
and fender work, replacement of parts or any work to passenger automobiles not
exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight, but not including any operation specified
under AUTOMOBILE OR MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR (MAJOR). Motor vehicles not licensed/
registered to a patron of the business shall not remain on the premises for
more than 30 days. See SALVAGE YARD for additional information.
   AUTOMOBILE SALES AND RENTALS. An establishment engaged in the display, sale,
leasing or rental of new or used motor vehicles. Vehicles included, but not
limited to: automobiles, light trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles,
motorcycles, personal watercraft, utility trailers, all-terrain vehicles and
mobile/manufactured homes.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. An area used for retail sales of gasoline, other
fuels, automobile accessories and incidental services. Incidental services
include minor repairs, the replacement of parts, motor services to passenger
automobiles and one-stall car washes provided they accommodate at least three
stacking spaces for cars.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is
partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance
from grade to the floor below is less that the vertical distance from grade to
ceiling. See CELLAR and STORY.
   BAY. Cantilevered area of a room.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. An owner-occupied residential structure
used as a lodging facility where four or fewer rooms are rented on a nightly
basis for guests staying less than a week and in which only one meal is
included as a part of the basic compensation.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The local body appointed by the City Council of
Dilworth, whose responsibility is set forth within §
153.025.
   BOARDER. One who receives regular meals and/or regular meals and lodging for
pay.
   BOARDING (HOUSE) HOME - FOSTER CHILDREN. A family dwelling where parental
care is provided by a family for children not related by blood or legal ties.
   BOARDING (LODGING) HOUSE. A building other than a hotel where, for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods meals and/or lodging
are provided to three or more persons, not of the principal family therein,
pursuant to previous arrangements and not to anyone who may apply, but not
including a building providing these services for more than ten persons.
   BOUNDARY LINES. Any line indicating the bounds or limits of any tract or
parcel of land; also a line separating the various use districts as shown on
the city's Zoning Map.
   BUFFER. The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences
or landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from the
vision of another use or property.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a lot after the minimum setback and
open space requirements of this chapter have been met and minus any easements
covering the remaining space.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattel or movable property of any kind, and includes any
structure.
   BUILDING CODE. The Building Code adopted by the State of Minnesota.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from:
      (1)   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a five foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building
when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet above lowest
grade; or
      (2)   An elevation ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface described in division (1) of this definition, is
more than ten feet above the lowest grade up to the highest point of the
parapet surrounding a flat surface of a flat roof with a parapet less than one
foot in height, to the deck lines of a mansard roof, or to the mean height
level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
      (3)   The height of a stepped or terrace building is the maximum height
of any segment of the building.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the street right-of-way at any story level
of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or any part of
the building is set back from said right-of-way.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. Representatives of the city who have been appointed by
the City Council and/or assigned the responsibility of enforcing provisions of
this chapter.
   BUILDING SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between the building and
the lot line.
   BUSINESS. Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise where
merchandise is manufactured, exhibited, or sold, or where services are offered
for compensation.
   CAMPGROUND. An area or tract of land on which accommodations for temporary
occupancy are located or may be placed, including cabins, tents, and major
recreational equipment, and which is primarily used for recreational purposes
and retains an open air or natural character.
   CARPORT. A canopy supported by posts either ornamental or solid and
completely open on one or more sides.
   CELLAR. That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling which is
wholly or partly below grade and is so located that the vertical distance from
grade to the floor is equal or greater than the vertical distance from grade to
ceiling.
   CEMETERY. A site or property set apart for the burial or interment of the
dead.
   CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST. An individual or person over the age of 18 who
practices or administers massage and has completed a course of study at a
school of massage that is approved by the American Massage Therapy Association
and is a member of the American Massage Therapy Association.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or
periodically.
   CHILD CARE CENTER. A facility licensed by the Department of Human Services
under Minn. Rules, part 9503 and M.S. § 245A in which children receive care,
maintenance and supervision for less than 24 hours per day (see permitted use
chart).
   CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a
religious body organized to sustain public worship.
   CITY. City of Dilworth.
   CITY COUNCIL. City Council of Dilworth, Minnesota.
   CLINIC. Any establishment where human patients are examined and treated by
doctors or dentists but not hospitalized overnight.
   CLUB OR LODGE. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members
paying annual dues, with the use of the premises being restricted to members
and their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such
premises, provided that adequate dining space and kitchen facilities are
available.
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. The development patterns and technique whereby
structures are arranged in closely related groups to make the most efficient
use of the land as accomplished through a Planned Unit Development.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATION. Bowling alley, cart track, jump center, golf,
billiards (pool) hall, vehicle racing or amusement, dance hall, skating,
trampoline, fire arms range, boat rental, amusement rides, campgrounds, park
and similar uses.
   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. Licensed commercial wireless
telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio
(ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE. Any open space including private parks, nature areas,
playgrounds, trails, and recreational buildings and structures, which is an
integral part of a development and is not owned on an individual basis by each
owner of the dwelling unit.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Unless otherwise stated, it is the General Plan for land
use, housing, transportation and community facilities prepared and maintained
by the City Council for the municipality.
   CONCEPT PLAN. A report in map and text form submitted as the first phase of
a Planned Unit Development (PUD) proposal, depicting the location, general
purpose, general type of land use and circulation patterns, primary
relationships between site elements and between the proposed development,
proposed general schedule of development and information on the applicant.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use other than those permitted which must meet certain
conditions to insure compatibility with the land uses in a district before such
a use may be approved and permitted with the City Council.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued by the City Council in accordance
with procedures specified in this chapter, as a flexibility device to enable
the City Council to assign dimensions to a proposed use or conditions
surrounding it after consideration of adjacent uses and their functions and the
special problems which the proposed use presents.
   CONDOMINIUM. A development or a structure housing two or more dwelling units
which are individually owned and which have jointly owned and shared areas and
facilities, which dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of the
Minnesota Condominium Law, M.S. §§ 515.A1-101 to 515.A.4-118.
   COOPERATIVE (HOUSING). A multiple-family dwelling owned and maintained by
the residents and subject to the provisions of M.S. §§ 290.09 and 290.13. The
entire structure and real property are under common ownership as contrasted to
a condominium dwelling where individual units are under separate individual
ownership.
   COURT. An unoccupied open space other than a yard which is bounded on three
or more sides by the walls of buildings.
   CURB LEVEL. The elevation of the established curb in front of a building
measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been established, the
City Engineer shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purposes
of this chapter.
   DAY CARE. A residence licensed by the Department of Human Services under
Minn. Rules, part 9502 and M.S. § 245A in which children/adults receive care,
maintenance and supervision for less than 24 hours per day (see district
permitted use chart(s). Minn. Rules, part 9502 is inclusive of family day care
(subp. 11), group family day care (subp. 13) and M.S. § 245A.02 is inclusive of
adult day care or family adult care services (subd. 2A).
   DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL. A number expressing the relationship of the number of
dwellings to an acre of land.
   DIVERSION. A channel that intercepts surface water runoff and that changes
the accustomed course of all or part of a stream.
   DRAINING. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land.
   DREDGING. To enlarge or clean out a waterbody, watercourse, or wetland.
   DRIVE-IN-RESTAURANT. Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or
serving of food, refreshments, or beverages on the premises, typically in the
customer's vehicle, however, including those establishments where customers may
consume food and beverages on the premises.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for
residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including hotels, motels or boarding houses.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residence designed for or occupied by two or
more families living independently of each other, with separate housekeeping
and cooking facilities for each unit.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A residence designed for or occupied by one family
only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A residence designed for or occupied by two families
only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. This would
include single-family homes with an apartment in the basement. A two-family
dwelling (duplex) with a rooming unit(s) shall be considered and classified as
a multi-family dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT. A residential building or portion thereof intended for
occupancy by one or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating, but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, seasonal cabins,
boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes or trailers.
   DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY. Any one room unit having cooking facilities and
used for combined living, dining, and sleeping purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT OCCUPANCY. Occupancy of a dwelling unit for the purpose of
enforcing provisions of this chapter shall be limited by restrictions as
included in the definition of this chapter.
   EARTH SHELTERED BUILDING. A building so constructed that 50% or more of the
completed structure is covered with earth. Earth covering is measured from the
lowest level of the livable space in residential units and of useable space in
nonresidential buildings. An earth sheltered building is a complete structure
that does not serve just as a foundation or substructure for above grade
construction. A partially completed building shall not be considered earth
sheltered.
   EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other
than the owner.
   ELDERLY (SENIOR CITIZEN) HOUSING. A multiple dwelling built with open
occupancy limited to persons over 60 years of age, or where not more than 10%
of the occupants may be persons under the age of 60.
   ENGINEER OF CITY OR CITY ENGINEER. The registered engineer employed or
retained by the city, unless otherwise stated.
   EROSION. The wearing away of land surface by the action of natural elements.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground
or overhead communication, gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants,
street signs, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public
health or safety or general welfare.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICE STRUCTURES. Structures and buildings necessary for the
operation of essential services, including but not limited to: telephone
buildings, telephone booths, gas regulator stations, substations, electrical
stations, water tanks and lift stations.
   EXTERIOR STORAGE. The storage of goods, materials, equipment, manufactured
products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption or a group of not more than four persons who need not be related by
blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
   FARM. An unplatted tract of land having one quarter-quarter section
containing ten acres or more, or two or more abutting parcels under the same
ownership having an area of approximately ten acres, measured from the
centerline of abutting roads, for purposes of residential density usually with
a house and barn and other buildings on which crops and often livestock are
raised for a source of livelihood.
   FARM; HOBBY. An unplatted of land generally consisting of ten or less acres
in size with a house and accessory buildings on which crops and often livestock
are raised but not as a principal source of income. A hobby farm shall not
qualify for exemptions provided in this chapter for farms.
   FARMING. Process of operating a farm for the growing and harvesting of crops
which shall include those necessary buildings, related to operating the farm,
and keeping of common domestic farm animals.
   FARMSTEAD. A dwelling unit surrounded by or connected to farm buildings, all
under single ownership.
   FEEDLOT, COMMERCIAL. The place of confined feeding of livestock or other
animals for food, fur, pleasure, or resale purposes in yards, lots, pens,
buildings, or other areas not normally used for pasture or crops and in which
substantial amounts of manure or related other wastes may originate by reason
of such feeding of animals.
   FENCE. A fence is defined for the purpose of this chapter as any partition,
structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing mark, barrier or enclosure.
   FILLING. The act of depositing any rock, soil gravel, sand or other material
so as to fill a waterbody, watercourse or wetland.
   FLOOD RELATED.
      (1)   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. Method of determining the location of
encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each
side of a stream are reduced by an equal amount when calculating the increases
in flood stages due to floodplain encroachments.
      (2)   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   FLOOD. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in
inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel.
      (4)   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The average frequency, statistically determined,
for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be
equaled or exceeded.
      (5)   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in
the Flood Insurance Study for the city.
      (6)   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. The areas included in the floodway and flood
fringe as indicated on the official Zoning Map and the Flood Insurance Study
and Flood Insurance Rate Map which have been officially adopted by the city.
      (7)   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. The Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the city.
      (8)   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The Flood Insurance Study prepared for the
city by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated May 19, 1981, and, as
applicable and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for the County of Clay and dated April 16,
1984.
      (9)   FLOODPLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse which has been or
hereafter may be covered by the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the
100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood
Insurance Study.
      (10)   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
      (11)   FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
regional flood determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other
supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.
      (12)   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or
projecting into any channel, watercourse of regulatory flood hazard area which
might impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by the water, or that is
placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of
life or property.
      (13)   ONE HUNDRED (100)-YEAR FLOOD. A flood which is representative of a
large regional flood known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and
reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average
frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval as determined by
the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in
the Flood Insurance Study.
      (14)   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by the natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
      (15)   REGULATORY FLOOD PROJECTION ELEVATION. A point not less than one
foot above the water surface profile associated with the 100-year flood as
determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and supporting technical
data from the Flood Insurance Study plus any increase in flood height
attributed to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which
uses regulated by this chapter are required to be elevated or flood proofed.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal area of all the floors of
a building utilized for principal and accessory uses.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles
and noncommercial trucks not exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight, of the
family or families residing upon the premises, and which no business service or
industry is carried on except for home occupations.
   GARAGE, STORAGE. Any premises, except those described as a private or public
garage, used exclusively for the storage of motor vehicles.
   GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION). The lowest point of elevation of the
finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the
building and the property line, or when the property line is more than five
feet from the building, between the building and the line five feet from the
building.
   GRADING. Changing the natural or existing topography of land.
   GROUP HOME. See RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM for additional information.
   GUEST ROOM. A room occupied by one or more guests for compensation and in
which no provision is made for cooking, but not including rooms in a dormitory
for sleeping purposes primarily.
   HALFWAY HOUSE. See RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM for additional information.
   HEALTH CLUB. A facility which provides athletic activities such as tennis,
handball, racquetball, track, basketball, exercise devises, and the like and
such incidental services as whirlpool, sauna or massage services for members
and guests.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of
a residential dwelling unit, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises and does not change the character of said
premises.
   HOTEL. Any building or portion thereof occupied as the more or less
temporary abiding place of individuals and containing six or more guest rooms,
used, designated, or intended to be used, let or hired out to be occupied, or
which are occupied by six or more individuals for compensation, whether the
compensation be paid directly or indirectly.
   HOUSING SHELTER - TEMPORARY HOUSING. A facility operated by the public or a
nonprofit charitable group or institution which provides one or more transient/
homeless persons with lodging and meals for short periods of time in a place
other than a person's own home.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. An artificial or natural surface through which water,
air or roots cannot penetrate.
   INTERIM USE PERMIT. A temporary use of property until a particular date,
until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no
longer permit it. Zoning regulations may permit the governing body to allow
interim uses. The regulations may set conditions on interim uses. The governing
body may grant permission for an interim use of property if: (1) the use
conforms to the zoning regulations; (2) the date or event that will terminate
the use can be identified with certainty; (3) permission of the use will not
impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to take
the property in the future; and (4) the user agrees to any conditions that the
governing body deems appropriate for permission of the use. Any interim use may
be terminated by a change in zoning regulations.
   KENNEL. Any lot, premises, dwelling or dwelling unit in which four or more
dogs over the age of six months are kept, harbored, owned or otherwise
possessed, either on a commercial basis or scale for boarding or breeding, or
on a private basis for personal use, enjoyment or profit. This includes
commercial dog daycares. KENNEL shall also include the commercial boarding of
cats.
   LANDSCAPING. Planting, such as trees, flowers, grass, shrubs, and may
include the reshaping of the land by moving earth or other physical
improvements.
   LIVESTOCK. Any animals, poultry or other fowl except dogs, cats and birds
owned by the resident of the premises and kept as pets but not for commercial
sale except incidental to their character as pets.
   LOADING SPACE. A space or berth on the same lot with a building, or
contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts
upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
   LODGING ROOM. A room rented as a sleeping and living quarters, but without
cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of
rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping
accommodation shall be counted as one lodging room.
   LOT. A parcel or portion of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum
zoning requirements for use, coverage and area; and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an
improved public street.
   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines, exclusive of any
portion of the right-of-way of any public roadway.
   LOT, BASE. Lots meeting all specifications in the zoning district prior to
being subdivided into a two-family dwelling.
   LOT COVERAGE. Those areas covered by principal buildings, accessory
buildings, and garages but does not include areas used for walkways, access
drives, parking spaces, open patios, swimming pools, tennis courts, and
landscaping elements.
   LOT DEPTH. Lot depths shall be considered to be the distance between the
midpoint of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines
in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
   LOT, FRONT. The front of a lot shall be considered to be that boundary
abutting a public right-of-way having the least width. In a through lot where
the lot abuts a limited access street, the front of the lot will be on the
street opposite from the limited access street.
   LOT IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, place, work of art or other
object, or improvement of the land on which it is situated, a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership; except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-
of-way.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street. In the case of a corner lot it shall be the shortest dimension
on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front line
shall be designated by the owner and filed with the Building Official.
   LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.
If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line of ten feet in length
within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or rear
lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved
and filed, or one unit of an auditor's outlot or a registered land survey, or a
parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered but for which a deed,
auditor's subdivision or registered land survey has been recorded in the Office
of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Ordinances for Clay County, Minnesota,
prior to December 13, 2010.
   LOT, SUBSTANDARD. A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded
in the Office of the Clay County Recorder upon or prior to December 13, 2010
which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks or other
dimensional standards of this chapter.
   LOT UNIT. Lots created from the subdivision of a two-family dwelling having
different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional base lots within
the zoning district.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the
setback line as established by this chapter, or if no setback line is
established, the distance between the side lot lines along the measured street
line.
   MANUFACTURED BUILDING. A manufactured building (or prefabricated structure)
is any structure manufactured in accordance with the requirements of the
Minnesota Prefabricated Structures and Manufactured Building Code promulgated
in accordance with M.S. §§ 16.852 and 16B.61 (state Building Code)
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
in the traveling mode is eight feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in
length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and included the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein,
except that the term includes any structure which meets all the requirements
and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily filed a certification
required by the Secretary of the United Stated Department of Housing and Urban
Development and complies with the standards established under this chapter. In
floodway and flood fringe overlay districts, a manufactured home means a
structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. Furthermore, in floodway and flood fringe
overlay districts for floodplain management purposes, the term manufactured
home also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. See MOBILE HOME.
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. A section of ground in a manufactured home park
designated as the location of one housing unit, and all other necessary
improvements required by this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any park, court, lot, parcel, or tract of land,
designed, improved, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a
location for manufactured home units or upon which any manufactured homes are
parked. It shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the
equipment thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of the manufactured
home park or not. Also referred to as mobile home park or trailer park.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING. A factory-built, single-family, detached housing unit
that is manufactured according to the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and shall include manufactured
homes or mobile homes.
   MASSAGE. The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body
with the hands for the exclusive purpose of relaxation, physical fitness, or
beautification and for no other purposes. It is administered, for a fee, by a
certified massage therapist.
   MASSAGE PARLOR. A place where the practice of massage is carried out.
   MEDICAL AND DENTAL CLINICS. A structure intended for providing medical and
dental examinations and service available to the public. This service is
provided without overnight care available.
   METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION. A description of real property which is not
described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by
starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the
lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a fractional
portion of a section, lot or area by describing lines or portions thereof.
   MOBILE HOME. Any type of potentially mobile structure which is designed
constructed and equipped for use as a single-family dwelling unit suitable for
year-round occupancy, not drawn by its own power, but with its own permanently
attached metal frame undercarriage to which wheels may be attached.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A site, lot, or tract of land under single ownership which
harbors mobile homes and any building, structure, or enclosure used or intended
for use as part of the equipment of such mobile park. See MANUFACTURED HOME
PARK for additional information.
   MOBILE HOME STAND. That part of an individual mobile home lot which has been
reserved for placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures, or addition.
   MOTEL/MOTOR HOTEL. A building or group of detached, semi-detached or
attached buildings containing guest rooms or units, each of which has a
separate entrance directly from the outside of the building, or corridor, with
garage or parking space conveniently located next to each unit, and used or
intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of transient guests
traveling by automobile.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by motor
truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate
shipment by motor truck.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, USE OR LOT; ILLEGAL. A building, structure,
premise, lot or use unlawfully established and in violation of regulations
applicable at the time of development or initiation.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, USE OR LOT; LEGAL. A building, structure, premise,
lot or use lawfully established prior to the adoption of this chapter or any
amendment thereto which does not now conform with the applicable conditions or
provisions of this chapter for the district in which the structure or use is
located.
   NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL. Material capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction, or capable of causing detrimental effects on
the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
   NURSERY, LANDSCAPE. A business growing and selling trees, flowering and
decorative plants and shrubs.
   NURSING HOME. A private building with facilities for the care of children,
the aged, infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but
not containing equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease or
injury. The nursing home shall be licensed by the State Board of Health as
provided for in Minnesota State Statutes.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used.
The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of
occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
   OPEN SALES LOT. Land devoted to the display of goods for purchase, sale,
rent, lease or trade where such goods are not enclosed within a building, and
for the storage of the same prior to sale.
   OPEN SPACE. Any open area not covered by structures, but not limited to the
following uses: required or established yard areas, parking areas, sidewalks,
trails, recreation areas, water bodies, shorelands, watercourses, wetlands,
groundwater recharge areas, floodplain, floodway, flood fringe, erodible
slopes, woodland and soils with severe limitation for development.
   OUTDOOR SMOKING AREA. An outdoor area designated by a proprietor where
smoking or use of an activated electronic delivery device is allowed.
   OUTLOT. A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is
intended as open space or other future use, for which no building permit shall
be issued.
   OUT-PATIENT CARE. Medical examination or service available to the public in
a hospital. This service is provided without overnight care and shall be
considered a separate, independent, principal use when combined or operated in
conjunction with a hospital.
   OVERBURDEN. The earth, rock, and other minerals that lie above a natural
deposit of mineral.
   OWNER. An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation,
trust or any other legal ownership interest in land buildings, structures,
dwelling unit(s) or other property.
   PARCEL. An individual lot or tract of land.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An off-street parking space as specified in §
153.060. Space for maneuvering incidental to parking or unparking shall not
encroach upon any public way. Every off-street parking space shall be
accessible from a public way.
   PARTY WALL. A common wall which divides two independent structures by a fire
wall.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. Criterion established for setbacks, fencing,
landscaping, screening, drainage, accessory buildings, outside storage and to
control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive
hazards, or glare or heat or other nuisance elements generated by or inherent
in uses of land or buildings.
   PERMITTED USE. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and performance standards (if any) of such districts.
   PERSON. Any individual or legal entity; includes an owner or representative
of the owner, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation as well as an individual.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. Land under unified control to be planned and
developed as a whole in a single development operation or a definitely
programmed series of development operations or phases. A Planned Unit
Development includes principal and accessory structures and uses substantially
related to the character and purposes of the planned development. A Planned
Unit Development is built according to general and detailed plans that include
not only streets, utilities, lots and building location, and the like, but also
site plans for all buildings as are intended to be located, constructed, used,
and related to each other, and plans for other uses and improvements on the
land as related to the buildings. A Planned Unit Development includes a program
for the provisions, operations, and maintenance of such areas, facilities, and
improvements as will be common use by some or all of the occupants of the
Planned Unit Development District, but which will not be provided, operated, or
maintained at general public expense.
   PLANNING COMMISSION or PLANNING AGENCY. The Dilworth Planning Commission.
   POLE BUILDINGS. Any structure possessing the following characteristics:
structural wood poles or timbers buried in ground on individual footings; metal
wall coverings hung vertically of less than 28 gauge. Such definition shall not
include or apply to decks, sign supports, earth retention structures,
playground equipment, electric utilities or any similar structure not covering
or enclosing a specific area.
   PREFABRICATED HOME. See MANUFACTURED HOME for additional information.
   PREFABRICATED STRUCTURE. See MANUFACTURED BUILDING for additional
information.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The structure in which the primary use of the lot on
which the structure is located is conducted.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses. A PRINCIPAL USE may be either permitted or
conditional.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts entered into between owners and holders of
mortgages constituting a restriction on the use of property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners.
   PUBLIC. Pertaining to municipal, school district, county, state or other
governmental units.
   PUBLIC USES. Uses owned or operated by municipal, school districts, county,
state or other governmental units.
   PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters of the state which serve a beneficial public
purpose, as defined in M.S. § 105.37, subd. 6, not including, however, a lake,
pond or flowage of less than ten acres in size or a river stream having a total
drainage area less than two square miles. In addition, bodies of water created
by private users, where there was not previous shoreland (for a designated
private use authorized by the Commissioner of Natural Resources) shall also not
be considered public waters. The official determination of the size and
physical limits of the drainage areas of rivers and streams shall be made by
the Commissioner of Natural Resources. The official size of lakes, ponds or
flowage shall be the area listed in the Division of Waters, Soils and Minerals
Bulletin 25, An Inventory of Minnesota Lakes, or in the event that lakes, ponds
or flowage are not listed therein, official determination of size and physical
limits shall be made by the Commissioner in cooperation with the City of
Dilworth.
   PUBLICATION. Notice placed in the official city newspaper stating time,
location and date of meeting and description of topic.
   RECREATION FIELD OR BUILDING. An area of land, water or any building in
which amusement, recreation or athletic sports are provided for public or semi-
public use, whether temporary or permanent, except a theater, whether provision
is made for the accommodation of an assembly or not. A golf course, arena,
baseball park, stadium, circus or gymnasium is a recreation field or building
for the purpose of this chapter.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Manufactured homes less than 30 feet in overall
length, including those with telescope or fold down, chassis, mounted campers,
house cars, motor homes, tent trailers, slip-in-campers (those mounted in a
pickup truck or similar vehicle), converted buses and converted vans used
primarily for recreational purposes. Cars used for racing shall not be included
within this definition. See TRAVEL TRAILER.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility in which recoverable resources, such as
newspaper, glass, and metal are collected, separated and processed prior to
shipment to others who will use those materials to manufacture new products.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY/PROGRAM. A program that provides 24 hour a day care,
supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education, habilitation
or treatment outside a person's own home, including home and community services
that are provided in or outside of a person's own home licensed under M.S. Ch.
245.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment which serves food to be consumed primarily
while seated at tables or booths within the building.
   RETAIL. The sale of items directly to the consumer.
   RETIREMENT HOME. A retirement facility for the elderly who are generally in
good health and able to care for themselves. Such facilities are characterized
as having separate dwelling units or sleeping rooms with or without central
eating facilities. Such facilities do not contain health facilities for the
care of occupants. This definition shall include public housing for the
elderly.
   ROOMER. One who rents a room and eats meals elsewhere.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling in which more than three persons either
individually or as families are housed or lodged for hire, with or without
meals. A boarding house or furnished room house shall be deemed a ROOMING
HOUSE.
   ROOMING UNIT. A separate room providing minimum housing accommodations for a
tenant with direct access to the outside or access through a hallway to an
outside entrance, arranged primarily for sleeping and which may include a
private bath but shall not include any kitchen equipment such as a sink or
cooking device.
   SALVAGE YARD. A parcel where used or second hand materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including, but not
limited to: scrap iron, rubber, tires, lumber, parts, automobiles and
automobile parts. Any parcel that contains two or more vehicles, which for a
period exceeding 30 days have not been in operating condition and/or not
licensed shall constitute evidence and classification of a salvage yard. Any
motor vehicle, which for a period exceeding 30 days is inoperable and/or not
licensed, shall hereby be deemed a junk vehicle. Salvage yards do not include
uses established entirely within closed buildings or sanitary landfills.
   SATELLITE DISH. A combination of: 1) antenna or dish antenna whose purpose
is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other
extraterrestrial sources; 2) a low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at
the focal point of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and
transfer signals; 3) a coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into
the interior of the building.
   SATELLITE DISH HEIGHT. Shall mean the height of the antenna or dish measured
vertically from the highest point of the antenna or dish when positioned for
operation, to the tip of the foundation which supports the antenna.
   SCHOOL. A building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary
education, which meets all the requirements of compulsory education laws of the
State of Minnesota, and not providing residential accommodations.
   SEMI-PUBLIC USE. Uses owned by private or private nonprofit organizations
which are open to some, but not all of the public, such as denominational
cemeteries, private schools, clubs, lodges, recreational facilities, churches,
and the like.
   SEPTIC SEWER SYSTEM. A septic sewer disposal system consists of: septic
tank, absorption field of standard trenches or a dry well, house sewer and
outlet sewer. In the septic tank, bacterial action breaks down sewage. Standard
trenches or a dry well handles final disposal of liquid from the septic tank.
The house sewer brings wastes to the tank and the outlet sewer carries sewage
liquids (effluent) from the absorption field.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distances between a structure and the
property line nearest thereto. For purposes of earth shelter buildings only,
above grade portions shall be used in determining setback requirements.
Distances are to be measured from the most outwardly extended portion of the
structure at ground level, except as provided herein after.
   SHOPPING CENTER. An integrated grouping of commercial stores, under single
ownership or control.
   SIGN. Any letter, word, symbol, device, poster, picture, statuary, reading
matter of representation in the nature of an advertisement, announcement,
message or visual communication whether painted, pasted, printed, affixed or
constructed which is displayed outdoors for informational purposes. It shall
include, but not be limited to, the following types and purposes of signs:
advertising, area identification, business, directional, flashing, free-
standing, illuminated, institutional, nameplate, pylon, rotating, swinging,
temporary, portable and traffic control.
   SIGNS, BILLBOARDS. A device that contains a message or messages relating to
an activity or product that is foreign to the site on which the device and
message(s) are located or an advertising device erected by a company or
individual for the purpose of selling advertising messages for profit.
   SIGNS, OFF-PREMISE. Signs directing attention to a business, profession,
product, service, activity, or entertainment and where the activity is
conducted, sold or offered on a different premises upon which the sign is
located
   SIGNS, ON-PREMISE. Signs directing attention to a business, profession,
product, service, activity, or entertainment and where the activity is
conducted, sold or offered on the same premises upon which the sign is located.
   SIGNS, PORTABLE. Any sign which is constructed so as to be movable, either
by skids, wheels, truck or other conveyance; any sign which does not have a
permanent foundation or is not otherwise permanently fastened to the ground,
and cloth signs or banners (of any material) shall be considered portable
signs. When on a trailer, the removal of wheels or undercarriage does not place
the sign in another category, nor does the anchoring of the sign by means of
concrete blocks, sandbags, or other types of temporary anchors.
   SITE PLAN. A map drawn to scale depicting the development of a tract of
land, including, but not limited to, the location and relationship of
structures, streets, driveways, recreation areas, utilities, landscaping and
walkways, as related to a proposed development.
   SLOPE. Means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal,
usually expressed in percent of degrees.
   SMOKING PATIO. A partially enclosed space, open to the outdoors, where
smoking or use of an activated electronic delivery device is allowed. The
smoking patio shall be less than 50% enclosed and have no more than two walls,
whether they are retractable, temporary or permanent.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Any solar collector or other solar device or any
structural design of a building whose primary purpose is to collect, convert
and store solar energy for useful purposes including heating and cooling of
buildings, domestic water heating, electric power generation and other energy
using processes.
   STACKING AREA. That area which allows for a line of automobiles in such
instances as drive-up tellers and other vehicle service areas.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, including below ground
portions of earth sheltered buildings, except that the topmost story shall be
that portion of a building included between the uppermost surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement, or unused underfloor space is more than six feet
above grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is
more than twelve feet above such grade as defined herein at any point, such as
basement or unused underfloor space shall be considered as a story.
   STREET. A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, through way, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated, which has been
dedicated to the public for public use and which affords principal means of
access to abutting property.
   STREET LINE. The right-of-way line of a street.
   STREET PAVEMENT. The wearing or exposed surface of a street or roadway used
by vehicular traffic.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the curb lines of a street.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, which
would prolong, or modify the life of the supporting members of a building, such
as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
   STRUCTURE. Anything which is built, constructed or erected; an edifice or
building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner whether temporary or
permanent in character. Among other things, structures including buildings,
manufactured homes, walls, fences, towers, antennas, swimming pools, billboards
and poster panels.
   SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION. The stage when a construction project is deemed
sufficiently completed to the point where the owner can use it for its intended
purpose. The project engineer, architect, construction manager, the owner or
the owner's designated representative shall make this determination.
   SUPPLY YARDS. A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and
similar goods. Supply yards do not include the wrecking, salvaging, dismantling
or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
   SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered under Minnesota state laws.
   SWIMMING POOL. A structure designed to be used for swimming which has the
capacity of 5,000 gallons or more which has a depth of over 24 inches.
   TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE DWELLING. Pursuant to authority granted by M.S.
§ 462.3593, subd. 9, the City of Dilworth opts-out of the requirements of M.S.
§ 462.3593, which defines and regulates TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE DWELLINGS.
   TOWER. Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination
thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces
and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna,
meteorological device or similar apparatus above grade.
   TOWN HOUSES. Structures housing two or more dwelling units contiguous with
each other only by the sharing of one common wall between units and occupying
its own lot.
   TRAILER PARKS. A park, court, camp site, lot, parcel or tract of land
designed, maintained, or intended for the purpose of supplying the location or
accommodations for any trailers, as defined herein, and upon which said
trailers are parked. The term trailer park shall include all buildings used or
intended for use as a part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made
for the use of the park and its facilities or not. TRAILER PARK shall not
include automobile, mobile home or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied
trailers or mobile homes are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
   TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL. Taxi, air, train, bus and mass transit terminal and
storage areas.
   TRAVEL TRAILER.
      (1)   Any vehicle or structure designed and used for human living
quarters which meets all of the following qualifications:
         (a)   Is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or occupant;
         (b)   Is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant
while engaged in recreational or vacation activities; and
         (c)   Is towed or otherwise transported, by its own or by other motive
power on the public streets or highways incidental to such recreational or
vacation activity.
      (2)   The term TRAILER shall not include mobile home. The term TRAILER
shall include, but not be limited to campers, camper tents, house trailers,
camping trailers, travel trailers, tent trailers, motor homes, and any self-
propelled vehicle constructed to provide living accommodations.
   TRUCK STOP. A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of trucks
and which shall include eating and/or sleeping facilities.
   USABLE OPEN SPACE. A required ground area or terrace area on a lot which is
graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and maintained for
either active or passive recreation or both, available to and usable by all
persons occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit on the lot and their guests.
Such areas shall be grassed and landscaped or covered only for recreational
purpose. Roofs, driveways and parking areas shall not constitute usable open
space.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied, utilized or
maintained, and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by
the performance standards of this chapter.
   VARIANCE. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance
where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions
of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is
authorized only for area, size of structure, size of yards, setback and side
yard requirements, and parking requirements; establishment or expansion of a
use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance
be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or
adjoining zoning districts.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. The uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and
care of animals, including animal or pet hospitals.
   WAREHOUSING. The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed
building.
   WATERSHED. The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage system,
bounded peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage
areas.
   WETLANDS.
      (1)   An area where water stands near, at or above the soil surface
during a significant portion of most years, saturating the soil and supporting
a predominately aquatic form of vegetation, and which may have the following
characteristics:
         (a)   Vegetation belonging to the marsh (emergent aquatic), bog, fen,
sedge meadow, shrubland, southern lowland forest (lowland hardwood), and
northern lowland forest (conifer swamp) communities. (These communities
correspond roughly to wetland types 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 described by the
United States Fish and Wildlife Services, Circular 39, Wetlands of the U.S.
1956);
         (b)   Mineral soils with gley horizons or organic soils belonging to
the Histosol order (peat and muck); and/or
         (c)   Soil which is waterlogged or covered with water at least three
months of the year.
      (2)   Swamps, bogs, marshes, potholes, wet meadows and sloughs are
wetlands, and such property may be shallow waterbodies, the waters of which are
stagnant or actuated by very feeble currents, and may at times be sufficiently
dry to permit tillage, but would require drainage to be made arable. The edge
of a wetland is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
   WHOLESALING. The selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to
another business that in turn sell to the final customer.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). Any device that is designed to convert
wind power to another form of energy such as electricity, mechanical, or heat
(also referred to as wind charger, wind turbine, or windmill).
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining
the width of a side yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line and
the main building shall be used.
   YARD, DEPTH OF. The mean horizontal distance between the line of a building
and the lot line.
   YARD, REQUIRED. That distance specified in the yard requirements pertaining
to setbacks. Setbacks and required yards are used interchangeably.
   YARD TYPE.
      (1)   FRONT YARD. The space extending between side lot lines from the
front property line and the building setback line.
      (2)   REAR YARD. A space extending between the rear line of the principal
structure and the rear line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
      (3)   SIDE YARD. A space between the building and the side line of the
lot and extending from the lot line to the rear yard. In the case of through
lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of the front yards required.
In the case of corner lots with normal frontage, there will be only one side
yard, adjacent to the interior lot. In the case of the corner lots with
reversed frontage, the yards remaining after the full and half-depth front
yards have been established shall be considered to be side yards. Width of
required side yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line
joining the ends of front and rear lot lines on the same side of the lot. The
inner side yard line of a required side yard shall be parallel to the straight
line so established.
   ZERO LOT LINE. The reduction of side yard setback requirements to zero,
permitting the placement of a structure near or adjacent to the side yard lot
line. With zero lot line, no portion of the structure or accessory appurtenance
shall project over the lot line, unless easements are provided.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The duly appointed officer charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   ZONING AMENDMENT. A change authorized by the city either in the allowed use
within a district or in the boundaries of the district.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas of the city (as delineated on the Zoning
Map) set aside for specific uses with specific regulations and provisions for
use and development as defined by this chapter.
   ZONING DISTRICT OVERLAY. A zoning district containing regulations
superimposed upon other zoning district regulations and superseding the
underlying zoning district use regulations.
   ZONING DISTRICT UNDERLYING. All zoning districts except overlay zoning
districts.
   ZONING MAP. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as part thereof,
designating the zoning districts.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 21-02, passed 3-8-2021; Ord. 24-02, passed 3-11-2024;
Ord. 24-04, passed 4-8-2024; Ord. 24-11, passed 11-12-2024)
ADMINISTRATIVE
§ 153.020 ADMINISTRATIVE; ENFORCEMENT AND FEES.
   (A)   Designated Building Official.
      (1)   The Building Official(s) designated by the City Council shall
administer and enforce this chapter and may be provided with the assistance of
other persons as authorized by the City Council.
      (2)   The Building Official reviews construction plans and inspects
construction for compliance with the Building Code. If the Building Official
finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he/she
shall notify the person responsible for such violation in writing, indicating
the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
The Building Official shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land,
buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures, or of the
additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this
chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
   (B)   Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator has authority granted
by the City Council, and is responsible for enforcement, maintenance, and
administration of the Zoning Ordinance. Specific duties include the following:
      (1)   Process applications for building permits and zoning certificates;
      (2)   Process applications for zoning changes, zoning amendments,
conditional use permits;
      (3)   Process applications for variances;
      (4)   Update zoning map periodically to reflect zoning changes; and
      (5)   Prepare findings of the Planning Commission and Board of Appeals to
be submitted to the City Council.
   (C)   Zoning certificate. A zoning certificate must be completed to ensure
that all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance are met when the applicant proposes
to construct a new structure, or to construct an expansion or addition to an
existing structure, or to construct an accessory building of 120 square feet or
larger (non temporary), or to move a structure onto a lot. When a building is
to be moved, it must also comply with the provisions of §
153.063. Zoning certificates are available upon request at the City Hall.
   (D)   Building permit required. No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by
the Building Official authorizing the action. No building permit shall be
issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Establishment of fees, charges and expenses. The City Council shall
establish, a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses, and a collection
procedure for rezoning applications, building permits, variances, conditional
uses, appeals, planned unit developments, subdivisions and other matters
pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be available at the
office of the Zoning Administrator, and Planning Department as appropriate and
may be altered and amended only by the City Council.
   (F)   Violations.
      (1)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply
with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements after
written notice by the Zoning Administrator allowing reasonable time to comply,
shall, upon conviction, thereof, be fined not more than $700 and costs of
prosecution or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day such
violation continues or occurs, constitutes a separate offense and may be
prosecuted as such.
      (2)   The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part
thereof, any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who
commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation, may each be
found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
      (3)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such
other lawful action, as is necessary, to prevent or remedy any violation.
   (G)   Application for building permit.
      (1)   Application forms are available at City Hall. All applications for
building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate when required by
the Building Official and properly signed zoning certificate from the Dilworth
Zoning Administrator. Plans shall be drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations
on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and
dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall
include such other information as lawfully may be required, including existing
or proposed buildings or alterations; existing or proposed uses of structures
and land; existing or proposed parking; the number of families, housekeeping
units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions
existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine
the conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, this chapter.
      (2)   One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant, after
such copy has been marked either approved or unapproved and attested to same by
the Zoning Administrator's signature on such copy. The second copy of the
plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator.
   (H)   Expiration of building permit. If the work described in any building
permit has not begun within six calendar months from the date of issuance, or
such work described ceases for a period of six calendar months, or is not
completed within 24 months, said permit shall expire, unless otherwise extended
pursuant to the adopted Building Code. The Building Official shall have the
authority to cancel permits given written notice is provided to persons
affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled
permit shall not proceed unless, and until, a new building permit has been
obtained.
   (I)   Construction and use pursuant to plans/permits. Building permits
issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Building Official
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Use, arrangement, or construction which is inconsistent with the
approved building permit shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.021 NONCONFORMING LOTS; USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   It shall be deemed nonconforming when, within the districts
established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, there
exists lots, structures and uses of land which were lawful before this chapter
was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted
under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. This chapter permits
these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, modified/altered
(other than repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement
activities) or otherwise terminated. Such uses are declared by this chapter to
be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further
the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses not permitted in the district. Within any zoning district, one may request
the Board of Adjustment and Appeals for a permit to physically expand or
enlarge a structure, including the construction or reconstruction of garages
and other accessory buildings normally found in residential areas. The request
shall be filed as a variance with the city on an official application form.
Furthermore, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall not grant such a permit
unless it makes the findings required to grant a variance.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans,
construction or designated use of a building or structure for which a building
permit has been issued to prior to December 13, 2010, provided however, that
the entire building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within
24 months from the date of issuance of said permit.
   (B)   Nonconforming lots of record. In any district in which single-family
dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
building(s) may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
this chapter provided that it fronts on a public right-of-way and provided,
further, that the width and area measurements are at least 75% of the minimum
requirements of this chapter. This provision shall apply provided that side
yards and front yard setbacks shall conform to the regulations for the district
in which such lot is located.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses of land.
      (1)   Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the
terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
      (2)   General provisions.
         (a)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied as of December 13, 2010;
         (b)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel;
         (c)   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for
a period of more than 12 months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform
to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such
land is located.
   (D)   Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists as of
December 13, 2010 that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by
reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, elevation or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
      (1)   No such structure may be enlarged, expanded or otherwise altered in
a way that increases its nonconformity, non-inclusive of repair, replacement,
restoration, maintenance or improvement activities as allowed under M.S. §
462.357, subd. 1e;
      (2)   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 50% of its estimated market value at time of destruction, and no
building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property was
damaged, the municipality may impose reasonable conditions upon a zoning or
building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent
property or water body(ies);
      (3)   Should such structure be moved for any reason, for any distance, it
shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after it is moved;
      (4)   When a nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for twelve
months, the nonconforming use shall not be resumed unless otherwise authorized
under this chapter; and
      (5)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoration of a structure to a safe condition. Any structure
or component thereof declared unsafe by any official charged with protecting
the public's safety, shall be addressed by the owner in a timely manner.
   (E)   Nonconforming use of land/structures combined.
      (1)   If a lawful use of structures or structures and land in combination
(hereinafter, use) exists at the effective date of this chapter that would not
be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, that use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
      (2)   General provisions.
         (a)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located; non-inclusive of repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or
improvement activities as allowed under M.S. § 462.357, subd. 1e;
         (b)   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a
building which was established, arranged or designed to accommodate such
nonconforming use prior to the adoption of this chapter. No use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building;
         (c)   Any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises,
may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals, by making findings in the specific case, determine that
the proposed use is equally or more appropriate within the district than the
existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals may impose such conditions as deemed necessary to protect the
public's interest, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
         (d)   Any nonconforming use which is replaced by a permitted or
conditional use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district
in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not
thereafter be resumed or re-established;
         (e)   When a nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for twelve
months, the nonconforming use shall not be resumed unless otherwise authorized
under this chapter; and
         (f)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
premises in combination, continuing use of the land in a nonconforming manor
shall not be permitted if the structure is removed or destroyed.
   (F)   Applicability of variance or conditional use permits. If a conditional
use permit has been granted as provided in this chapter, it shall not be deemed
a nonconformity upon adoption of any future amendments or revisions, but shall
continue to only operate under the authority granted within the conditional use
permit. Upon expiration or termination of the conditional use permit, the
property, use or structure shall be subject to all provisions within the
chapter.
   (G)   District boundary changes. Wherever the boundaries of a district shall
be changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district of a
different classification, the foregoing, therein, shall come into existence
upon the change of district boundaries.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.022 CONDITIONAL USE AND INTERIM USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of a conditional use permit is to
provide a discretionary approval process, for proposed uses which have unique
or widely varying operating characteristics. The procedure is intended to
ensure that proposed conditional uses will not have a significant adverse
impact on surrounding uses or on the general welfare, public health and safety
of the community. An interim use permit shall follow the same guidelines and
process as a conditional use permit, but its intent is to have a termination
date for the approved use.
   (B)   Initiating a request.
      (1)   The Planning Commission or City Council may, upon their own motion,
initiate a conditional use permit request in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any person owning property, or having documented interest therein,
may initiate a request for a conditional use permit for that property in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The property owner or
designated representative shall complete the required application for a
conditional use permit which may be obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Filing an application.
      (1)   The application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator who
shall refer the application together with comments thereon to the Planning
Commission. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by
the City Council. The city, after receipt and review of the application, may
request additional information from the applicant which it deems necessary for
a proper review by the Planning Commission. The request for a conditional use
permit shall be placed on the agenda of a regular or special meeting of the
Planning Commission in a timely manner, and in accordance with state statute.
      (2)   Whenever an application for a conditional use permit has been
considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the
conditional use permit affecting the same property shall not be considered
again by the Planning Commission for at least one year from the date of its
denial, except as follows:
         (a)   The Planning Commission determines that the circumstances
surrounding the previous application have changed substantially; or
         (b)   The City Council directs the Planning Commission to reconsider
the permit request by a vote of not less than a majority of all members of the
City Council.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use
permit, the Zoning Administrator shall set the time and date for a public
hearing. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its
findings and make recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing
shall consist of a legal property description and a summary description of the
request, published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days
prior to the hearing. In the case of conditional use permits involving an area
of five acres or less, a written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at
least ten days prior to the hearing to all owners of land within 350 feet of
the property to which the amendment relates. A copy of the hearing notice and a
list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be
attested and made a part of the record of the proceeding. Failure of a property
owner to receive said notice, or failure to provide mailed notice to individual
property owners, or defects in the notice shall not invalidate any such
proceedings as set forth within this chapter provided a bona fide attempt has
been made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Consideration of request by Planning Commission. Provided the
applicant has furnished all information, as requested by the Zoning
Administrator, and provided the prescribed notification requirements can be
met, the Planning Commission shall consider the application at its next
meeting. The Planning Commission shall formulate its recommendations and
forward a report and recommended findings of fact to the City Council who shall
consider the request at its next regular meeting. Should the Planning
Commission fail to provide a recommendation to the City Council, the applicant
may appeal directly to the City Council for a decision. Failure of the Planning
Commission to provide a recommendation to the City Council shall not invalidate
the proceedings or actions of the City Council.
   (F)   Consideration of request by City Council.
      (1)   If, upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the City Council finds inconsistencies in the review process, the
City Council may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further
consideration prior to making a final decision. The City Council shall have the
option to set and hold a public hearing, if deemed necessary, and shall make a
recorded finding of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   The City Council must take action on the application within 60 days
from the date an application is received and deemed complete by the city. An
application for a conditional use permit may be granted by a majority vote of
the Council.
      (3)   If the City Council grants the conditional use permit, they may
impose such conditions, as may be deemed necessary for, or appropriate to serve
the purposes, of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (G)   Issuance of a permit. In the issuance of a conditional use permit, the
Planning Commission, may for good reason, recommend approval and the City
Council may approve a use that does not meet all the minimum standards and
requirements of the zoned district. Any standards not met shall be so noted as
part of the conditional use permit.
   (H)   Amendments. An amended conditional use permit shall be applied for in
a manner similar to that required for a new conditional use permit. Amendments
to conditional use permits shall require the submittal of an application and
may include the following scenarios: (a) permit has expired; (b) permit has
been previously denied; or (c) request for substantial changes in conditions or
uses attached to the permit as previously approved. The Planning Commission
may, upon formal review and with approval by all members present, authorize
minor changes which may include, but not limited to the following: location,
siting, heights of buildings or structures and increase in overall coverage of
buildings and structures. However, no change authorized by this division shall
cause any of the following:
      (1)   A change in the use or character of the development;
      (2)   An increase in intensity of use (i.e. gross density, net density or
FAR);
      (3)   An increase in traffic generation (volumes, ADT's, and the like);
      (4)   A modification to off-street parking and loading spaces; or
      (5)   A reduction in required pavement widths.
   (I)   Cancellation, termination or expiration. Where applicable, unless
otherwise specified by the City Council at the time it is authorized, a
conditional use permit shall expire if the applicant fails to utilize such
conditional use permit within one year from the date of its issuance.
   (J)   Appeal. Any person, taxpayer, department, board, or bureau of the city
aggrieved by the decision of the City Council shall have the right to seek
review within 45 days of the decision with a court of record of such decision
in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota, and particularly
M.S. Ch. 462 as such statute may be from time to time amended, supplemented, or
replaced.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.023 REZONE REQUESTS AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The regulations, restrictions, and zoning
districts promulgated in this chapter may, from time to time, be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified or repealed; provided that no action be taken
until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties with
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. These changes may
be to the text, Zoning Map, or any other component of this chapter.
   (B)   Initiating a request.
      (1)   The Planning Commission or City Council may, upon their own motion,
initiate a zoning amendment request in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   Any person owning property, or having documented interest therein,
may initiate a request for a zoning amendment for that property in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter. The property owner or designated
representative shall complete the required application for a zoning amendment
which may be obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Filing an application.
      (1)   The application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator who
shall refer the application together with comments thereon to the Planning
Commission. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by
the City Council. The Zoning Administrator, after receipt and review of the
application, may request additional information from the applicant which is
deemed necessary for a proper review by the Planning Commission. The request
for a zoning amendment shall be placed on the agenda of a regular or special
meeting of the Planning Commission in a timely manner, and in accordance with
state statute.
      (2)   Whenever an application for a zoning amendment has been considered
and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the zoning amendment
affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning
Commission for at least one year from the date of its denial, except as
follows:
         (a)   The Planning Commission determines that the circumstances
surrounding the previous application have changed substantially; or
         (b)   The City Council, by a two-thirds vote, directs the Planning
Commission to reconsider the zoning amendment.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of an application for a zoning amendment,
the Zoning Administrator shall set the time and date for a public hearing. The
Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and make
recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a
legal property description and/or a summary description of the request, and be
published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the
hearing. In the case of zoning amendments involving changes in district
boundaries affecting an area of five acres or less, a written notice of said
hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to all owners of
land within 350 feet of the property to which the amendment relates. A copy of
the hearing notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the
notice was sent shall be attested and made a part of the record of the
proceeding. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice, or failure to
provide mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice
shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter
provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Consideration of request by Planning Commission. Providing the
applicant has furnished all information, as requested by the Zoning
Administrator, and provided the prescribed notification requirements can be
met, the Planning Commission shall consider the application at its next
meeting. The Planning Commission shall formulate its recommendations and
forward a report and recommended findings of fact to the City Council who shall
consider the request at its next regular meeting. Should the Planning
Commission fail to provide a recommendation to the City Council, the applicant
may appeal directly to the City Council for a decision. Failure of the Planning
Commission to provide a recommendation to the City Council shall not invalidate
the proceedings or actions of the City Council.
   (F)   Consideration of request by City Council.
      (1)   If, upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the City Council finds inconsistencies in the review process, the
City Council may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further
consideration prior to making a final decision. The City Council shall have the
option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary and shall make a
recorded finding of fact and may impose any conditions it considers necessary
to protect the health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   The City Council must take action on the zoning amendment request
within 60 days from the date an application is received and deemed complete by
the city. Approval of a proposed amendment shall require a two-thirds vote of
the City Council.
   (G)   Effective date. The amendment shall not become effective until such
time as the City Council approves an ordinance reflecting said amendment and
after said ordinance is published in a newspaper of general circulation.
   (H)   Appeals. Any person, taxpayer, department, board, or bureau of the
city aggrieved by the decision of the City Council shall have the right to seek
review within 45 days of the decision with a court of record of such decision
in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota, and particularly
M.S. Ch. 462 as such statute may be from time to time amended, supplemented, or
replaced.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.024 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The variance process is intended to provide
limited relief from the requirements of this chapter in those circumstances
where strict application of a particular requirement will create a practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship prohibiting the use of land in a manner
otherwise allowed under this chapter. It is not intended that variances be
granted for the establishment or expansion of a use within a zone district
where it is not permitted.
   (B)   Initiating a request. Any person owning property, or having documented
interest therein, may initiate a request for a variance for that property in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The property owner or
designated representative shall complete the required application for a
variance which may be obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Filing an application.
      (1)   The property owner or designated representative shall complete the
required application for a variance which may be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by
the City Council. The application for a variance shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator, after review of the application, shall
have the authority to request additional information from the applicant which
is deemed necessary for a proper review by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
The request for a variance shall be placed on the agenda of the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals to occur no later than 60 days from the date of
submission.
      (2)   Variance requests for the same property, of similar intent, shall
not be heard within six months of a previous request unless it can be
demonstrated to the Zoning Administrator that the conditions for the variance
have changed.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of an application for a variance, the
Zoning Administrator shall set the time and date for the public hearing. Notice
of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and a summary
description of the request, published in a newspaper of general circulation at
least ten days prior to the hearing. In the case of variances affecting an area
of five acres or less, a written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at
least ten days prior to the hearing to all owners of land within 350 feet of
the property to which the variance relates. A copy of the hearing notice and a
list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be
attested and made a part of the record of the proceeding. Failure of a property
owner to receive said notice, or failure to provide mailed notice to individual
property owners, or defects in the notice shall not invalidate any such
proceedings as set forth within this chapter provided a bona fide attempt has
been made to comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Consideration of request by Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall make findings of fact and
shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the request for
variance within 60 days from the date an application is received and deemed
complete by the city. A variance to this chapter shall not be granted unless
approved by a majority of the members of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
      (2)   A variance from any provision(s) within this chapter shall not be
granted unless the Board of Adjustment makes findings, based upon competent
material and substantial evidence that the request complies with the following
factors that must be satisfied in constituting an undue hardship:
         (a)   The property cannot be put to a reasonable use if used under
conditions allowed by this chapter;
         (b)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property and not created by the landowner; and
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of locality.
   (F)   Conditions of approval. In authorizing a variance, the Board may, in
addition to the specific conditions of approval called for in this chapter,
attach such other conditions regarding the location, character, landscaping, or
treatment reasonably necessary to further the intent and spirit of this chapter
and the protection of the public interest.
   (G)   Cancellation, termination or expiration. Unless otherwise specified by
the Board of Adjustment and Appeals at the time it is authorized, a variance
shall expire if the applicant fails to utilize such variance within one year
from the date of its issuance.
   (H)   Appeals.
      (1)   To appeal a decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, a
written notice of appeal must be filed with the city within 45 days of the
decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Appeals to the City Council
and appeals from the City Council's decision shall be in accordance with the
procedures for appeals from the Board of Adjustment and Appeals set forth in §
153.025.
      (2)   Any person, taxpayer, department, board, or bureau of the city
aggrieved by the decision of the City Council shall have the right to seek
review within 45 days of the decision with a court of record of such decision
in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota, and particularly
M.S. Ch. 462 as such statute may be from time to time amended, supplemented, or
replaced.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.025 DECISION MAKING BODIES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is established pursuant
to authority granted to the city under Minnesota Statutes. The Planning
Commission shall have the review and recommendation authority as established in
this chapter.
      (1)   Members and terms. The Planning Commission shall consist of no more
than nine voting members whom shall be appointed by the City Council. All
members shall be bona fide residents of the City. Members of the Planning
Commission shall serve in such capacity without compensation of any manner. The
term of office shall be four years. The City Council shall fill vacancies and
may additionally remove members without cause by a four-fifths vote. The City
Council shall appoint one voting member of the Council and may additionally
identify an alternative (duration to be consistent with his/her Council term).
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only and members may be
appointed for successive terms without limitation.
      (2)   Quorum and voting. A quorum of the Planning Commission shall
consist of five out of nine members of the regular membership. A quorum must
exist before this Commission can take any official action on behalf of the
city. All actions of the Planning Commission require a majority vote by a
quorum of the Commission, unless otherwise set forth in this chapter. A member
of the Commission may only be excused from voting on a particular issue if it
has been determined that the member would have a conflict of interest or would
be violating any codes of ethics.
      (3)   Records. The city shall keep files, record and notice of all
meetings, which shall be available for public inspection.
      (4)   Chairperson. The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson from
among its appointed members for the term of one year, starting in January.
      (5)   Meetings. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting each month, pending the availability of agenda items.
   (B)   Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals
is established pursuant to authority granted to the city under Minnesota
Statutes.
      (1)   Members and terms. The Planning Commission will serve as the Board
of Adjustment and Appeals and have the powers granted under M.S. §§ 462.357,
subd. 6 and 462.359, subd. 4, as they may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Quorum and voting. Same as §
153.025(A)(2).
      (3)   Records. The city shall keep files, record and notice of all
meetings; which shall be available for public inspection.
      (4)   Chairperson. Same as the Chairperson for the Planning Commission.
      (5)   Meetings. Request for the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
meet as needed, based on the availability of agenda items at the regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
   (C)   Appeals - applicability. An appeal shall only be applicable to an
interpretation of legislative intent of provisions of this chapter. Opinions
and evaluations as it pertains to the impact or result of a request are not
subject to the appeal procedure.
   (D)   Proceedings. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may adopt rules
necessary to the conduct and processing of appeals, while maintaining
consistency with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Filing an appeal.
      (1)   Appeals forwarded to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals concerning
interpretation or administration of this chapter must be filed with the city by
the property owner or their agent within 45 days of the rendered decision.
      (2)   Any appeal filed shall be comprehensive and include all matters
subject to question. Such appeals must be filed with the Zoning Administrator
and shall specifically identify the framework of the appeal, including chapter
citations, as applicable. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to
the Board of Adjustment and Appeals all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken. Subsequent appeals filed by the same
person which are intended to cause unjustifiable delay shall not be accepted by
the city.
   (F)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of an application for an appeal, the
Zoning Administrator shall set the time and date for the public hearing. Notice
of said hearing shall consist, at minimum, of a summary description of the
request, published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days
prior to the hearing. Due notice shall be given to all property owners within a
350 foot radius of the affected property, if the application is applicable to a
defined property or location within city limits. A copy of the hearing notice
and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent
shall be attested and made a part of the record of the proceeding, as
applicable. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice, or failure to
provide mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice
shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter
provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice
requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Stay of proceedings (appeals). An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action being appealed unless it is certified to the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals, after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by a court of record on application to
the city.
   (H)   Appeals procedure. The procedure for making such an appeal shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The property owner or their agent shall file with the city a
written notice of appeal stating the specific grounds upon which the appeal is
made. The person filing the appeal shall be given written notice of a hearing
date and shall be able to appear and testify at such hearing. Such hearing
shall be held within 60 days of the filing of the appeal.
      (2)   The filing of an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as provided
for by the City Council which shall be consistent with any established fee for
a variance.
      (3)   The ruling appealed from shall stand unless a majority of all
members of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals by vote to overturn or modify
the prior ruling within 60 days of the hearing.
      (4)   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall make its decision within
60 days of the hearing.
   (I)   Decisions.
      (1)   In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this
chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such other
requirement, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have powers of
the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken.
      (2)   A copy of the decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
be served on the applicant by mail.
   (J)   Appeals from Board of Adjustment and Appeals or City Council. Any
person, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, shall have the right to seek
review within 45 days of the decision with the City Council. An appeal must be
filed, in writing, with the City Administrator within the 45 day period, and
such written appeal shall set forth the decision appealed from and the date of
that decision. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the appeal shall be placed on
the agenda of the next regular Council meeting to occur following at least 15
days from the receipt of the appeal. At that meeting the Council shall review
the findings of facts and decision made by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals,
as well as any documents that were furnished to the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals on the matter. The Council may, but is not required to, allow the
aggrieved party and the other persons to speak to the Council on the issue
involved in the appeal. The City Council shall have the authority to uphold the
decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals by passing a resolution
adopting the findings of facts and decision of the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals, or the Council, by a vote of a majority of all the members of the
Council, may reverse or modify the decision of the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals, in which case the City Council shall prepare its own findings of facts
and decision on the matter appealed. In the absence of a resolution adopting
the findings of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals or of a resolution
reversing the decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals by a vote of a
majority of all members of the Council within 45 days of the date of the
initial consideration of the appeal at a Council meeting, the findings and
decision of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be deemed adopted by the
City Council. Any person, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city
aggrieved by the decision of the City Council shall have the right to seek
review within 30 days of the decision with a court of record of such decision
in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota, and particularly
M.S. Ch. 462 as such statute may be, from time to time, amended, supplemented
or replaced.
   (K)   Specific responsibilities. It is the intent of this chapter that all
questions or interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the
Zoning Administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning
Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals shall be forwarded to the City Council and, if necessary, to the
courts as provided by law and particularly by M.S. Ch. 462.
SUMMARY TABLE OF PROCEDURES. (TABLE 9.1)
                               Planning Board of                  Zoning
Procedure Section City Council Comm.    Adjustment and City staff certificate
                                        Appeals
                                    Planning Board of               Zoning
Procedure      Section City Council Comm.    Adjustment  City staff certificate
                                             and Appeals
Planning and Zoning
Code           §                          A           D           
interpretation 153.025
Rezone         §      D            R, H                R          Yes
               153.023
Zoning         §      D            R, H                R          Yes
amendment      153.023
Permits and Approvals
Conditional    §      D            R, H                R          Yes
use permit     153.022
Variance       §      A, H                 D, H        R           
               153.024
Sign permit    §
(on-site and   153.064                     A           D          Yes2 
off-premise)
Moving permits §      D            R, H                R          Yes
               153.063
Moving permits
(accessory
structures or  §
single story   153.063 1                    A1          D1         Yes
garages
outside the
city limits)
Home           §                          A           D           
occupation     153.070
 
1 Pursuant to §
153.063(B)(11) the Zoning Administrator retains the authority to forward any
moving permit (including accessory structures or single story garages) through
Planning Commission and City Council approval processes. See §
153.063 for additional information.
2 As applicable, per §
153.064.
R - Review (responsible for review and/or recommendation)
D - Decision (responsible for final decision)
H - Hearing (public hearing required)
A - Appeal (authority to hear/decide appeals)
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.026 ZONING DISTRICTS; DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Zoning districts. This section and the subsequent subchapter establish
the 11 zoning districts within the City of Dilworth and set forth information
pertaining to the districts, including: (a) statements of purpose; and (b)
dimensional standards and permitted uses. Land use regulations, building
regulations and development standards set forth within this chapter shall be
enforced uniformly within each district.
   (B)   Statements of purpose.
      (1)   Transitional Zone (TZ). This district identifies land that is
presently agricultural in use and will be limited to this specific use type
until such time that development occurs. Prior to the development of this land
or contemporaneous with any development application, a rezoning process
consistent with §
153.023 shall be required.
      (2)   Single-Family and Limited Two-Family District (R-1). This district
is established to provide predominantly single-family neighborhoods.
      (3)   Single-Family and Two-Family Districts (R-2). This district is
established to encompass and preserve primary residential neighborhoods.
      (4)   Limited Multiple-Family Residential District (R-3). This district
is established to provide an area where there will be a compatible variety in
residential densities by limiting multiple-family dwellings to eight units. The
intent of the district is to provide appropriate transitions between single-
family residences, two-family residences and low density multiple-family
residences.
      (5)   Multiple-Family Residential District (R-4). This district is
established to provide a place for high density residential development. Non-
residential uses permitted in this district will be limited to those uses and
buildings that will provide stability and dignity to the area as a residential
neighborhood.
      (6)   Manufactured Housing Residential District (R-5). This district is
established to set aside an area within municipal limits for the exclusive use
of manufactured home park(s) with certain restrictions to provide the residents
in that district a safe, healthy environment.
      (7)   Neighborhood Business District (C-1). This district is established
to provide an area for commercial development of a nature that is compatible
and complementary with adjacent residential areas.
      (8)   Central Business District (C-2). This district is established to
provide a core area of services to the community of Dilworth. Services provided
within this district should vary in use and extent.
      (9)   General Business District (C-3). This district is established to
provide the community and region with an area of commercial establishments that
will provide a variety of goods and services.
      (10)   Light Industrial District (I-1). This district is established to
permit light industrial uses that are free from objectionable influence upon
adjacent urban development.
      (11)   Heavy Industrial District (I-2). This district is established to
provide an area that will accommodate industries not permitted in other
districts. However, these uses should not endanger the health, safety or
general welfare of the city or its residents.
(Ord. passed - -)
ZONING DISTRICTS; DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND PERMITTED USES
§ 153.040 TRANSITION ZONE DISTRICT (TZ).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Transition Zone District is established
primarily for those annexed unplatted areas within the city that have not been
zoned for development and are undergoing a transition from, in most cases,
agricultural to urban uses. The urban transition is contingent upon development
plans, proper timing, availability of public utilities and services and
compatibility with the City of Dilworth Comprehensive Land Use Plan. As these
conditions for development are met, a more conventional urban zoning district
will replace the Transition Zone District.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Transition
Zone (TZ) District:
      (1)   Residential uses.  
         (a)   Single-family and two-family dwellings;
         (b)   Day care facilities; and
         (c)   Home occupation.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Farming (includes crop, trees, hobby farms, etc) and
agricultural related uses subject to MPCA standards, but not including
livestock operations;
         (b)   Home occupation;
         (c)   Essential services; and
         (d)   Nurseries, greenhouses, landscape material operations including
retail and wholesale operations.
      (3)   Public, institutional and civic uses. Open space, athletic fields,
parks and playgrounds.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the Transition
Zone (TZ) District:
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Residential Planned Unit Development, as regulated by §
153.062; and
         (b)   Residential programs/facilities serving six or fewer persons.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Recreational areas which includes, but not limited to the
following: golf courses, country clubs, swimming pools, ice arena/ice rink,
driving range, and similar facilities provided that:
            1.   The principle use, function or activity is recreational in
character;
            2.   Not more than 40% of the land area shall be covered by
buildings, structures or impervious surfaces; and
            3.   When abutting a residential use and/or a residential use
district, the property shall be screened and landscaped in compliance with §
153.065;
         (b)   Riding stables, dog kennels, animal hospitals (with overnight
care) and similar uses/facilities provided that:
            1.   Any building in which animals are kept, whether roofed,
enclosed or otherwise sheltered, shall be located, at minimum, a distance of
300 feet from any lot line;
            2.   Animals shall, at minimum, be kept in a physically enclosed
pen or corral of sufficient height and strength to retain such animals;
            3.   Compliance with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Regulations
SW 53.(2) as may be amended is obtained; and
            4.   All other applicable state and local regulations pertaining to
nuisance, heath and safety conditions are met;
         (c)   Cemeteries, provided that:
            1.   The site has direct vehicular access to a minor arterial
street; and
            2.   The site is landscaped in accordance with §
153.068;
         (d)   Farm buildings within 300 feet of an existing residence or
residential platted lot;
         (e)   Non-farm related open and outdoor storage as a principal or
accessory use provided that:
            1.   The area is fenced and screened from view of neighboring
residential uses or districts per §
153.065;
            2.   Storage is screened from view from the public right-of-way in
compliance with §§
153.065 and
153.068;
            3.   Storage area(s) are sodded, seeded or otherwise altered with
an appropriate surface treatment to control dust; and
            4.   All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light
source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or neighboring
residences and shall be in compliance with §
153.068;
         (f)   Non-farm related open or outdoor service, sale and rental as a
principal or accessory use provided that;
            1.   Outside sale(s) areas are fenced are screened from view of
neighboring residential uses, abutting residential district and the public
right-of-way in compliance with this chapter;
            2.   All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light
source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring
residences and shall be in compliance with §
153.068;
            3.   Sales area(s) are sodded, seeded or otherwise altered with an
appropriate surface treatment to control dust.
   (D)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in a TZ District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.  
 
Lot area Two and one-half acres
Width    150 ft.
Depth    300 ft.
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: not less than 25 feet.
         (b)   Side yard:
            1.   Single and two-family:
               a.   Interior lots: eight feet;
               b.   Corner lots: 12 feet.
            2.   All other permitted and conditional uses: ten feet.
         (c)   Rear yard:
            1.   Principal building: 25 feet;
            2.   Accessory building or use: three feet, except on corner lots,
which shall not be less that 12 feet on the side abutting the street.
   (E)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see the definition BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Dwelling units or principal buildings: 35 feet;
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069; and
      (3)   Farm buildings: none
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage. No structure or combination of structures shall
occupy more than 10% of the lot area unless otherwise permitted within this
section.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.041 SINGLE-FAMILY AND LIMITED TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The R-1 District is hereby established to provide
a predominantly single-family character for residential development.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Single-Family
and Limited Two- Family Residential (R-1) District:
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings (corner lots only);
         (c)   A state licensed residential facility or a housing with services
establishment registered under M.S. Ch. 144D serving six or fewer persons, a
licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer persons, and a group family day
care facility licensed under Minn. Rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve
14 or fewer children shall be considered a permitted single-family residential
use of property for the purposes of zoning, except that a residential facility
whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who have violated criminal statutes
relating to sex offenses or have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of
conduct in violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be
considered a permitted use, in accordance with M.S. § 462.357;
         (d)   Manufactured homes subject to the following conditions:
            1.   All manufactured homes shall be constructed after June 15,
1976, and bear the H.U.D. certification seal;
            2.   The minimum width of the main portion of the structure shall
not be less than 22 feet, as measured across the narrowest portion;
            3.   All dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation in
compliance with the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city; and
            4.   Tongues on all manufactured homes shall be removed;
         (e)   Garage and rummage sales provided that:
            1.   Sales may not exceed four days during any 30 day period and
are limited to a maximum of eight days per year;
            2.   Signs advertising the sale may not be placed within any public
right-of-way; and
            3.   No merchandise offered for sale may be placed within any
public right-of-way.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Golf courses; and
         (b)   Essential services.
      (3)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Library;
         (b)   Primary and secondary schools;
         (c)   Open space, athletic fields, parks, and playgrounds;
         (d)   Public swimming pools (not less than 200 feet from existing
residential neighborhoods or areas platted and/or zoned as residential area
(s)); and
         (e)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like).
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Single-Family and Limited Two-Family Residential (R-1) District:
      (1)   Private garages, parking spaces and car ports. Private garages are
intended for use to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or
families whom reside upon the premises, and in which no business service or
industry is carried on. Such space can be rented to noncommercial vehicles,
trailers or equipment if sufficient off-street parking in full compliance with
this chapter is provided elsewhere on the property;
      (2)   The storage of recreational vehicles and related equipment;
      (3)   Home occupations as regulated by §
153.070;
      (4)   Noncommercial greenhouses and conservatories;
      (5)   Private swimming pool, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests;
      (6)   Tool sheds, structures and similar buildings for storage of
domestic supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment; and
      (7)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in an R-
1 District:
      (1)   Residential uses. Residential Planned Unit Development, as
regulated by §
153.062;
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Governmental and public regulated utility buildings necessary
for the health, safety and general welfare of the city, provided that:
            1.   Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained
and required setbacks are met;
            2.   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure; and
            3.   Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with §
153.068.
         (b)   Recreational buildings which include golf courses and
neighborhood or community centers; public or private educational institutes
(limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools); and public
assembly facilities (churches, temples, synagogues), provided that:
            1.   Side yard setbacks shall be double than required for the
district, but not greater that 30 feet;
            2.   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and
landscaping is provided in compliance with §
153.065;
            3.   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided pursuant to
§
153.060 and parking areas are adequately screened/landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with §
153.065; and
            4.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated, where applicable, by §
153.060.
         (c)   Cemeteries; provided that:
            1.   The site has direct vehicular access to a minor arterial or
arterial street; and
            2.   The site is screened in accordance with §
153.065.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-1 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.  
 
Lot area Single-family (7,000 sq. ft.)
         Two-family (9,000 sq. ft.)
Width    60 ft.
Depth    100 ft.
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: not less than 25 feet.
         (b)   Side yard:
            1.   All permitted or conditional uses:
               a.   Interior lots: eight feet;
               b.   Corner lots: 12 feet.
            2.   Accessory structures: five feet minimum unless a garage
entrance faces into a street in which case the setback will be 18 feet to
accommodate a vehicle from encroaching into public right-of-way.
         (c)   Rear yard:
            1.   Principal building: 25 feet;
            2.   Accessory structures: five feet except on corner lots, which
shall be not less than 12 feet on the side abutting the street. If a garage
entrance faces onto a street the minimum setback will be 18 feet to accommodate
a vehicle from encroaching onto the public right-of-way.
   (F)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see definition of BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Dwelling units or principal buildings: 35 feet;
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. No structure or combination of structures in the
R-1 District shall occupy more than 33% of the total lot area.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.042 SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The R-2 District is established to encourage the
preservation of residential neighborhoods characterized primarily by single-
family and two-family dwellings and to preserve undeveloped lands for similar
types of residential development.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Single-Family
and Two-Family Residential (R-2) District:
      (1)   Residential uses.  
         (a)   Single-family dwellings;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings;
         (c)   A state licensed residential facility or a housing with services
establishment registered under M.S. Ch. 144D serving six or fewer persons, a
licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer persons, and a group family day
care facility licensed under Minn. Rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve
14 or fewer children shall be considered a permitted single-family residential
use of property for the purposes of zoning, except that a residential facility
whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who have violated criminal statutes
relating to sex offenses or have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of
conduct in violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be
considered a permitted use, in accordance with M.S. § 462.357; and
         (d)   Manufactured homes subject to the following conditions:
            1.   All manufactured homes shall be constructed after June 15,
1976, and bear the H.U.D. certification seal;
            2.   The minimum width of the main portion of the structure shall
not be less than 22 feet, as measured across the narrowest portion;
            3.   All dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation in
compliance with the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city; and
            4.   Tongues on all manufactured homes shall be removed.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Golf courses; and
         (b)   Essential services.
      (3)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Library;
         (b)   Primary and secondary schools;
         (c)   Open space, athletic fields, parks, and playgrounds;
         (d)   Public swimming pools (not less than 200 feet from existing
residential neighborhoods or areas platted and/or zoned as residential area
(s)); and
         (e)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like).
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Single-Family and Two-Family Residential (R-2) District:
      (1)   Private garages, parking spaces and car ports. Private garages are
intended for use to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or
families whom reside upon the premises, and in which no business service or
industry is carried on. Such space can be rented to noncommercial vehicles,
trailers or equipment if sufficient off-street parking in full compliance with
this chapter is provided elsewhere on the property;
      (2)   Recreational vehicles and equipment;
      (3)   Home occupations as regulated by §
153.070;
      (4)   Noncommercial greenhouses and conservatories;
      (5)   Private swimming pool, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests;
      (6)   Tool sheds, structures and similar buildings for storage of
domestic supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment; and
      (7)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in an R-
2 District:
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Multiple-family dwellings or attached single-family dwelling
structures with not more than four units or retirement, nursing, assisted
living, elderly homes provided that:
            1.   There is adequate off-street parking provided in compliance
with §
153.060;
            2.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated, where applicable, by §
153.060; and
            3.   Parking areas shall be adequately screened/landscaped from
surrounding and abutting residential districts in compliance with §
153.065.
         (b)   Residential Planned Unit Development, as regulated by §
153.062.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Governmental and public regulated utility buildings necessary
for the health, safety and general welfare of the city, provided that:
            1.   Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained
and required setbacks are met;
            2.   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure; and
            3.   Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with §
153.065.
         (b)   Recreational buildings which include golf courses and
neighborhood or community centers; public or private educational institutes
(limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools); and public
assembly facilities (churches, temples, synagogues), provided that:
            1.   Side yard setbacks shall be double that required for the
district, but not greater that 30 feet;
            2.   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and
landscaping is provided in compliance with §
153.065;
            3.   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided pursuant to
§
153.060 and parking areas are adequately screened/landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with §
153.065; and
            4.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated, where applicable, by §
153.060.
         (c)   Cemeteries; provided that:
            1.   The site has direct vehicular access to a minor arterial or
arterial street; and
            2.   The site is screened in accordance with §
153.065.
         (d)   Businesses and professional service(s) office space/neighborhood
commercial structures. These buildings may include, but are not limited to the
following: small retail and personal service stores provided they are designed
to be functionally harmonious with the existing residential neighborhood.
Permitted structures shall serve the primary needs of the immediate
neighborhood and should not generate a large portion of destination trips
external to the immediate neighborhood, provided that:
            1.   The space is located within an already existing structure; and
            2.   The proposed uses shall not include more than one business per
structure.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.
 
Unit type     Lot area                                    Lot width Lot depth
Single-family 4,800 sq. ft.                               50 ft.    100 ft.
Two-family    6,000 sq. ft.                               60 ft.    100 ft.
Townhouse     2,500 sq. ft.                               N/A       N/A
              Not less than 6,000 sq. ft. for each multi-
Multi-family  family building having at least four units; 130 ft.   100 ft.
              and not less than 1,000 sq. ft. additional
              area for each additional dwelling unit.
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: not less than 25 feet.
         (b)   Side yard:
            1.   Interior lots: five feet;
            2.   Corner lots: 12 feet on side yards abutting a street except
when the apron to a garage is facing said side yard, in which case the apron
shall be a minimum of 18 feet to accommodate a vehicle from encroaching into
public right-of-way;
            3.   Multi-family: 12% of the lot width with a minimum of six feet;
            4.   Townhouse: no setback required on internal common walls or
party walls;
            5.   Garages: five feet unless garage entrances face onto street or
alley, in which case, the minimum setback will be 18 feet to accommodate a
vehicle from encroaching into public right-of-way;
            6.   Accessory structures: five feet minimum unless a garage
entrance faces onto a street or alley, in which case, the setback will be 18
feet to accommodate a vehicle from encroaching into public right-of-way; and
            7.   All other uses: ten feet.
         (c)   Rear yard:
            1.   Principal building: 25 feet;
            2.   Accessory structures: five feet except on corner lots, which
shall not be less than 12 feet on the side abutting a street; and
            3.   Garages: five feet unless garage entrances face onto a street
or alley, in which case, the minimum setback will be 18 feet to accommodate a
vehicle from encroaching into public right-of-way.
   (F)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see the definition BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Dwelling units or principal buildings: 35 feet;
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. No structure or combination of structures shall
occupy more than 33% of the lot area.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.043 LIMITED MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The R-3 District is established to provide for an
area where there will be a compatible variety of residential densities/dwelling
units by encouraging single-family units, two-family units and multiple-family
dwellings.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Limited
Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) District:
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings;
         (b)   Multi-family dwellings of more than two units but less than
eight units;
         (c)   Townhome dwellings of more than two units but less than 13
units;
         (d)   Two unit single-family attached dwellings;
         (e)   Two unit condominiums if part of a larger single-family attached
or condominium complex;
         (f)   Except as otherwise provided in §
153.041(B)(1)(c) and §
153.042(B)(1)(c), a state licensed residential facility serving from seven
through 16 persons or a licensed day care facility serving from 13 through 16
persons, in accordance with M.S. § 462.357; and
         (g)   Manufactured homes subject to the following conditions:
            1.   All manufactured homes shall be constructed after June 15,
1976, and bear the H.U.D. certification seal;
            2.   The minimum width of the main portion of the structure shall
not be less than 22 feet, as measured across the narrowest portion;
            3.   All dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation in
compliance with the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city;
            4.   Tongues on all manufactured homes shall be removed.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Golf courses; and
         (b)   Essential services.
      (3)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Library;
         (b)   Primary and secondary schools;
         (c)   Open space, athletic fields, parks, and playgrounds;
         (d)   Public swimming pools (not less than 200 feet from existing
residential neighborhoods or areas platted and/or zoned as residential area
(s)); and
         (e)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like).
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Limited Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) District:
      (1)   Private garages, parking spaces and car ports. Private garages are
intended for use to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or
families whom reside upon the premises, and in which no business service or
industry is carried on. Such space can be rented to noncommercial vehicles,
trailers or equipment if sufficient off-street parking in full compliance with
this chapter is provided elsewhere on the property;
      (2)   Private garages, parking spaces and car ports. Private garages are
intended for use to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or
families whom reside upon the premises, and in which no business service or
industry is carried on such space can be rented to noncommercial vehicles,
trailers or equipment if sufficient off-street parking in full compliance with
this chapter is provided elsewhere on the property;
      (3)   Recreational vehicles and equipment;
      (4)   Home occupations as regulated by §
153.070;
      (5)   Noncommercial greenhouses and conservatories;
      (6)   Private swimming pool, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests;
      (7)   Tool sheds, structures and similar buildings for storage of
domestic supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment; and
      (8)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in an R-
3 District:
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Multiple-family dwellings or attached single-family dwelling
structures with more than eight units, provided that:
            1.   There is adequate off-street parking provided in compliance
with §
153.060;
            2.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated, where applicable, by §
153.060; and
            3.   Parking areas shall be adequately screened/landscaped from
surrounding and abutting residential districts in compliance with §
153.065.
         (b)   Residential Planned Unit Development, as regulated by §
153.062.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Governmental and public regulated utility buildings necessary
for the health, safety and general welfare of the city, provided that:
            1.   Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained
and required setbacks are met;
            2.   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure; and
            3.   Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with §
153.065.
         (b)   Commercial recreational buildings which includes golf courses
and neighborhood or community centers; public or private educational institutes
(limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools); and public
assembly facilities (churches, temples, synagogues), provided that:
            1.   Side yard setbacks shall be double that required for the
district, but not greater than 30 feet;
            2.   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and
landscaping is provided in compliance with §
153.065;
            3.   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided pursuant to
§
153.060 and parking areas are adequately screened/landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with §
153.065; and
            4.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated, where applicable, by §
153.060.
         (c)   Cemeteries, provided that:
            1.   The site has direct vehicular access to a minor arterial or
arterial street; and
            2.   The site is screened in accordance with §
153.065.
         (d)   Neighborhood commercial structure. These buildings may include,
but are not limited to the following: small retail and personal service stores
provided they are designed to be functionally harmonious with the existing
residential neighborhood. Permitted structures shall serve the primary needs of
the immediate neighborhood and should not generate a large portion of
destination trips external to the immediate neighborhood, provided that:
            1.   The space is located within an already existing structure; and
            2.   The proposed uses shall not include more than one business per
structure.
         (e)   Businesses and professional service(s) office space but non-
inclusive of facilities or operations that provide overnight accommodations for
patients or funeral homes, mortuaries or similar uses, and provided that:
            1.   Such uses are arranged, designed and constructed to be a
functional, harmonious and compatible component of the surrounding
neighborhood;
            2.   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure;
            3.   Adequate screening and landscaping from adjoining residential
uses is provided in accordance with §
153.065;
            4.   All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light
source is not visible from the public right-of-way or from abutting residential
property and shall be in compliance with §
153.068;
            5.   Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading areas, if
necessary, shall be provided in compliance with §
153.060;
            6.   The site and related parking and service entrances are served
by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the
traffic which will be generated; and
            7.   Vehicular entrances to parking or service areas shall create a
minimum of conflict with through traffic movement.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in a R-3 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.
 
Unit type     Lot area                                      Lot width Lot depth
Single-family 4,800 sq. ft.                                 50 ft.    N/A
Two-family    6,000 sq. ft.                                 50 ft.    N/A
Townhouse     2,500 sq. ft.                                 18 ft.    N/A
              Not less than 6,000 sq. ft. for each multi-
Multi-family  family building having at least four units;   50 ft.    N/A
              and not less than 750 sq. ft. additional area
              for each additional dwelling unit.
All other uses per §
153.069
 
      (2)   Setbacks.  
         (a)   Front yard: not less than 25 feet.
         (b)   Side yard:
            1.   Single-family, two-family and townhouses:
               a.   Interior lots: five feet;
               b.   Corner lots: 12 feet on the side yards abutting a public
way, except when the apron to a garage is facing the side yard, in which case
the apron shall be a minimum of 18 feet; and
               c.   Townhouse: no setback required on internal common walls or
party walls.
            2.   Multiple-family: 12% of the lot with a minimum of six feet;
            3.   Garages: five feet unless garage entrances face onto street or
alley, in which case, the minimum setback will be 18 feet to accommodate a
vehicle from encroaching into public right-of-way;
            4.   Other principal structures:
               a.   For lots 50 feet wide or less, each side yard must not be
less than six feet in width; for lots more than 50 feet wide but less than 100
feet wide, each side yard must be not less than 12% of the width of the lot;
and for lots 100 feet wide or more, each side yard must be not less than 12
feet wide; and
               b.   Corner lots: 12 feet.
         (c)   Rear yards:
            1.   Principal buildings: 25 feet; and
            2.   Accessory buildings: five feet, except on corner lots, which
shall be not less than 12 feet on the side abutting the street and 20 feet if
the garage entrance faces onto a street in order to prevent a vehicle from
encroaching into public right-of-way.
   (F)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see the definition BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Dwelling units or principal buildings: 35 feet; and
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. The following maximum lot coverage standards
will apply in the R-3 District:
      (1)   Single-family and two-family: No structure or combination of
structures shall occupy more than 33% of the lot area; and
      (2)   Multiple-family: No structure or combination of structures shall
occupy more than 40% of the lot area.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.044 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT (R-4).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The R-4 District is established to provide high-
density residential development within municipal limits. Non-residential uses
permitted in this district will be limited to those uses and buildings that
will provide stability and dignity to the area as a residential neighborhood.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Multiple-
Family Residential (R-4) District:
      (1)   Residential uses.  
         (a)   Multiple-family dwellings;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in §
153.041(B)(1)(c) and §
153.042(B)(1)(c), a state licensed residential facility serving from seven
through 16 persons or a licensed day care facility serving from 13 through 16
persons, in accordance with M.S. § 462.357; and
         (c)   Manufactured homes subject to the following conditions:
            1.   All manufactured homes shall be constructed after June 15,
1976, and bear the H.U.D. certification seal;
            2.   The minimum width of the main portion of the structure shall
not be less than 22 feet, as measured across the narrowest portion;
            3.   All dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation in
compliance with the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city;
            4.   Tongues on all manufactured homes shall be removed.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Golf courses;
         (b)   Essential services;
         (c)   Retirement, nursing, assisted living, elderly homes or similar
uses; and
         (d)   Museums, art galleries or similar uses.
      (3)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Library;
         (b)   Primary and secondary schools;
         (c)   Open space, athletic fields, parks, and playgrounds;
         (d)   Public swimming pools (not less than 200 feet from existing
residential neighborhoods or areas platted and/or zoned as residential area
(s)); and
         (e)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like).
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Multiple-Family Residential (R-4) District:
      (1)   Private garages, parking spaces and car ports. Private garages are
intended for use to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or
families whom reside upon the premises, and in which no business service or
industry is carried on. Such space can be rented to noncommercial vehicles,
trailers or equipment if sufficient off-street parking in full compliance with
this chapter is provided elsewhere on the property;
      (2)   Recreational vehicles and equipment;
      (3)   Home occupations as regulated by §
153.070;
      (4)   Noncommercial greenhouses and conservatories;
      (5)   Private swimming pool, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests;
      (6)   Tool sheds, structures and similar buildings for storage of
domestic supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment; and
      (7)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in an R-
4 District:
      (1)   Residential uses. 
         (a)   Multiple-family dwellings or attached single-family dwelling
structures with more than 12 units, provided that:
            1.   There is adequate off-street parking provided in compliance
with §
153.060;
            2.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated, where applicable, by §
153.060; and
            3.   Parking areas shall be adequately screened/landscaped from
surrounding and abutting residential districts in compliance with §
153.065.
         (b)   Residential Planned Unit Development, as regulated by §
153.062; and
         (c)   Residential programs/facilities (more than six individuals).
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Governmental and public regulated utility buildings necessary
for the health, safety and general welfare of the city, provided that:
            1.   Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained
and required setbacks are met;
            2.   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure; and
            3.   Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with §
153.065.
         (b)   Recreational buildings which includes golf courses and
neighborhood or community centers; public or private educational institutes
(limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools); and public
assembly facilities (churches, temples, synagogues), provided that:
            1.   Side yard setbacks shall be double that required for the
district, but not greater that 30 feet;
            2.   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and
landscaping is provided in compliance with §
153.065;
            3.   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided pursuant to
§
153.060 and parking areas are adequately screened/landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with §
153.065; and
            4.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated, where applicable, by §
153.060.
         (c)   Cemeteries, provided that:
            1.   The site has direct vehicular access to a minor arterial or
arterial street; and
            2.   The site is screened in accordance with §
153.065;
         (d)   Neighborhood commercial structure. These buildings may include,
but not limited to the following: small retail and personal service stores
provided they are designed to be functionally harmonious with the existing
residential neighborhood. Permitted structures shall serve the primary needs of
the immediate neighborhood and should not generate a large portion of
destination trips external to the immediate neighborhood, provided that:
            1.   The space is located within an already existing structure; and
            2.   The proposed uses shall not include more than one business per
structure.
         (e)   Businesses and professional service(s) office space but non-
inclusive of facilities or operations that provide overnight accommodations for
patients or funeral homes, mortuaries or similar uses, and provided that:
            1.   Such uses are arranged, designed and constructed to be a
functional, harmonious and compatible component of the surrounding
neighborhood;
            2.   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure;
            3.   Adequate screening and landscaping from adjoining residential
uses is provided in accordance with §
153.065;
            4.   All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light
source is not visible from the public right-of-way or from abutting residential
property and shall be in compliance with §
153.068;
            5.   Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading areas, if
necessary, shall be provided in compliance with §
153.060;
            6.   The site and related parking and service entrances are served
by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the
traffic which will be generated; and
            7.   Vehicular entrances to parking or service areas shall create a
minimum of conflict with through traffic movement.
      (3)   Public, institutional and civic uses. Clubs or lodges which are
operated for the benefit of members only.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in a R-4 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.
 
Unit type Lot area      Lot width Lot depth
Townhomes 2,500 sq. ft. 18 ft.    170 ft.
All other uses (per §  50 ft.    170 ft.
153.069)
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: not less than 25 feet.
         (b)   Side yard:
            1.   Townhouses:
               a.   Interior lots: five feet;
               b.   Corner lots: 12 feet;
               c.   Townhouse: no setback required on internal common walls or
party walls.
            2.   Other principal structures:
               a.   For lots 50 feet wide or less, each side yard must not be
less than six feet in width; for lots more than 50 feet wide but less than 200
feet wide, each side yard must be not less than 12% of the width of the lot;
and for lots 100 feet wide or more, each side yard must be not less than 12
feet wide;
               b.   Corner lots: 12 feet.
         (c)   Rear yard:
            1.   Principal buildings: 25 feet;
            2.   Accessory buildings: five feet, except corner lots, which
shall not be less than 12 feet on the side abutting the street.
   (F)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see the definition BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Dwelling units or principal buildings: 35 feet;
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. No structure or combination of structures shall
occupy more than 40% of the lot area.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.045 MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-5).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. This district is established to set aside an area
within municipal limits for the exclusive use of manufactured home park(s) with
certain restrictions to provide the residents in that district a safe healthful
environment.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Single-family, detached, manufactured housing and
manufactured home park offices shall be permitted uses within the R-5 District
unless otherwise specified in the provisions of this chapter. New mobile home
parks may not be established unless otherwise specified in the provisions of
this chapter. Additionally, existing mobile home parks may not be expanded or
modified (acreage, parcels, lots, etc) unless zoned Manufactured Housing
Residential (R-5) District.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Manufactured Housing Residential District (R-5):
      (1)   Private garages, parking spaces and car ports. Private garages are
intended for use to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or
families whom reside upon the premises, and in which no business service or
industry is carried on such space can be rented to noncommercial vehicles,
trailers or equipment if sufficient off-street parking in full compliance with
this chapter is provided elsewhere on the property;
      (2)   Recreational vehicles and equipment;
      (3)   Home occupations as regulated by §
153.070;
      (4)   Noncommercial greenhouses and conservatories;
      (5)   Private swimming pool, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests;
      (6)   Tool sheds, structures and similar buildings for storage of
domestic supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment;
      (7)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons; and
      (8)   Community laundry facilities, storm shelter, park office,
recreational building(s), provided that such structures are of a permanent
nature and comply with the provisions of the state Uniform Building Code.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in an R-
4 District:
      (1)   Residential uses. Residential Planned Unit Development, as
regulated by §
153.062.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Essential services;
         (b)   Convenience establishments (coin-operated laundries, grocery
stores, dry cleaning establishments, and beauty and barber shops) may be
permitted in mobile home parks subject to the following restrictions:
            1.   Such establishments and parking areas shall not occupy more
than 10% of the area of the park;
            2.   Shall be located, designed and intended to serve frequent
trade or service needs of persons residing in the park; and
            3.   Shall present no visible evidence of their commercial
character to any portion of any residential district outside of the park.
         (c)   Overnight travel trailer park facilities;
         (d)   Wind energy conservation systems, subject to the minimum
standards found in §
153.061;
         (e)   Governmental and public regulated utility buildings necessary
for the health, safety and general welfare of the city, provided, that:
            1.   Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained
and required setbacks are met;
            2.   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure; and
            3.   Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with §
153.065.
         (f)   Recreational buildings which include golf courses and
neighborhood or community centers; public or private educational institutes
(limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools); and public
assembly facilities (churches, temples, synagogues), provided that:
            1.   Side yard setbacks shall be double that required for the
district, but not greater that 30 feet;
            2.   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and
landscaping is provided in compliance with §
153.065;
            3.   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided pursuant to
§
153.060 and parking areas are adequately screened/landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with §
153.065; and
            4.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated, where applicable, by §
153.060.
         (g)   Cemeteries, provided that:
            1.   The site has direct vehicular access to a minor arterial or
arterial street; and
            2.   The site is screened in accordance with §
153.065.
   (E)   General provisions.
      (1)   Drainage and landscaping. All land area shall be adequately
drained, landscaped to control dust, and clean and free from refuse, garbage,
rubbish or debris;
      (2)   Tents. No tents shall be used for residential housing purposes;
however, tents may be used for recreational purposes.
      (3)   Outdoor camping. There shall be no outdoor camping anywhere in a
manufactured housing park.
      (4)   Access approval. Access to manufactured housing parks to/from
public right-of-way shall be approved by the city.
      (5)   Structures. Permits must be obtained for construction of buildings
or structures when required by the Building Code.
      (6)   Enclosure of lower areas; inspection. The area beneath a
manufactured housing unit shall be enclosed with a compatible material except
that such enclosure must have access for inspection.
      (7)   Clothes lines. Laundry and clothing shall be hung out to dry only
on lines indicated in city approved areas established and maintained
exclusively for that purpose, as identified on the manufactured housing park
site plan.
      (8)   Central community buildings. A manufactured housing park shall have
an adequate central community building with the following features, as
applicable:
         (a)   Laundry drying areas and machines;
         (b)   Public toilets and lavatories; and/or
         (c)   Storm shelter.
         (d)   Such buildings shall have adequate heating in all areas and be
maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition.
      (9)   Completion of spaces before occupancy. The minimum number of spaces
completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted in a
manufactured home park shall be ten units.
      (10)   Length of rental. No space shall be rented except for periods of
30 days or more.
      (11)   Tie-down and blocking requirements. Blocking, anchors and tie-
downs shall be placed in accordance with Minnesota state law and the adopted
Building Code.
      (12)   Inspection. All manufactured homes shall comply with state and
local fire, health and building regulations.
      (13)   Refuse disposal. Procedures for garbage, waste and trash disposal
must be approved by the city and must conform to all state and local health and
pollution control regulations.
      (14)   Manufactured housing parks must provide and maintain adequate
park/street lighting throughout the entirety of the park.
   (F)   Site plan requirements. At such time an application is submitted to
rezone property (see §
153.023) to a Manufactured Housing Residential District (R-5), the applicant
must submit a site plan to the city. The applicant shall be bound by said site
plan after the rezone application is processed and acted upon by the city. The
site plan shall be processed contemporaneous with the rezone application.
Thereafter, no building permit shall be issued unless compliance is determined
and deemed consistent with any approval issued by the City Council. The site
plan shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of all owners and developers participating in
the development of the proposed manufactured housing park;
      (2)   The legal description and lot size in acres;
      (3)   The location and size of all manufactured home lots, commercial
lots, storage areas, recreation areas and facilities, landscaping, existing
tree growth, surface water, topography, roadways, sidewalks and parking sites;
      (4)   Detailed landscaping plans, grading plans and specifications;
      (5)   Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, sub-surface
drainage, fire hydrants, water systems, electrical services, gas services,
cable television, and street lighting;
      (6)   Location and right-of-way width for all public streets abutting the
proposed manufactured home park, inclusive of all street/sidewalk accesses and
curbcuts from such street;
      (7)   Preliminary road construction plans and specifications including
applicable cross section and curb details;
      (8)   Preliminary floor plans and elevations for all permanent
structures, as appropriate;
      (9)   Staging and timing of construction program regardless of whether
the entire area will be developed at one time or in phases;
      (10)   Such other information that is deemed reasonable and applicable by
the city in order to complete a comprehensive review of the proposed
development; and
      (11)   The scale for all drawings shall be one inch to 100 feet, legible
and reproducible.
   (G)   Design standards. This division establishes design standards that
should be applied to any applications for new manufactured housing parks within
the municipal limits of Dilworth:
      (1)   Park size. The minimum area required for a manufactured housing
park designation shall be eight acres.
      (2)   Density. The maximum density allowed within a manufactured home
park shall be 12 manufactured homes per gross acre.
      (3)   Individual manufactured housing site (homes 14 feet wide or less).
         (a)   Each manufactured housing site shall contain at least 5,000
square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupant;
         (b)   Width: no less than 50 feet; and
         (c)   Depth: no less than 100 feet.
      (4)   Individual manufactured housing sites (homes in excess of 14 feet,
but less than 18 feet in width):
         (a)   Each manufactured housing site shall contain at least 6,050
square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupant;
         (b)   Width: no less than 55 feet; and
         (c)   Depth: no less than 110 feet.
      (5)   Individual manufactured housing sites (homes over 18 feet in
width);
         (a)   Each manufactured housing site shall contain at least 6,500
square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupant;
         (b)   Width: no less than 65 feet; and
         (c)   Depth: no less than 100 feet.
      (6)   Lot coverage. The manufactured home stand and manufactured home
unit including accessory structures shall not cover more than 50% of the
manufactured home lot.
      (7)   Individual manufactured housing unit setbacks.
         (a)   In manufactured housing parks existing prior to November 1,
1988, housing units shall not be located closer than ten feet to side lot lines
nor closer than 15 feet to its front lot line, or within ten feet of its rear
lot line;
         (b)   In all manufactured housing parks developed after November 1,
1988, housing units shall not be located closer than ten feet to side lot lines
nor closer than 30 feet to its front lot line, or within ten feet of its rear
lot line;
         (c)   All accessory structures such as awnings, cabanas, storage
sheds, car ports, windbreaks, entryways or solar energy system shall be
located, at minimum, three feet from any property line and in no case closer
than ten feet to the nearest adjoining manufactured home.
      (8)   Each manufactured housing site shall have frontage on an approved
street or roadway and the corner of each manufactured home shall be marked and
each site shall be numbered.
      (9)   Building requirements.
         (a)   No principal structure shall exceed one story or 25 feet;
         (b)   No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height;
         (c)   The unit structure is in compliance with the Guidelines for
Manufactured Housing Installation, International Conference of Building
Officials, 1983, as may be amended;
         (d)   No manufactured home stand shall be used for parking more than
one manufactured home; and
         (e)   Each manufactured home shall have the lot number or house number
mounted on the street side of the home.
      (10)   Parking.
         (a)   Each manufactured housing site shall have off-street parking
space for two automobiles. All parking stalls shall be completely contained on
the lot in which they serve;
         (b)   Each manufactured housing park shall maintain additional hard
surfaced off-street parking lot(s) for guests of occupants in the amount of one
space for every three home sites; and
         (c)   Driveways and access roads to unit sites/parking spaces shall be
hard surfaced according to specifications established by the city.
      (11)   Utilities.
         (a)   All manufactured housing units shall be connected to a public
water and sanitary sewer system or a private water and sanitary sewer system
approved by the state Department of Health;
         (b)   All installations for disposal of surface stormwater must be
approved by the city;
         (c)   All utility connections shall be as approved by the city;
         (d)   The source of fuel for cooking, heating or other purposes at
each manufactured housing site shall be approved by the city;
         (e)   All manufactured housing units shall be provided with telephone
and electrical outlets;
         (f)   All utilities shall be underground; there shall be no overhead
wires or supporting poles except those essential for street or other lighting
purposes set forth herein;
         (g)   No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of
plumbing, electrical facilities and related manufactured appurtenances;
         (h)   The owner shall pay any required sewer connection fees to the
city;
         (i)   The owner shall pay inspection and testing fees to the city; and
         (j)   Facilities for fire protection shall be installed as required by
the city.
      (12)   Internal roads and streets.
         (a)   Roads and streets shall be bituminous or concrete surfaced as
approved by the city;
         (b)   All roads and streets shall have a concrete (mountable, roll
type) curb and gutter, unless otherwise approved by the city;
         (c)   All streets shall be developed with a road bed of not less than
32 feet in width and collector streets of not less than 36 feet in width. If
parking is permitted on street then the roadbed shall be at least 36 feet in
width. To qualify for the reduced road width (i.e. 32 feet) adequate off-street
parking must be provided;
         (d)   The city discourages the use of cul-de-sac streets in
manufactured home parks. If they are constructed, cul-de-sacs shall have a
minimum roadbed radius of 40 feet;
         (e)   State and local traffic laws shall govern the operation of motor
vehicles upon all dedicated streets in a mobile/manufactured home park; and
         (f)   The manufactured home park shall have a street lighting plan
approved by the city.
      (13)   Recreation.
         (a)   All manufactured housing parks shall have at least 20% of the
land developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children's play equipment,
swimming pool, golf green, and the like). Developed and maintained at the
owner/operator's expense, unless otherwise negotiated. Such areas shall be
located to avoid any potential traffic hazards.
         (b)   In lieu of land dedication for public park purposes, a cash
contribution as established by the city Subdivision Regulations, as may be
amended or updated, may be paid to the city.
      (14)   Grading. Each manufactured home stand and lot shall have a
longitudinal grade of not less than 4% in traverse crown or grade to provide
adequate surface drainage.
      (15)   Landscaping.
         (a)   Each site shall be properly landscaped with trees, hedges,
grass, fences, windbreaks and similar appropriate materials;
         (b)   A compact hedge, redwood fence or landscaped area shall be
installed around each manufactured home park and shall be maintained in an
appropriate, first class condition at all times; and
         (c)   All areas shall be landscaped in accordance with landscaping
plans approved by the city.
      (16)   Lighting.
         (a)   Artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of
darkness in all buildings containing public toilets, laundry equipment or
common facilities for park occupant's use; and
         (b)   The manufactured housing park grounds shall be lighted as
approved by the city from sunset to sunrise.
      (17)   Storage. Storage of large items such as boats, boat trailers,
recreation vehicles, and the like. shall be accommodated in a separate secured
and screened area of the park. No parking of such vehicles or equipment shall
be permitted on the housing site.
      (18)   Removal. Manufactured home stands and lots shall be at such
elevation, distance and position relative to the street or driveway that
placement and removal of the manufactured home can be accomplished in a
practical and reasonable manner.
      (19)   General. For those items not specifically referenced, the design
standards as established by the Subdivision Regulations, as may be amended,
shall be utilized as general development guidelines.
   (H)   Registration.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the operator of the manufactured housing
park to keep a record of all homeowners and occupants located within the park.
The register shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of each unit occupant;
         (b)   The name and address of the owner of each unit;
         (c)   The make, model and year of the unit;
         (d)   The state, territory or country issuing such license;
         (e)   The date of arrival and departure of each unit; and
         (f)   The number and type of motor vehicles of residents of the park.
      (2)   The park operator shall keep the register available for inspection
at all times by authorized city, state and county officials, public health
officials and other public offices whose duty necessitates acquisition of the
information contained in the register. The register shall not be destroyed
until after a period of three years following the date of departure of the
registrant from the park.
   (I)   Maintenance. The operator and/or owner of any manufactured housing
park, or a duly authorized attendant and/or caretaker shall be responsible at
all times for keeping the park, its facilities and equipment (including, but
not limited to, private roads, public/park restrooms (if any), parking areas,
recreational areas/equipment, street lighting, park lighting, dumpsters, refuse
disposal and storage facilities. See division (E) above for additional
information), in a clean, orderly, operable and sanitary condition. The
attendant or caretaker shall be held accountable along with said operator/
owner, for the violation of any provisions of these regulations to which said
owner/operator is subject.
   (J)   Review procedures. All informational elements as required in this
section shall be submitted to the city in accordance with the normal time
schedule outlined for zoning district amendments, whether or not the proposal
requires a rezoning. Proposals for manufactured housing park expansions on
properly zoned land shall be reviewed for compliance with the applicable
standards and requirements contained in this section by all designated and
official city review bodies.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.046 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-1).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District is to provide for the establishment of integrated neighborhood
centers. These neighborhood commercial centers are intended to provide
convenient services such as office space, retail or service related
establishments to adjacent residential areas. See §
153.068(D) for building and design standards.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Neighborhood
Business District (C-1):
      (1)   Non-residential uses.  
         (a)   Personal services, inclusive of:
            1.   Dry cleaning;
            2.   Laundromat;
            3.   Incidental repair;
            4.   Shoe repair;
            5.   Sewing/tailor;
            6.   Massage treatments;
            7.   Tanning salon; and
            8.   Barber/beauty shop.
         (b)   Professional services/commercial offices, inclusive of:
            1.   Locksmith;
            2.   Dental/hygienic;
            3.   Medical/clinics;
            4.   Chiropractic;
            5.   Travel agency;
            6.   Real estate;
            7.   Arch./design;
            8.   Engineering;
            9.   Accounting;
            10.   Property management;
            11.   Investment (banks, loans, credit unions, and the like); and
            12.   Professional services or commercial offices of similar use/
type/intent.
         (c)   General retail, inclusive of:
            1.   Paint/decor store;
            2.   Book store;
            3.   Camera/photo/film;
            4.   Bicycle sales/repair;
            5.   Essential services;
            6.   Gift store/novelties;
            7.   Jewelry sales;
            8.   Appliance sales;
            9.   Hobby shop;
            10.   Florists;
            11.   Tobacco shop;
            12.   Health food/products;
            13.   Dairy product retail;
            14.   Clothing/apparel;
            15.   Antique store;
            16.   Variety store;
            17.   General sales/repair (clocks, watches, vacuums, dry goods,
televisions, electronics or other similar uses);
            18.   Music/record stores (including instruments); and
            19.   Convenience grocery (non-supermarket and without fuel sales).
         (d)   Food and beverage services, inclusive of:
            1.   Bakery (goods/retail);
            2.   Delicatessen/prepared food sales;
            3.   Dairy product retail;
            4.   Candy/ice cream/frozen desserts;
            5.   Meat or produce market (non-processing); and
            6.   Grocery, fruit/vegetable store (non-vehicle or movable sales).
         (e)   Residential programs/facilities, day care facilities, child care
centers, retirement, nursing, assisted living, elderly homes or similar uses,
provided that:
            1.   Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational
areas, unless otherwise approved. Said area shall be fenced, controlled and
screened in compliance with §
153.065;
            2.   The site and related parking/service entrances have direct
access to an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate
the traffic which will be generated by the development. Vehicular entrances to
parking or service areas shall create minimum conflicts with through traffic
movement;
            3.   Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with §
153.060;
            4.   Adequate off-street loading, as deemed applicable, is provided
in compliance with §
153.060;
            5.   When abutting a residential district, a buffer area with
screening and landscaping in compliance with §
153.065 shall be provided; and
            6.   All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly
adhered to and all operating permits are secured.
      (2)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like);
         (b)   Governmental offices; and
         (c)   Open space, athletic fields, parks and playgrounds.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Neighborhood Commercial District (C-1):
      (1)   Commercial uses within a building/structure that are accessory to
the principal use but such use shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor space as
utilized by the principal use;
      (2)   Off-street parking as regulated by §
153.060, but not including off-street parking for semi-trailer trucks; and
      (3)   Off-street loading facilities as regulated by §
153.060.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in a C-
1 District:
      (1)   Residential uses. Multiple-family dwellings up to 12 units
(consistent with conditions under division (2) below).
      (2)   Non-residential uses. Publicly regulated utility buildings,
structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the
community, drug stores, automobile service station, mini-warehouse or storage
garages with no outdoor storage, multiple-family dwellings up to 12 units,
private club or lodge serving food and beverages, and restaurants, cafes and
off-safe liquor with no drive-thru service, provided that:
         (a)   Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained
and required setbacks are met;
         (b)   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure; and
         (c)   Adequate screening and landscaping from neighborhood residential
districts is provided in accordance with §
153.065.
      (3)   Planned Unit Developments.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the C-1 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.
 
Use type     Lot area       Lot width Lot depth
As permitted 10,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.   N/A
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: not less than 30 feet.
         (b)   Side yard: not less than 15 feet, and side yard abutting a
street shall not be less than 20 feet;
         (c)   Rear yard: 20 feet.
   (F)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see definition BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Principal buildings: 35 feet;
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.047 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. This district is established to provide a core
area of civic and high quality commercial uses to the community of Dilworth.
These services should vary in use and extent to facilitate interdependence. The
intent of this district is to support commercial uses that provide economic
activity within city limits and to provide adequate/safe access to
transportation infrastructure. See §
153.068(D) for building and design standards.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Central
Business District (C-2):
      (1)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Animal-related services, inclusive of:
            1.   Veterinary clinics/hospitals (no overnight care, outside
pens); and
            2.   Pet shops (no outside pens, kennels or exercise yards).
         (b)   Entertainment and recreational activities, inclusive of:
            1.   Art galleries;
            2.   Museums;
            3.   Bowling alleys;
            4.   Billiards;
            5.   Indoor recreation;
            6.   Studios/dance; and
            7.   Theatres (non-drive-up).
         (c)   Vehicles and equipment, inclusive of:
            1.   Auto service station; and
            2.   Automobile repair (minor, includes tire sales).
         (d)   Personal services, inclusive of:
            1.   Dry cleaning;
            2.   Laundromat;
            3.   Incidental repair;
            4.   Shoe repair/sales;
            5.   Sewing/tailor;
            6.   Massage treatments;
            7.   Tanning salon;
            8.   Barber/beauty shop;
            9.   Drug/pharmaceuticals;
            10.   Employment agencies;
            11.   Health clubs; and
            12.   Mortuaries/funeral.
         (e)   Professional services/commercial offices, inclusive of:
            1.   Locksmith;
            2.   Dental/hygienic;
            3.   Medical/clinics/hospitals;
            4.   Chiropractic;
            5.   Travel agency;
            6.   Real estate;
            7.   Architecture/design;
            8.   Engineering;
            9.   Accounting;
            10.   Property management;
            11.   Contracting (office);
            12.   Insurance sales/claims;
            13.   Plumbing/heating/electrical;
            14.   Shops/sales;
            15.   Investment (banks, savings, loans, credit unions, and the
like); and
            16.   Professional services or commercial offices of similar use/
type/intent.
         (f)   General retail, inclusive of:
            1.   Paint/decor store;
            2.   Book store;
            3.   Camera/photo/film;
            4.   Bicycle sales/repair;
            5.   Essential services;
            6.   Gift store/novelties;
            7.   Jewelry sales;
            8.   Appliance sales;
            9.   Hobby shop;
            10.   Florists;
            11.   Tobacco shop;
            12.   Health food/products;
            13.   Dairy product retail;
            14.   Clothing/apparel;
            15.   Antique store;
            16.   Variety store;
            17.   Hardware;
            18.   Pawn shops;
            19.   Tattoo shops;
            20.   Sporting goods;
            21.   Toy/game stores;
            22.   General sales/repair (clocks, watches, vacuums, dry goods,
fabric, auto part sales, postage, appliances, copies, televisions, electronics
or other similar uses);
            23.   Music/record stores (including instruments);
            24.   Convenience store (with or without fuel sales);
            25.   Department/discount;
            26.   Hunting goods/firearms/with other merchandise sales;
            27.   State-licensed THC product sales;
            28.   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible retailer-only and
the following cannabis-related uses: delivery service, event organizer business
and retailer-only;
            29.   State-licensed medical cannabis retailer-only; and
            30.   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible, cannabis edible or
medical cannabis edible product manufacturing.
         (g)   Food and beverage services, inclusive of:
            1.   Bakery (goods/retail);
            2.   Delicatessen/prepared food sales;
            3.   Nightclubs;
            4.   Cocktail lounges;
            5.   Clubs/lodges;
            6.   Restaurants, cafes (no drive thru service);
            7.   Dairy product retail;
            8.   Candy/ice cream/frozen desserts;
            9.   Meat or produce market (non-processing);
            10.   Grocery, supermarket, fruit/vegetable store (non-vehicle or
movable sales); and
            11.   Liquor store (on-off sale).
         (h)   Lodging facilities, inclusive of:
            1.   Motels/motor hotels; and
            2.   Hotels.
         (i)   Residential programs/facilities, day care facilities, child care
centers, retirement, nursing, assisted living, elderly homes or similar uses,
provided that:
            1.   Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational
areas, unless otherwise approved. Said area shall be fenced, controlled and
screened in compliance with §
153.065;
            2.   The site and related parking/service entrances have direct
access to an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate
the traffic which will be generated by the development. Vehicular entrances to
parking or service areas shall create minimum conflicts with through traffic
movement;
            3.   Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with §
153.060;
            4.   Adequate off-street loading, as deemed applicable, is provided
in compliance with §
153.060;
            5.   When abutting a residential district, a buffer area with
screening and landscaping in compliance with §
153.065 shall be provided; and
            6.   All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly
adhered to and all operating permits are secured.
         (j)   Commercial car washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-
service), provided that:
            1.   Stacking space is constructed subject to the approval of the
City Engineer;
            2.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be screened in compliance with this chapter;
            3.   Parking or car storage space shall be screened from view of
abutting residential districts in compliance with §
153.065;
            4.   The entire area other than that occupied by the building or
plantings shall be surfaced with material which will control dust and drainage,
of which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer;
            5.   The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject
to the approval of the city;
            6.   All lighting shall be hooded and so directed so as not to be
in violation of the provisions of §
153.068; and
            7.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the business shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
      (2)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Library;
         (b)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like);
         (c)   Governmental offices, conference centers, civic buildings;
         (d)   Open space, athletic fields, parks and playgrounds;
         (e)   Trade or vocational schools; and
         (f)   Parking lots and transportation terminals.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Central Business District (C-2):
      (1)   Commercial uses within a building/structure that are accessory to
the principal use but such use shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor space as
utilized by the principal use;
      (2)   Off-street parking as regulated by §
153.060, but not including off-street parking for semi-trailer trucks; and
      (3)   Off-street loading facilities as regulated by §
153.060.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in a C-
2 District:
      (1)   Residential uses. Multiple-family dwellings, up to 12 units,
provided that:
         (a)   There is adequate off-street parking in compliance with §
153.060;
         (b)   One off-street loading space, if applicable, in compliance with
§
153.060;
         (c)   Parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of
surrounding and abutting residential districts in compliance with §
153.065;
         (d)   All signing and informal or visual communication devices shall
be in compliance with the applicable provisions of the City Code;
         (e)   The principal use structure is in compliance with the state
Uniform Building Code; and
         (f)   Usable open space is equal to 20% of the gross lot area.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Publicly regulated utility buildings, structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community and mini-warehouse or
storage garages with no outdoor storage; and
         (b)   Automobile sales and rentals.
      (3)   Planned Unit Developments.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the C-2 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.
 
Use type     Lot area Lot width Lot depth
As permitted None     None      None
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: ten feet from curb line or right-of-way/property
boundary, whichever is more restrictive;
         (b)   Side and rear setbacks: none or as otherwise required per
building codes.
   (F)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see definition of BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Principal building: none;
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 23-01, passed 4-24-2023; Ord. 24-09, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 153.048 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-3).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the C-3 General Business
District to provide areas for commercial establishments that offer a variety of
goods and services. The district is intended to attract commercial uses that
can provide products and services to the community and region. Proximity to
adjacent uses for spin-off business is not a primary consideration and this
district should provide larger lots and efficient access to arterial streets.
See §
153.068(D) for building and design standards.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the General
Business District (C-3):
      (1)   Residential uses. Trailer parks and camping facilities: camping
facilities for tourists provided that any boundary line associated with the
facility is at least 300 feet from any existing residential district.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Animal-related services, inclusive of:
            1.   Veterinary clinics/hospitals (no overnight care, no outside
pens, runs or exercise yards). Dog daycares are permitted as a conditional use
(see division (D));
            2.   Pet shops (no outside pens, kennels or exercise yards); and
            3.   All animal-related services shall be conducted within a
soundproof building or structure designed to minimize noise pollution.
         (b)   Entertainment and recreational activities, inclusive of:
            1.   Art galleries;
            2.   Museums;
            3.   Bowling alleys;
            4.   Billiards;
            5.   Indoor recreation;
            6.   Studios/dance;
            7.   Miniature golf;
            8.   Golf driving range;
            9.   Theatres (drive-up requires six foot obscuring fence); and
            10.   Amusement parks (go-kart tracks shall be at least 300 feet
from any residential district);
         (c)   Vehicles and equipment, inclusive of:
            1.   Auto service station;
            2.   Automobile repair (major, minor and tire sales);
            3.   Agricultural implements/dealerships; and
            4.   Automobile sales and rentals.
         (d)   Personal services, inclusive of:
            1.   Dry cleaning;
            2.   Laundromat;
            3.   Incidental repair;
            4.   Shoe repair/sales;
            5.   Sewing/tailor;
            6.   Massage treatments;
            7.   Tanning salon;
            8.   Barber/beauty shop;
            9.   Drug/pharmaceuticals;
            10.   Employment agencies;
            11.   Health clubs; and
            12.   Mortuaries/funeral.
         (e)   Professional services/commercial offices, inclusive of:
            1.   Locksmith;
            2.   Dental/hygienic;
            3.   Medical/clinics/hospitals;
            4.   Chiropractic;
            5.   Travel agency;
            6.   Real estate;
            7.   Architecture/design;
            8.   Engineering;
            9.   Accounting;
            10.   Property management;
            11.   Contracting (office);
            12.   Insurance sales/claims;
            13.   Plumbing/heating/electrical shops/sales; and
            14.   Electrical/heating/air conditioning/masonry/refrigeration/
roofing or similar contracting businesses where outside equipment or storage
does not exceed 20,000 square feet, provided the area is effectively screened
by a site obscuring fence at least six feet in height.
            15.   Investment (banks, savings, loans, credit unions, and the
like); and
            16.   Professional services or commercial offices of similar use/
type/intent.
         (f)   General retail, inclusive of:
            1.   Paint/decor store;
            2.   Book store;
            3.   Camera/photographic/film;
            4.   Bicycle sales/repair;
            5.   Essential services;
            6.   Gift store/novelties;
            7.   Jewelry sales;
            8.   Appliance sales;
            9.   Hobby shop;
            10.   Florists;
            11.   Tobacco shop;
            12.   Health food/products;
            13.   Dairy product retail;
            14.   Clothing/apparel;
            15.   Antique store;
            16.   Variety store;
            17.   Hardware;
            18.   Pawn shops;
            19.   Tattoo shops;
            20.   Sporting goods;
            21.   Toy/game stores;
            22.   Nurseries/landscape/garden centers;
            23.   General sales/repair (clocks, watches, vacuums, dry goods,
fabric, auto part sales, postage, appliances, copies, televisions, electronics
or other similar uses);
            24.   Music/record stores (including instruments);
            25.   Convenience store (with or without fuel sales);
            26.   Department/discount;
            27.   Hunting goods/firearms/with other merchandise sales;
            28.   State-licensed THC product sales;
            29.   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible retailer-only and
the following cannabis-related uses: delivery service, event organizer business
and retailer-only;
            30.   State-licensed medical cannabis retailer-only; and
            31.   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible, cannabis edible or
medical cannabis edible product manufacturing.
         (g)   Food and beverage services, inclusive of:
            1.   Bakery (goods/retail);
            2.   Delicatessen/prepared food sales;
            3.   Nightclubs;
            4.   Cocktail lounges;
            5.   Liquor stores (on/off sale);
            6.   Clubs/lodges;
            7.   Restaurants, cafes;
            8.   Bars, liquor sales;
            9.   Dairy product retail;
            10.   Meat or produce market (non-processing);
            11.   Truck stops/drive-thru restaurants (parking lots shall be 150
feet from any existing residential district);
            12.   Candy/ice cream/frozen desserts; and
            13.   Grocery, supermarket, fruit/vegetable store (non-vehicle or
movable sales).
         (h)   Lodging facilities; inclusive of:
            1.   Motels/motor hotels; and
            2.   Hotels.
         (i)   Residential programs/facilities, day care facilities, child care
centers, retirement, nursing, assisted living, elderly homes or similar uses,
provided that:
            1.   Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational
areas, unless otherwise approved. Said area shall be fenced, controlled and
screened in compliance with §
153.065;
            2.   The site and related parking/service entrances have direct
access to an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate
the traffic which will be generated by the development. Vehicular entrances to
parking or service areas shall create minimum conflicts with through traffic
movement;
            3.   Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with §
153.060;
            4.   Adequate off-street loading, as deemed applicable, is provided
in compliance with §
153.060;
            5.   When abutting a residential district, a buffer area with
screening and landscaping in compliance with §
153.065 shall be provided;
            6.   All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly
adhered to and all operating permits are secured; and
            7.   All signing, informational or visual communication devices
shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this code.
         (j)   Commercial car washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-
service), provided that:
            1.   Stacking space is constructed subject to the approval of the
City Engineer;
            2.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be screened in compliance with this chapter;
            3.   Parking or car storage space shall be screened from view of
abutting residential districts in compliance with §
153.065;
            4.   The entire area other than occupied by the building or
plantings shall be surfaced with material which will control dust and drainage,
of which is subject to the approval of the City Engineer;
            5.   The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject
to the approval of the city;
            6.   All lighting shall be hooded and so directed so as not to be
in violation of the provisions of §
153.068; and
            7.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the business shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
      (3)   Industrial uses. Production (light assembly) and warehouse,
inclusive of:
            1.   Building material sales (non-lumber yard);
            2.   Lumber yards (outside storage shall be screened by a six foot
obscuring fence);
            3.   Modular (factory built) home sales;
            4.   Carpentry/cabinets;
            5.   Furniture sales/assembly;
            6.   Furniture re-finishing;
            7.   Mini-storage/warehouse; and
            8.   Assembly/processing of non-offensive materials (appliances,
electrical equipment, medical, dental, scientific or other similar uses).
      (4)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Library;
         (b)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like);
         (c)   Governmental offices/buildings, conference centers, civic
buildings;
         (d)   Open space, athletic fields, parks and playgrounds;
         (e)   Trade or vocational schools; and
         (f)   Parking lots/ramps and transportation terminals.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Central Business District (C-3):
      (1)   Commercial uses within a building/structure that are accessory to
the principal use but such use shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor space as
utilized by the principal use;
      (2)   Off-street parking as regulated by §
153.060, but not including off-street parking for semi-trailer trucks;
      (3)   Off-street loading facilities as regulated by §
153.060;
      (4)   Outdoor storage, sales, rental and service subject to §§
153.068 and
153.069; and
      (5)   The stockpiling of black dirt and landscaping rock and materials
accessory to nurseries, landscape centers and garden centers.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in an C-
3 District:.
      (1)   Residential uses. Multiple-family dwellings up to 12 units,
provided that:
         (a)   There is adequate off-street parking in compliance with §
153.060;
         (b)   One off-street loading space, if applicable, in compliance with
§
153.060;
         (c)   Parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of
surrounding and abutting residential districts in compliance with §
153.065;
         (d)   All signing and informal or visual communication devices shall
be in compliance with the applicable provisions of the City Code;
         (e)   The principal use structure is in compliance with the state
Uniform Building Code; and
         (f)   Usable open space is equal to 20% of the gross lot area.
      (2)   Non-residential uses. Publicly regulated utility buildings,
structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the
community.
         (a)   Adequate off-street loading is provided in compliance with §
153.060;
         (b)   Vehicular entrances to parking or service areas shall create
minimum conflict with through traffic movement; and
         (c)   All signing and informational or visual communication devices
shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Planned Unit Developments.
      (4)   Off-premise or billboard signs as provided for in §
153.064.
      (3)   Planned Unit Developments.
      (4)   Commercial kennels, dog daycares, dog clinics or shelters with
outdoor activity spaces, providing for overnight stays, provided that:
         (a)   Limited to a set maximum number of animals at any one time. This
number shall be set at the time of permit issuance.
         (b)   All animal-related uses and services (excluding an outdoor
activity space) shall be conducted within a soundproof building or structure
designed to minimize noise pollution.
         (c)   Animal waste and order control shall be addressed as part of
facility operations.
         (d)   The site and related parking and service entrances are served by
an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the
traffic that will be generated.
         (e)   Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with §
153.060.
         (f)   All facilities, including the outdoor activity spaces shall be
located at least 300 feet from any existing residential use or low-density (R-
1, R-2) residential districts.
         (g)   No outdoor runs or kennels.
         (h)   Outdoor activity spaces shall meet the following requirements:
            1.   The space shall be completely fenced and screened by a six-
foot-tall fence that is at least 80% opaque.
            2.   The space shall be cleaned daily so as not to create a
nuisance.
            3.   Animal waste produced within the space shall not be allowed
directly enter the city's storm sewer system.
            4.   Animals in the activity space shall be attended by a facility
staff member. Noise from dogs shall be muffled as practically as possible.
Continuous or excessive barking shall not be allowed.
      (5)   Off-premise or billboard signs as provided for in §
153.064.
      (6)   State-licensed medical cannabis combination business, may:
            (a)   Manufacture artificially derived cannabinoids;
            (b)   Manufacture medical cannabinoid products;
            (c)   Manufacture lower-potency hemp edibles;
            (d)   Manufacture adult-use cannabis edibles;
            (e)   Sell medical cannabis flower and cannabinoid products; and
            (f)   Sell immature cannabis plants and seedlings, adult-use
flower, adult- use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp derived
consumer products, and other products authorized by law.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the C-3 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.
 
Use type     Lot area Lot width Lot depth
As permitted None     None      None
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: none or as otherwise required per building codes.
         (b)   Side and rear setbacks: none or as otherwise required per
building codes.
   (F)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see definition of BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Principal building: none.
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 23-01, passed 4-24-2023; Ord. 24-04, passed 4-8-2024;
Ord. 24-09, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 153.049 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the I-1 Light Industrial
District to permit light industrial uses that are free from objectionable
influence upon adjacent urban development.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Light
Industrial District (I-1):
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Residential uses, provided that one dwelling unit shall be
allowed per commercial structure and shall be incorporated into the structure.
Residential uses shall not be located at ground level/first floor of any
commercial structure in this district; and
         (b)   Trailer parks and camping facilities: camping facilities for
tourists provided that any boundary line associated with the facility is at
least 300 feet from any existing residential district.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Animal-related services, inclusive of:
            1.   Veterinary clinics/hospitals/shelters (no overnight care, no
outside pens); and
            2.   Pet shops (no outside pens, kennels or exercise yards).
         (b)   Entertainment and recreational activities, inclusive of:
            1.   Art galleries;
            2.   Museums;
            3.   Bowling alleys;
            4.   Billiards;
            5.   Indoor recreation;
            6.   Studios/dance;
            7.   Miniature golf;
            8.   Golf driving range;
            9.   Theatres (drive-up requires six foot obscuring fence); and
            10.   Amusement parks (go-kart tracks shall be at least 300 feet
from any residential district).
         (c)   Vehicles and equipment, inclusive of:
            1.   Auto service station;
            2.   Automobile repair (major, minor and tire sales);
            3.   Agricultural implements/dealerships;
            4.   Automobile sales and rentals (includes dealerships/
implements); and
            5.   Heavy equipment sales, service, and repair.
         (d)   Personal services, inclusive of:
            1.   Dry cleaning;
            2.   Laundromat;
            3.   Incidental repair;
            4.   Shoe repair/sales;
            5.   Sewing/tailor;
            6.   Massage treatments;
            7.   Tanning salon;
            8.   Barber/beauty shop;
            9.   Drug/pharmaceuticals;
            10.   Employment agencies;
            11.   Health clubs; and
            12.   Mortuaries/funeral.
         (e)   Professional services/commercial offices, inclusive of:
            1.   Locksmith;
            2.   Dental/hygienic;
            3.   Medical/clinics/hospitals;
            4.   Chiropractic;
            5.   Travel agency;
            6.   Real estate;
            7.   Architecture/design;
            8.   Engineering;
            9.   Accounting;
            10.   Property management;
            11.   Contracting (office);
            12.   Insurance sales/claims;
            13.   Plumbing/heating/electrical shops/sales;
            14.   Electrical/heating/air conditioning/masonry/refrigeration/
roofing or similar contracting businesses where outside equipment or storage
does not exceed 20,000 square feet, provided the area is effectively screened
by a site obscuring fence at least six feet in height;
            15.   Investment (banks, savings, loans, credit unions, and the
like); and
            16.   Professional services or commercial offices of similar use/
type/intent.
         (f)   General retail, inclusive of:
            1.   Paint/decor store;
            2.   Book store;
            3.   Camera/photographic/film;
            4.   Bicycle sales/repair;
            5.   Essential services;
            6.   Gift store/novelties;
            7.   Jewelry sales;
            8.   Appliance sales;
            9.   Hobby shop;
            10.   Florists;
            11.   Tobacco shop;
            12.   Health food/products;
            13.   Dairy product retail;
            14.   Clothing/apparel;
            15.   Antique store;
            16.   Variety store;
            17.   Hardware;
            18.   Pawn shops;
            19.   Tattoo shops;
            20.   Sporting goods;
            21.   Toy/game stores;
            22.   Nurseries/landscape/garden centers;
            23.   General sales/repair (clocks, watches, vacuums, dry goods,
fabric, auto part sales, postage, appliances, copies, televisions, electronics
or other similar uses);
            24.   Music/record stores (including instruments);
            25.   Convenience store (with or without fuel sales);
            26.   Department/discount; and
            27.   Hunting goods/firearms/with other merchandise sales.
         (g)   Food and beverage services, inclusive of:
            1.   Bakery (goods/retail);
            2.   Delicatessen/prepared food sales;
            3.   Nightclubs;
            4.   Cocktail lounges;
            5.   Liquor stores (on/off sale);
            6.   Clubs/lodges;
            7.   Restaurants, cafes;
            8.   Bars, liquor sales;
            9.   Dairy product retail;
            10.   Meat or produce market (non-processing);
            11.   Truck stops/drive-thru restaurants (parking lots shall be 150
feet from any existing residential district);
            12.   Candy/ice cream/frozen desserts;
            13.   Grocery, supermarket, fruit/vegetable store (non-vehicle or
movable sales); and
            14.   Bottling/distribution facilities.
         (h)   Lodging facilities, inclusive of:
            1.   Motels/motor hotels; and
            2.   Hotels.
         (i)   Agricultural processing (including fertilizer manufacturing),
grain elevator and feed mixing and grinding plants; asphalt and concrete
batching or ready-mix plants; concrete or cement products manufacturing;
battery manufacture; bulk fuel, or gas storage; slaughter of animals (excluding
stock yards); tire recapping or retreading or other similar heavy industrial
uses, provided that:
            1.   A minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet and minimum lot width
of 150 feet;
            2.   Drainage systems shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer;
            3.   Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §
153.068;
            4.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with §
153.068;
            5.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the business shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer; and
            6.   No outside storage except as allowed in compliance with §
153.068.
         (j)   Car impound lots (other than publicly owned), provided that:
            1.   The entire site other than that taken up by a building,
structure or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and
drainage, subject to the approval of the City Engineer;
            2.   Drainage systems shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer;
            3.   Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §
153.068;
            4.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with §
153.068;
            5.   All fencing shall conform with the applicable provisions of
the City Code;
            6.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the facility shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer; and
            7.   No additional outside storage except as allowed in compliance
with §§
153.068 and
153.069 shall be allowed.
         (k)   Salvage yards, wrecking yards, or waste recycling facilities,
public utilities and public service uses to include: car impound lots, power
production, waste and water treatment plants, solid waste transfer station,
coal transfer stations and holding ponds, solid waste incineration or
composting with or without energy recovery, provided that:
            1.   Drainage systems shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer;
            2.   Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §
153.068;
            3.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with §
153.068;
            4.   All fencing shall conform with the applicable provisions of
the City Code;
            5.   Exterior storage areas shall be screened from view in
compliance with §
153.068; and
            6.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the facility shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
         (l)   Insecticide and pesticide, packaging only, and metal finishing,
planting, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning, rust-proofing and heat
treatment, provided that:
            1.   Drainage systems shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer;
            2.   Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §
153.068;
            3.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with §
153.068;
            4.   All fencing shall conform with the applicable provisions of
the City Code; exterior storage areas shall be screened from view in compliance
with §
153.068; and
            5.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the facility shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
      (3)   Industrial uses. Manufacturing, production (light assembly),
warehouse, storage and waste, inclusive of:
         (a)   Building material sales (non-lumber yard);
         (b)   Lumber yards (outside storage shall be screened by a six foot
obscuring fence);
         (c)   Modular (factory built) home sales;
         (d)   Carpentry/cabinets;
         (e)   Furniture sales/assembly;
         (f)   Furniture re-finishing;
         (g)   Mini-storage/warehouse/rental facilities;
         (h)   Assembly/processing of non-offensive materials (appliances,
electrical equipment, medical, dental, advertising products, scientific or
other similar uses);
         (i)   Highway/street maintenance facilities;
         (j)   Research/development/testing laboratories/facilities;
         (k)   Fabrication, machining, processing, packing/packaging, freight
or general light industrial uses (non-inclusive of agricultural fertilizer/
pesticide processing/sales, batch plants, concrete plants, grain elevators,
bulk fuel sales, grinding plants, feed mixing, slaughter facilities, tire
recapping/retreading or similar heavy industrial uses);
         (l)   State-licensed lower-potency hemp concentrate manufacturing and
the following cannabis-related uses: cultivator, manufacturer, mezzobusiness,
microbusiness, testing facility, transporter and wholesaler; and
         (m)   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible, cannabis edible or
medical cannabis edible product manufacturing.
      (4)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Library;
         (b)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like);
         (c)   Governmental offices, conference centers, civic buildings;
         (d)   Trade or vocational schools; and
         (e)   Parking lots/ramps and transportation terminals.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Light Industrial District (I-1):
      (1)   Commercial uses within a building/structure that are accessory to
the principal use but such use shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor space as
utilized by the principal use;
      (2)   Off-street parking as regulated by §
153.060, but not including off-street parking for semi-trailer trucks;
      (3)   Off-street loading facilities as regulated by §
153.060; and
      (4)   Outdoor storage, sales, rental and service subject to §§
153.068 and
153.069.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in an I-
1 District:
      (1)   Residential uses. Multiple-family dwellings up to 12 units,
provided that:
         (a)   There is adequate off-street parking in compliance with §
153.060;
         (b)   One off-street loading space, if applicable, in compliance with
§
153.060;
         (c)   Parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of
surrounding and abutting residential districts in compliance with §
153.065;
         (d)   All signing and informal or visual communication devices shall
be in compliance with the applicable provisions of the City Code;
         (e)   The principal use structure is in compliance with the state
Uniform Building Code; and
         (f)   Usable open space is equal to 20% of the gross lot area.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Publicly regulated utility buildings, structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community; and
         (b)   Adult establishments (all types). This citation is based on a
report prepared entitled "Report Of The Attorney General's Working Group On
Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses", dated June 6, 1989; other adjacent
municipalities adopted regulations regarding adult uses and a review of zoning
districts under this chapter. The city has determined that adult uses will have
secondary effects upon certain pre-existing land uses within the city.
Therefore, adult uses can be reasonably allowed in the Light Industrial (I-1)
and Heavy Industrial (I-2) Districts if separated from certain sensitive land
uses, provided that:
            1.   No adult establishment shall be located less than 1,000 feet
from the nearest property line of any land in a residential zone, Planned Unit
Development, residential uses, child care centers, day care facilities, school,
religious institution, park, public recreational facility, library,
establishment with a liquor license, playground or any similar sensitive use as
determined by the city, whether within the city limits or not;
            2.   No adult establishment may be located less than 500 feet from
any other adult establishment, whether within city limits or not. Measurements
shall be made in a direct line from the property line of the premises where
each use is located;
            3.   Off-site visibility. Any business operating as an adult
establishment shall prevent visibility of its merchandise from public streets,
sidewalks, parking lots or any areas outside of the building;
            4.   All entrances to the building (other than fire exits not
useable by patrons) should be visible from the public right-of-way;
            5.   Signage. Signs shall not contain representational depiction of
an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the adult theme of the operation;
            6.   Minors. No minor shall be permitted on the premises of any
adult establishment; and
            7.   Other requirements may apply as determined through the
conditional use permit process, as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission and City Council.
      (3)   Off-premise or billboard signs as provided for in §
153.064.
      (4)   State-licensed medical cannabis combination business, may:
         (a)   Grow cannabis plants from seed or immature plant to mature plant
and harvest adult-use cannabis flower and medical cannabis flower from a mature
plant;
         (b)   Make cannabis concentrate;
         (c)   Make hemp concentrate, including hemp concentrate with a delta-
9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than 0.3% as measured by weight;
         (d)   Manufacture adult-use cannabis products and hemp derived
consumer products for public consumption;
         (e)   Package and label medical cannabis and medical cannabinoid
products for sale; and
         (f)   Package and label adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles and hemp derived consumer products for
sale to customers.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the I-1 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.
 
Use type     Lot area Lot width Lot depth
As permitted None     None      None
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: none or as otherwise required per building codes.
         (b)   Side and rear setbacks: none or as otherwise required per
building codes.
   (F)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see definition of BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Principal building: none.
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 24-09, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 153.050 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the I-2 Heavy Industrial
District to provide an area that will accommodate industries not permitted in
other districts. However, these uses should not endanger the health, safety or
general welfare of the city or its residents.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Heavy
Industrial District (I-2):
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Residential uses, provided that one dwelling unit shall be
allowed per commercial structure and shall be incorporated into the structure.
Residential uses shall not be located at ground level/first floor of any
commercial structure in this district;
         (b)   Trailer parks and camping facilities: camping facilities for
tourists provided that any boundary line associated with the facility is at
least 300 feet from any existing residential district.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Animal-related services, inclusive of:
            1.   Veterinary clinics/hospitals/shelters (no overnight care, no
outside pens); and
            2.   Pet shops (no outside pens, kennels or exercise yards).
         (b)   Entertainment and recreational activities, inclusive of:
            1.   Art galleries;
            2.   Museums;
            3.   Bowling alleys;
            4.   Billiards;
            5.   Indoor recreation;
            6.   Studios/dance;
            7.   Miniature golf;
            8.   Golf driving range;
            9.   Theatres (drive-up requires six foot obscuring fence); and
            10.   Amusement parks (go-kart tracks shall be at least 300 feet
from any residential district);
         (c)   Vehicles and equipment, inclusive of:
            1.   Auto service station;
            2.   Automobile repair (major, minor and tire sales);
            3.   Agricultural implements/dealerships;
            4.   Automobile sales and rentals (includes dealerships/
implements); and
            5.   Heavy equipment sales, service, and repair.
         (d)   Personal services, inclusive of:
            1.   Dry cleaning;
            2.   Laundromat;
            3.   Incidental repair;
            4.   Shoe repair/sales;
            5.   Sewing/tailor;
            6.   Massage treatments;
            7.   Tanning salon; barber/beauty shop;
            8.   Drug/pharmaceuticals;
            9.   Employment agencies;
            10.   Health clubs; and
            11.   Mortuaries/funeral.
         (e)   Professional services/commercial offices, inclusive of:
            1.   Locksmith;
            2.   Dental/hygienic;
            3.   Medical/clinics/hospitals;
            4.   Chiropractic;
            5.   Travel agency;
            6.   Real estate;
            7.   Architecture/design;
            8.   Engineering;
            9.   Accounting;
            10.   Property management;
            11.   Contracting (office);
            12.   Insurance sales/claims;
            13.   Plumbing/heating/electrical shops/sales;
            14.   Electrical/heating/air conditioning/masonry/refrigeration/
roofing or similar contracting businesses where outside equipment or storage
does not exceed 20,000 square feet, provided the area is effectively screened
by a site obscuring fence at least six feet in height;
            15.   Investment (banks, savings, loans, credit unions, and the
like); and
            16.   Professional services or commercial offices of similar use/
type/intent.
         (f)   General retail, inclusive of:
            1.   Paint/decor store;
            2.   Book store;
            3.   Camera/photographic/film;
            4.   Bicycle sales/repair;
            5.   Essential services;
            6.   Gift store/novelties;
            7.   Jewelry sales;
            8.   Appliance sales;
            9.   Hobby shop;
            10.   Florists;
            11.   Tobacco shop;
            12.   Health food/products;
            13.   Dairy product retail;
            14.   Clothing/apparel;
            15.   Antique store;
            16.   Variety store;
            17.   Hardware;
            18.   Pawn shops;
            19.   Tattoo shops;
            20.   Sporting goods;
            21.   Toy/game stores;
            22.   Nurseries/landscape/garden centers;
            23.   General sales/repair (clocks, watches, vacuums, dry goods,
fabric, auto part sales, postage, appliances, copies, televisions, electronics
or other similar uses);
            24.   Music/record stores (including instruments);
            25.   Convenience store (with or without fuel sales);
            26.   Department/discount; and
            27.   Hunting goods/firearms/with other merchandise sales.
         (g)   Food and beverage services, inclusive of:
            1.   Bakery (goods/retail);
            2.   Delicatessen/prepared food sales;
            3.   Nightclubs;
            4.   Cocktail lounges;
            5.   Liquor stores (on/off sale);
            6.   Clubs/lodges;
            7.   Restaurants, cafes;
            8.   Bars, liquor sales;
            9.   Dairy product retail;
            10.   Meat or produce market (non-processing);
            11.   Truck stops/drive-thru restaurants (parking lots shall be 150
feet from any existing residential district);
            12.   Candy/ice cream/frozen desserts;
            13.   Grocery, supermarket, fruit/vegetable store (non-vehicle or
movable sales); and
            14.   Bottling/distribution facilities.
         (h)   Lodging facilities, inclusive of:
            1.   Motels/motor hotels; and
            2.   Hotels.
         (i)   Agricultural processing (including fertilizer manufacturing);
grain elevator and feed mixing and grinding plants; asphalt and concrete
batching or ready-mix plants; concrete or cement products manufacturing;
battery manufacture; bulk fuel, or gas storage; slaughter of animals (excluding
stock yards); tire recapping or retreading or other similar heavy industrial
uses, provided that:
            1.   A minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet and minimum lot width
of 150 feet;
            2.   Drainage systems shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer;
            3.   Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §
153.068;
            4.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with §
153.068;
            5.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the business shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer; and
            6.   No outside storage except as allowed in compliance with §§
153.068 and
153.069.
         (j)   Salvage yards, wrecking yards, car impound lots, or waste
recycling facilities, public utilities and public service uses to include: car
impound lots, power production, waste and water treatment plants, solid waste
transfer station, coal transfer stations and holding ponds, solid waste
incineration or composting with or without energy recovery, provided that:
            1.   Drainage systems shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer;
            2.   Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §
153.068;
            3.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with §
153.068;
            4.   All fencing shall conform with the applicable provisions of
the City Code;
            5.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the facility shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer; and
            6.   No additional outside storage except as allowed in compliance
with §§
153.068 and
153.069 shall be allowed.
         (k)   Insecticide and pesticide, packaging only, and metal finishing,
planting, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning, rust-proofing and heat
treatment, provided, that:
            1.   Drainage systems shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer;
            2.   Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §
153.068;
            3.   At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not
less than five feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with §
153.068;
            4.   All fencing shall conform with the applicable provisions of
the City Code;
            5.   Exterior storage areas shall be screened from view in
compliance with §§
153.068 and
153.069; and
            6.   Vehicular access points and curb cuts to the facility shall be
limited in order to maintain efficient transportation systems and to reduce
conflicts with through traffic. Site plans and access configurations shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
      (3)   Industrial uses. Manufacturing, production (light assembly),
warehouse, storage and waste, inclusive of:
         (a)   Building material sales (non-lumber yard);
         (b)   Lumber yards (outside storage shall be screened by a six foot
obscuring fence);
         (c)   Modular (factory built) home sales;
         (d)   Carpentry/cabinets;
         (e)   Furniture sales/assembly;
         (f)   Furniture re-finishing;
         (g)   Mini-storage/warehouse/rental facilities;
         (h)   Assembly/processing of non-offensive materials (appliances,
electrical equipment, medical, dental, advertising products, scientific or
other similar uses);
         (i)   Highway/street maintenance facilities;
         (j)   Research/development/testing laboratories/facilities;
         (k)   Fabrication, machining, processing, packing/packaging, freight
or general light industrial uses (non-inclusive of agricultural fertilizer/
pesticide processing/sales, batch plants, concrete plants, grain elevators,
bulk fuel sales, grinding plants, feed mixing, slaughter facilities, tire
recapping/retreading or similar heavy industrial uses);
         (l)   State-licensed lower-potency hemp concentrate manufacturing and
the following cannabis-related uses: cultivator, manufacturer, mezzobusiness,
microbusiness, testing facility, transporter and wholesaler; and
         (m)   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible, cannabis edible or
medical cannabis edible product manufacturing.
      (4)   Public, institutional and civic uses.
         (a)   Library;
         (b)   Public assembly (churches, synagogues, temples, and the like);
         (c)   Governmental offices/buildings, conference centers, civic
buildings;
         (d)   Trade or vocational schools; and
         (e)   Parking lots/ramps and transportation terminals.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Heavy Industrial District (I-2):
      (1)   Commercial uses within a building/structure that are accessory to
the principal use but such use shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor space as
utilized by the principal use;
      (2)   Off-street parking as regulated by §
153.060, but not including off-street parking for semi-trailer trucks;
      (3)   Off-street loading facilities as regulated by §
153.060; and
      (4)   Outdoor storage, sales, rental and service subject to §§
153.068 and
153.069.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Publicly regulated utility buildings, structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community; and
         (b)   Adult establishments (all types). This citation is based on a
report prepared entitled "Report Of The Attorney General's Working Group On
Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses", dated June 6, 1989; other adjacent
municipalities adopted regulations regarding adult uses and a review of zoning
districts under this chapter. The city has determined that adult uses will have
secondary effects upon certain pre-existing land uses within the city.
Therefore, adult uses can be reasonably allowed in the Light Industrial (I-1)
and Heavy Industrial (I-2) Districts if separated from certain sensitive land
uses, provided that:
            1.   No adult establishment shall be located less than 1,000 feet
from the nearest property line of any land in a residential zone, Planned Unit
Development, residential uses, child care centers, day care facilities, school,
religious institution, park, public recreational facility, library,
establishment with a liquor license, playground or any similar sensitive use as
determined by the city, whether within the city limits or not;
            2.   No adult establishment may be located less than 500 feet from
any other adult establishment, whether within city limits or not. Measurements
shall be made in a direct line from the property line of the premises where
each use is located;
            3.   Off-site visibility. Any business operating as an adult
establishment shall prevent visibility of its merchandise from public streets,
sidewalks, parking lots or any areas outside of the building;
            4.   All entrances to the building (other than fire exits not
useable by patrons) should be visible from the public right-of-way;
            5.   Signage. Signs shall not contain representational depiction of
an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the adult theme of the operation;
            6.   Minors. No minor shall be permitted on the premises of any
adult establishment; and
            7.   Other requirements may apply as determined through the
conditional use permit process, as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission and City Council.
      (2)   Off-premise or billboard signs as provided for in §
153.064.
      (3)   State-licensed medical cannabis combination business, may:
         (a)   Grow cannabis plants from seed or immature plant to mature plant
and harvest adult-use cannabis flower and medical cannabis flower from a mature
plant;
         (b)   Make cannabis concentrate;
         (c)   Make hemp concentrate, including hemp concentrate with a delta-
9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than 0.3% as measured by weight;
         (d)   Manufacture adult-use cannabis products and hemp derived
consumer products for public consumption;
         (e)   Package and label medical cannabis and medical cannabinoid
products for sale; and
         (f)   Package and label adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles and hemp derived consumer products for
sale to customers.
   (E)   Prohibited uses. The following are prohibited uses in the I-
2 District: acetylene gas manufacturing, ammonia or chlorine manufacturing,
anhydrous ammonia bulk storage plants, any other trade, industry or use that
will be injurious, hazardous or offensive to an extent equal to or greater than
those listed above.
   (F)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the I-1 District subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Lot dimensional standards.
 
Use type     Lot area Lot width Lot depth
As permitted None     None      None
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Front yard: none or as otherwise required per building codes.
         (b)   Side and rear setbacks: none or as otherwise required per
building codes.
   (G)   Maximum building height. For additional information on calculating
building heights see the definition BUILDING HEIGHT in § 153.010.
      (1)   Principal building: none.
      (2)   Accessory buildings: as governed by §
153.069.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 24-09, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 153.051 TRADITIONAL MIXED-USE DISTRICT (MU1).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. This district is culturally and historically the
oldest neighborhood commercial node in the city. It is established to
facilitate mixed-use, including commercial, residential, public, institutional,
and recreational uses. Residential will continue to be integral to this
district and include a variety of densities and styles. To preserve the
historic character of this area, development and redevelopment shall be
arranged to create a compact, pedestrian-oriented environment. New buildings
and renovations to existing buildings shall be architecturally compatible with
existing structures and enhance the district's small-town character.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the MU1 District:
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings; and
         (c)   Townhouses, up to four units.
      (2)   Non-residential uses.
         (a)   Animal-related services, inclusive of:
            1.   Veterinary clinics/hospitals (no overnight care, outside
pens); and
            2.   Pet shops (no outside pens, kennels or exercise yards).
         (b)   Entertainment and recreational activities, inclusive of:
            1.   Art galleries;
            2.   Museums;
            3.   Bowling alleys;
            4.   Billiards;
            5.   Indoor recreation;
            6.   Studios/dance; and
            7.   Theaters (non-drive-up).
         (c)   Personal services, inclusive of:
            1.   Dry cleaning;
            2.   Laundromat;
            3.   Shoe repair/sales;
            4.   Sewing/tailor;
            5.   Massage treatments;
            6.   Tanning salon;
            7.   Barber/beauty shop;
            8.   Drug/pharmaceuticals;
            9.   Employment agencies;
            10.   Health clubs; and
            11.   Mortuaries/funeral.
         (d)   Bed and breakfast establishment.
         (e)   Professional services/commercial offices, inclusive of:
            1.   Locksmith;
            2.   Dental/hygienic;
            3.   Medical/clinics;
            4.   Chiropractic;
            5.   Travel agency;
            6.   Real estate;
            7.   Architecture/design;
            8.   Engineering;
            9.   Accounting;
            10.   Property management;
            11.   Insurance sales/claims;
            12.   Shops/sales;
            13.   Investment (banks, savings, loans, credit unions, and the
like); and
            14.   Professional services or commercial offices of similar use/
type/intent.
         (f)   General retail, inclusive of:
            1.   Paint/decor store;
            2.   Book store;
            3.   Bicycle sales/repair;
            4.   Essential services;
            5.   Gift store/novelties;
            6.   Jewelry sales;
            7.   Appliance sales;
            8.   Hobby shop;
            9.   Florists;
            10.   Tobacco shop;
            11.   THC product sales;
            12.   Health food/products;
            13.   Clothing/apparel;
            14.   Antique store;
            15.   Variety store;
            16.   Hardware;
            17.   Pawn shops;
            18.   Tattoo shops;
            19.   Sporting goods;
            20.   Toy/game stores;
            21.   Music/record stores (including instruments); and
            22.   Hunting and outdoors goods/firearms/with other merchandise
sales (no outside storage).
         (g)   Food and beverage services, inclusive of:
            1.   Bakery (goods/retail);
            2.   Delicatessen/prepared food sales;
            3.   Cocktail lounges;
            4.   Brew pubs;
            5.   Micro-distillery and micro-distillery cocktail room;
            6.   Restaurants, cafes;
            7.   Candy/ice cream/frozen desserts;
            8.   Grocery, supermarket, butcher shop; and
            9.   Florists;
            10.   Tobacco shop;
            11.   State-licensed THC product sales;
            12.   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible retailer-only and
the following cannabis-related uses: delivery service, event organizer business
and retailer-only;
            13.   State-licensed medical cannabis retailer-only;
            14.   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible, cannabis edible or
medical cannabis product manufacturing;
            15.   Health food/products;
            16.   Clothing/apparel;
            17.   Antique store;
            18.   Variety store;
            19.   Hardware;
            20.   Pawn shops;
            21.   Tattoo shops;
            22.   Sporting goods;
            23.   Toy/game stores;
            24.   Music/record stores (including instruments); and
            25.   Hunting and outdoors goods/firearms/with other merchandise
sales (no outside storage).
         (h)   Residential programs/facilities, day care facilities, child care
centers, retirement, nursing, assisted living, elderly homes or similar uses,
provided that:
            1.   Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational
areas, unless otherwise approved. Said area shall be fenced, controlled and
screened in compliance with §
153.065;
            2.   Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with §
153.060; permanent parking or garage access shall be off side streets or
alleyways of the property;
            3.   Adequate off-street loading, as deemed applicable, is provided
in compliance with §
153.060, access shall be off side streets or alleyways;
            4.   When abutting a residential district, screening and
landscaping shall be in compliance with §
153.065; and
            5.   All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly
adhered to and all operating permits are secured.
         (i)   Public, institutional, and civic uses.
            1.   Library;
            2.   Governmental offices;
            3.   Open space, parks, and playgrounds; and
            4.   Municipally-owned parking lots.
   (C)   (1)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in
the Mixed Use (MU) District:
      (2)   Residential accessory structures and uses.
         (a)   Private garages, car ports, sheds, and similar buildings for the
storage of vehicles or other items, as regulated by §
153.069;
         (b)   Recreational vehicles and equipment, stored in accordance with
local regulations;
         (c)   Home occupations as regulated by §
153.070;
         (d)   Noncommercial greenhouses and conservatories; and
         (e)   Private swimming pools (rear yard only).
         (f)   Solar panels shall be architecturally compatible with the
building and roof design. They shall not be visible from the front street
right-of-way.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the Mixed Use
(MU) District:
      (1)   Planned unit developments;
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings with no more than 12 units;
      (3)   Conference centers, civic buildings;
      (4)   Drive-thru food or beverage service, provided that:
         (a)   The facility is accessory to a specialty food or coffee shop,
restaurant, financial institution, or other similar type commercial use
approved by the Planning Department.
         (b)   The drive-thru is only operated between the hours of 5:30 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. if abutting properties used for residential purposes.
         (c)   There is no more than one lane located to the side or rear of a
building.
         (d)   Any drive-thru canopy extends no further than three feet into
required side or rear yard setbacks.
         (e)   Stacking spaces meet the following standards:
            1.   Minimum of ten feet by 20 feet in size. The required width for
vehicle drive aisles shall not be allocated toward stacking spaces. The
measurement of stacking spaces shall begin behind the first point at which the
vehicle must stop (which may be the order board, a pre-order board or payment/
pick up window)
            2.   Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal
driveways by surface markings.
            3.   Raised medians may be required where deemed necessary by staff
for the purpose of traffic movement and safety.
            4.   Stacking spaces may not impede pedestrian movements, on or
off-site traffic movements, or movements in or out of off-street parking
spaces.
         (f)   All elements of the drive-through service area, including, but
not limited to, menu boards, order stations, teller windows, and vehicle lights
from stacking lanes must be screened from view of residences through one of the
following:
            1.   Opaque fence at least six feet high;
            2.   Landscaped berm at least six feet high; or
            3.   Two staggered rows of evergreen trees with trees in each row
spaced a maximum of 12 feet.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards.
      (1)   Principal use standards.
         (a)   Lot dimensions.
 
Use                           Lot Area                                Lot Width
Single-family                 4,800 sq. ft.                           50 ft.
Two-family                    6,000 sq. ft.                           60 ft.
Townhouse                     2,500 sq. ft.                           N/A
                              Not less than 6,000 sq. ft. for each
                              multi-family building having at least
Multi-family                  four units and not less than 1,000 sq.  130 ft.
                              ft. additional area for each additional
                              dwelling unit.
All other uses (as permitted) None                                    None
 
         (b)   Site dimensions.
 
Use             Front           Side             Rear   Lot Coverage    Height
                                Interior lots: 5
                                ft.
Single-family   25 ft.          Corner: 12 ft.   25 ft. 33% All         35 ft.
                                unless garage           structures
                                faces side yard,
                                then 18 ft.
                                Interior lots: 5
                                ft.
Two-family      25 ft.          Corner: 12 ft.   25 ft. 33% All         35 ft.
                                unless garage           structures
                                faces side yard,
                                then 18 ft.
                Between 15 ft.  10 ft. abutting
Townhouse       and 25 ft. from a street.        25 ft. 40% All         35 ft.
                property line   None on internal        structures
                                wall.
                                12% of the lot          40% All
Multi-family    25 ft.          width; minimum 6       structures      35 ft.
                                ft.
                                None, except
                                when a side or          Up to 95%
                Between 0 ft.   rear lot line           structures and
All other uses  and 15 ft. of   coincides with a 25 ft. parking lots    35 ft.
(as permitted)  the front       residential             with stormwater
                property line   district line,          accommodation
                                then 10 ft.
                                minimum.
 
      (2)   Accessory use standards. All accessory structures shall follow the
following site requirements:
         (a)   Setbacks, single and two family.
            1.   Front: 25 feet (or no closer than front building line) for a
detached garage only. All other accessory structures must be within a side or
rear yard.
            2.   Side: five feet unless a garage entrance face onto street or
alley, in which case, the minimum setback will be 18 feet to accommodate a
vehicle from encroaching into public right-of-way.
            3.   Rear: five feet except on corner lots, which shall not be less
than 12 feet on the side abutting a street (18 feet if structure is a garage).
         (b)   Height. Garage building height shall not exceed that of the
principal structure, with the maximum 16 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96e14085516423cf5f2f7dee14d1ffa276e7c04d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1403.png]
 
   (F)   Building and site design standards.
      (1)   Applicability. The following standards shall apply to new
development, redevelopment, and building expansions greater than 50% of the
floor area of an existing building.
      (2)   Uses. Where multiple uses are within a structure, uses can be mixed
horizontally across multiple buildings or vertically. Residential uses are
prohibited on first floors.
      (3)   Building standards.
         (a)   Building materials. All buildings in the mixed-use district
shall use high-quality and durable exterior building materials that contribute
to the visual look and small-town character of the neighborhood including
lighting, textures, colors, and architectural features that are compatible with
adjacent structures and functions.
            1.   Primary materials. Brick, stone, glass, metal, high-quality
composite and other modern materials shall be the majority of the exterior
building and facade (excluding windows).
            2.   Accent materials. Additional exterior architectural detailing
that incorporates and complements the primary materials such as decorative
metal, tile, wood, stucco, vinyl panels and other aesthetically pleasing
materials shall be included in the facade. EIFS may be used as an accent
material. At a minimum, accent materials shall comprise 20% of the building
facade.
            3.   Prohibited materials. Exterior materials that shall not be
included in the building design include untextured concrete and corrugated
metal unless allowed by the City Council because of the materials contribution
to the building design.
         (b)   Frontages and entrances.
            1.   The main entry shall face the front property line, with
secondary entrances on the side or rear. Entrances shall be clearly articulated
and obvious from the street.
            2.   All new building frontages and primary entrances shall include
a minimum of three of the following design elements: awnings, canopies,
pillars, cornices, parapet, columns, a combination of horizontal and vertical
design features, or other architecturally designed building materials.
            3.   Multi-story buildings shall have the ground floor
distinguished from the upper floors by having one or more of the following:
wning, trellis, arcade, window lintels, cornice line, or brick detailing such
as quoins or corbels.
            4.   Awnings - specific standards.
               a.   Intent. Historically awnings have been a frequent feature
of buildings in the downtown. Awnings have been used to soften a hard and rigid
streetscape. Awnings enhance the historic feel of the district, while providing
sun protection for display windows, shelter for pedestrians, and provide
additional accent color and design to building facades.
               b.   Approval required. Color renderings meeting the conditions
identified below and showing the location, size, color and any proposed signage
for an awning shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission:
                  i.   The awning may project over the public sidewalk provided
that it is at least eight feet above grade and does not project more than two-
thirds the width of the sidewalk as measured from the building to a maximum of
six feet.
                  ii.   Awnings must be constructed of durable, water-repellent
material such as canvas or metal. Plastic or fiberglass awnings are not
permitted.
                  iii.   Backlighting or illumination of awnings is not
permitted.
                  iv.   Retractable or fixed awnings may be used.
                  v.   Awnings shall not extend across multiple storefronts or
and/or multiple buildings.
                  vi.   Awning colors and materials shall complement the
building facade. Earth tones are encouraged. Large areas of bright colors are
considered inappropriate.
                  vii.   Signage on awnings is permitted on the end panel or
valance only.
                  viii.   Awnings and canopies deteriorate over time; regular
maintenance and replacement is required.
         (c)   Facade transparency.
            1.   Non-residential building facades facing a street or public
open space shall have a minimum of 60% transparency on the ground floor and a
minimum of 20% transparency on any upper floors.
            2.   Facades of residential buildings facing a street or public
open space shall have a minimum of 20% transparency on all floors.
            3.   Reflective glass, opaque glass, colored glass, and glass block
is prohibited for windows and doors on ground story facades fronting on a
public street, park, or plaza.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96e14085516423cf5f2f7dee14d1ffa276e7c04d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1405.png]
 
         (d)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall be
constructed of the same materials and colors of the principal building.
         (e)   All rooftop or ground mounted mechanical equipment and exterior
trash and recycling storage areas shall be enclosed with materials compatible
with the principal structure. Low profile, self-contained mechanical units,
including solar energy panels, and rooftop rainwater collection systems, which
blend in with the building architecture are exempt from the screening
requirement.
      (4)   Landscaping.
         (a)   All structures must have foundational plantings consisting of
shrubs, perennials, and native grasses every ten feet on building sides facing
a public street or a linear open space corridor connected via sidewalk.
         (b)   All open areas of a lot not used for buildings, parking,
circulations, patios, or storage must be landscaped with a combination of
canopy trees, ornamental trees, evergreen trees, shrubs, flowers, sod, ground
cover, and other site design features to ensure soil stabilization. This
requirement shall not apply to undisturbed areas retained in a natural state.
         (c)   The periphery of all parking lots shall be well landscaped and
screened from the public right-of-way. If parking lots exist along the primary
right-of-way, it must contain a landscaped edge that contains low shrubs,
street trees, fencing, walls or a combination of these elements.
         (d)   Landscape plans shall be submitted for all site related
applications where exterior construction and development activity will occur,
except for the construction of an individual single-family or two-family
dwelling.
         (e)   All residential one- and two-family developments shall require
two canopy trees per dwelling unit installed in the city right-of-way.
         (f)   All multi-family, mixed-use, and non-residential uses shall
provide:
            1.   One canopy or evergreen tree per 25 linear feet of street
frontage.
            2.   In the event of overhead utilities, tree species shall be of
the appropriate maximum height to accommodate utility installations.
            3.   All structures must have foundation plantings consisting of
shrubs, perennials, and native grasses.
            4.   All additions, expansions, or additional structures shall
require an additional two shrubs per 1,000 square feet of new construction.
            5.   Each multi-family residential development shall provide a
minimum of 200 square feet per residential unit as private usable open space.
Private usable open spaces will not count toward park dedication requirements.
Usable open space means designed outdoor space intended for passive or active
recreation that is accessible and suited to the needs of the development's
residents, and shall generally have the following characteristics:
               a.   Functional and aesthetic design that relates to the
principal building or buildings, with clear edges, including seating,
landscaping, recreational facilities, sidewalk connections, and other
amenities;
               b.   May be designed as courtyards, plazas, picnic areas,
swimming pools, playground, rooftop patios/gardens, or trails within natural
areas;
               c.   Compatible with or expands upon existing pedestrian
connections, and public parks or open space;
               d.   May include both private common areas for use by all
residents of that development, as well as a private unit's open space for
exclusive use by that unit's residents;
               e.   Does not include driveways, parking areas, steep slopes, or
stormwater ponds.
            6.   All plant materials must:
               a.   Meet the minimum standards set by the American National
Standards Institute in ANSI Z60.1 American Standard for Nursery Stock.
               b.   Landscape species shall be indigenous or proven adaptable
to the climate, but shall not be invasive species.
            7.   Landscape materials shall be tolerant of specific site
conditions, including but not limited to heat, drought, and salt.
            8.   Existing healthy plant material may be utilized to satisfy
landscaping requirements, provided it meets the minimum plant size specified in
this division.
            9.   Not more than 30% of the required number of trees shall be of
the same species.
         (g)   Solar battery storage installations placed in required yard
areas shall be screened. Placement of such installations on the exterior of
buildings shall be architecturally compatible with the building design.
   (G)   Parking and loading. All parking requirements shall follow §
153.060 Off-Street Parking Requirements and Standards and specific MU district
regulations set forth herein.
      (1)   Off-street parking.
         (a)   Off-street surface parking shall not be allowed between a
building and a sidewalk.
         (b)   Parking area entrances and exits shall be located on secondary
streets or alleys instead of Highway 10, where possible.
         (c)   The number of driveways shall be limited in order to maximize
the amount of on-street parking spaces.
         (d)   Parking lots shall have designated pedestrian routes, including
sidewalks and driveway crossings, shall be provided to connect each parking
space to the front sidewalk, front entrance, and/or rear entrance. Driveways
shall not be utilized as a designated pedestrian route.
         (e)   Off-street parking for residential developments shall be
provided on-site and shall be specifically reserved for the use of residents.
Visitor parking for multi-family residential units can be shared with other
uses on site. Designed multi-family residential unit spaces shall not be
counted as part of any shared parking or joint parking agreement.
         (f)   Off-street, non-residential parking should be located in the
rear of the site, on the same lot as the principal use; except where off-lot
parking is provided by an agreement with a neighboring owner.
         (g)   At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, an administrative
waiver of up to 5% of minimum parking requirements can be approved in response
to unique site or use-specific characteristics.
         (h)   Within the MU district the Planning Commission and/or City
Council may waive required off-street parking spaces in favor of delineated on-
street parking. On-street parking spaces may replace off-street parking spaces
at a 1:1 ratio.
      (2)   Shared parking facilities. When two or more parking lots have
adjacent rear or side property lines, the parking lots may be connected by a
driveway crossing the side and rear yards. For new or redevelopments, evidence
of an agreement or access easement must be provided to the city.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96e14085516423cf5f2f7dee14d1ffa276e7c04d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1409.png]
 
      (3)   Loading docks shall not be located in the front yard and shall be
100% screened from ground level view of public streets, adjacent residential
properties, and public open spaces. Screening can be landscaping or a wall of
the same materials and colors as the principal building.
(Ord. 24-02, passed 3-11-2024; Ord. 24-09, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 153.052 RAIL MIXED-USE DISTRICT (MU2).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. This district is a new commercial node in the
city. It is established to facilitate neo-traditional commercial mixed-use
development, including commercial, residential, public, institutional, and
recreational uses. Residential will be ancillary to this district and used to
support the commercial district. Buildings, streets, alleys, parking areas and
sidewalks/trails shall be arranged to create a compact, pedestrian-oriented
environment. New buildings shall be architecturally compatible with existing
structures and enhance the small-town commercial district character.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the Mixed-Use (MU)
District:
      (1)   Commercial uses.
         (a)   Entertainment and recreational activities, inclusive of:
            1.   Art galleries;
            2.   Museums;
            3.   Bowling alleys;
            4.   Billiards;
            5.   Indoor recreation;
            6.   Studios/dance; and
            7.   Theatres (non-drive-up).
         (b)   Personal services, inclusive of:
            1.   Dry cleaning;
            2.   Laundromat;
            3.   Shoe repair/sales;
            4.   Sewing/tailor;
            5.   Massage treatments;
            6.   Tanning salon;
            7.   Barber/beauty shop;
            8.   Drug/pharmaceuticals;
            9.   Employment agencies;
            10.   Health clubs; and
            11.   Mortuaries/funeral (non-crematory).
         (c)   Professional services/commercial offices, inclusive of:
            1.   Locksmith;
            2.   Gunsmith;
            3.   Dental/hygienic;
            4.   Medical/clinics;
            5.   Chiropractic;
            6.   Travel agency;
            7.   Real estate;
            8.   Architecture/design;
            9.   Engineering;
            10.   Accounting;
            11.   Property management;
            12.   Insurance sales/claims;
            13.   Shops/sales;
            14.   Investment (banks, savings, loans, credit unions, and the
like); and
            15.   Professional services or commercial offices of similar use/
type/intent.
         (d)   General retail, inclusive of:
            1.   Paint/decor store;
            2.   Book store;
            3.   Bicycle sales/repair;
            4.   Essential services;
            5.   Gift store/novelties;
            6.   Jewelry sales;
            7.   Appliance sales;
            8.   Hobby shop;
            9.   Florists;
            10.   Greenhouses;
            11.   Tobacco shop;
            12.   State-licensed THC product sales;
            13.   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible retailer-only and
the following cannabis-related uses: delivery service, event organizer business
and retailer-only;
            14.   State-licensed medical cannabis retailer-only;
            15.   State-licensed lower-potency hemp edible, cannabis edible or
medical cannabis product manufacturing;
            16.   Health food/products;
            17.   Clothing/apparel;
            18.   Antique store;
            19.   Variety store;
            20.   Hardware;
            21.   Pawn shops;
            22.   Tattoo shops;
            23.   Sporting goods;
            24.   Toy/game stores;
            25.   Music/record stores (including instruments); and
            26.   Hunting and outdoor goods/firearms/with other merchandise
sales (no outside storage).
         (e)   Food and beverage services, inclusive of:
            1.   Bakery (goods/retail);
            2.   Delicatessen/prepared food sales;
            3.   Cocktail lounges;
            4.   Brewpubs; micro-brewery;
            5.   Microdistillery and microdistillery cocktail room;
            6.   Restaurants, cafes;
            7.   Candy/ice cream/frozen desserts;
            8.   Neighborhood grocery store, boutique or natural grocery store,
butcher shop; and
            9.   Off-sale liquor store.
         (f)   Day senior residential programs/facilities, child day care
facilities, and childcare centers, provided that:
            1.   Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational
areas, unless otherwise approved. Said area shall be fenced, controlled and
screened in compliance with §
153.065;
            2.   Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with §
153.060; permanent parking or garage access shall be off side streets or
alleyways of the property;
            3.   Adequate off-street loading, as deemed applicable, is provided
in compliance with §
153.060, access shall be off side streets or alleyways;
            4.   When abutting a residential district, screening and
landscaping shall be in compliance with §
153.065; and
            5.   All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly
adhered to and all operating permits are secured.
         (g)   Public, institutional, and civic uses:
            1.   Library;
            2.   Governmental offices;
            3.   Open space, parks, and playgrounds; and
            4.   Municipally owned parking lots and parking ramps.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
Mixed-Use (MU) District:
      (1)   Commercial accessory structures and uses.
         (a)   Private garages, carports, sheds, and similar buildings for the
storage of vehicles or other items, as regulated by §
153.069.
         (b)   Solar panels and related equipment shall be architecturally
compatible with the building and roof design. They shall not be visible from
the front street right-of-way.
      (2)   Private parking lots and ramps as regulated in this section and §
153.060.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the Mixed-Use
(MU) District:
      (1)   Planned unit developments; commercial, or residential uses as
follows:
         (a)   Multi-family dwellings of not less than seven units but less
than 36 units.
         (b)   Condominiums of more than seven units but less than 36 units.
         (c)   Structures that exceed district dimensional requirements.
      (2)   Upper-story apartment development above commercial buildings, not
to exceed 36 units;
      (3)   Conference centers, civic buildings;
      (4)   Drive-thru food or beverage service provided that:
         (a)   The facility is accessory to a specialty food or coffee shop,
restaurant, financial institution, or other similar type commercial use
approved by the Planning Department.
         (b)   The drive-thru is only operated between the hours of 5:30 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. if abutting properties used for residential purposes.
         (c)   There is no more than one lane located to the side or rear of a
building.
         (d)   Any drive-thru canopy extends no further than three feet into
required side or rear yard setbacks.
         (e)   Stacking spaces meet the following standards:
            1.   Minimum of ten feet by 20 feet in size. The required width for
vehicle drive aisles shall not be allocated toward stacking spaces. The
measurement of stacking spaces shall begin behind the first point at which the
vehicle must stop (which may be the order board, a pre order board or payment/
pick up window).
            2.   Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal
driveways by surface markings.
            3.   Raised medians may be required where deemed necessary by staff
for the purpose of traffic movement and safety.
            4.   Stacking spaces may not impede pedestrian movements, on or
off-site traffic movements, or movements in or out of off-street parking
spaces.
         (f)   All elements of the drive-through service area, including, but
not limited to, menu boards, order stations, teller windows, and vehicle lights
from stacking lanes must be screened from view of a residential use through one
of the following:
            1.   Opaque fence at least six feet high;
            2.   Landscaped berm at least six feet high; or
            3.   Two staggered rows of evergreen trees with trees in each row
spaced a maximum of 12 feet.
      (5)   Pet stores, provided that:
         (a)   Business to be conducted within a soundproof building or
structure design.
         (b)   There are no outside pens, kennels or exercise yards.
         (c)   Animal waste and odor control shall be addressed as a part of
facility operations.
   (E)   Minimum dimensional requirements and standards.
      (1)   Principal use standards.
         (a)   Table 1 lot dimensions.
 
Use                           Lot Area                           Lot Width
Commercial                    2,500 sq. ft. minimum              25 ft. minimum
                              Not less than 6,000 sq. ft. for
                              each multi-family building having
Multi-family                  at least seven units and not less  130 ft.
                              than 1,000 sq. ft. additional area
                              for each additional unit.
All other uses (as permitted) None                               None
 
         (b)   Table 2 site setback and dimensions.
 
Use                Front Side                  Rear   Lot Coverage      Height
                                                      Up to 95%; all
                         20 ft. max width; 45         structures and
Commercial         None  ft. max with driveway None   parking lots with 40 ft.*
                                                      stormwater
                                                      accommodation
                                                      Up to 95%; all
Multi-family       None  None                  None   structures with   40 ft.*
                                                      stormwater
                                                      accommodation
                         None, except when a          Up to 95%; all
                         side or rear lot line        structures and
All other uses (as None  coincides with a      25 ft. parking lots with 40 ft.*
permitted)               residential district         stormwater
                         line, then 10 ft.            accommodation
                         minimum
*Maximum 3 stories
 
      (2)   Accessory use standards. All accessory structures shall follow the
following site requirements.
         (a)   Setbacks.
            1.   Front: 25 feet (or no closer than front building line) for a
detached garage only. All other accessory structures must be within a side or
rear yard.
            2.   Side: Five feet unless a garage entrance face onto street or
alley, in which case, the minimum setback will be 18 feet to accommodate a
vehicle from encroaching into public right-of-way.
            3.   Rear: Five feet except on corner lots, which shall not be less
than 12 feet on the side abutting a street (18 feet if structure is a garage).
         (b)   Height. Garage building height shall not exceed that of the
principal structure, with a maximum height of 16 feet.
   (F)   Building and site design standards.
      (1)   Applicability. The following standards shall apply to new
development, redevelopment, and building expansions greater than 50% of the
floor area of an existing building.
      (2)   Uses. Where multiple uses are within a structure, uses can be mixed
horizontally across multiple buildings or vertically. Residential uses are
prohibited on first floors in mixed-use buildings.
      (3)   Building standards. 
         (a)   Building materials. All buildings in the mixed-use district
shall use high- quality and durable exterior building materials that contribute
to the visual character of the neighborhood including lighting, textures,
colors, and architectural features that are compatible with adjacent structures
and functions.
            1.   Primary materials. Brick, stone, glass, architectural metal
panels, high-quality composite and other modern materials shall be the majority
of the exterior building and facade (excluding windows).
            2.   Accent materials. Additional exterior architectural detailing
that incorporates and complements the primary materials such as decorative
metal, tile, wood, stucco, vinyl panels, and other aesthetically pleasing
materials may be included in the facade. EIFS may be used as an accent
material. At a maximum, accent materials shall comprise 20% of the building
facade.
            3.   Prohibited materials. Exterior materials that shall not be
included in the building design include untextured concrete and corrugated
metal unless allowed by the City Council because of the material's contribution
to the building design.
         (b)   Frontages and entrances.
            1.   The main entry shall face the front property line, with
secondary entrances on the side or rear. Entrances shall be clearly articulated
and obvious from the street.
            2.   All new building frontages and primary entrances shall include
a minimum of two architecturally designed building features. Examples include:
awnings, canopies, pillars, cornices, parapets, columns, a combination of
horizontal and vertical design features, or other architecturally designed
building features.
            3.   Multi-story buildings are encouraged to have the ground floor
distinguishable from the upper floors.
            4.   Awnings - specific standards.
               a.   Intent. Historically awnings have been a frequent feature
of buildings in the downtown. Awnings have been used to soften a hard and rigid
streetscape. Awnings enhance the historic feel of the district, while providing
sun protection for display windows, shelter for pedestrians, and provide
additional accent color and design to building facades.
               b.   Approval required. Color renderings meeting the conditions
identified below and showing the location, size, color and any proposed signage
for an awning shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission:
                  (i)   The awning may project over the public sidewalk
provided that it is at least eight feet above grade and does not project more
than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk as measured from the building to a
maximum of six feet.
                  (ii)   Awnings must be constructed of durable, water-
repellent material such
as canvas or metal. Plastic or fiberglass awnings are not permitted.
                  (iii)   Retractable or fixed awnings may be used.
                  (iv)   Awnings shall not extend across multiple storefronts
or and/or multiple buildings.
                  (v)   Awning colors and materials shall complement the
building facade. Earth tones are encouraged. Large areas of bright colors are
considered inappropriate.
                  (vi)   Signage on awnings is permitted on the end panel or
valance only.
                  (vii)   Awnings and canopies deteriorate over time; regular
maintenance and replacement is required.
         (c)   Facade transparency (see Exhibit 1).
            1.   Non-residential building facades facing a street or public
open space shall have a minimum of 50% transparency on the ground floor and a
minimum of 20% transparency on any upper floors.
            2.   Facades of residential buildings facing a street or public
open space shall have a minimum of 10% transparency on all floors.
            3.    Reflective glass, opaque glass, colored glass, and glass
block is prohibited for entry doors on ground- story facades fronting on a
public street, park, or plaza.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96e14085516423cf5f2f7dee14d1ffa276e7c04d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1429.gif]
 
         (d)    All rooftop or ground-moun ted mechanical and battery storage
equipment and exterior trash and recycling storage areas shall be enclosed with
materials compatible with the principal structure. Low profile, self-contained
mechanical units, including solar energy panels, and rooftop rainwater
collection systems, which blend in with the building architecture are exempt
from the screening requirement.
      (4)   Landscaping.
         (a)   Landscape plans shall be submitted and approved by the city for
all site-related applications where development activity will occur.
         (b)   Areas on development sites to be graded or prepped for
development shall have ground cover planted and maintained as per plans
approved by the city.
         (c)   Natural or planted cover shall be maintained on development
sites prior to issuance of development permits.
         (d)   All plant materials must:
            1.   Meet the minimum standards set by the American National
Standards Institute in ANSI Z60.1 American Standard for Nursery Stock.
            2.   Landscape species shall be indigenous or proven adaptable to
the climate, but shall not be invasive species.
         (e)   All new developments shall provide:
            1.   One canopy or evergreen tree per 25 linear feet of street
frontage, except in downtown streetscape areas. Any trees in the downtown
streetscape areas shall be part of an approved landscape plan.
            2.   In the event of overhead utilities, tree species shall be of
the appropriate maximum height to accommodate utility installations.
            3.   Landscape materials shall be tolerant of specific site
conditions, including but not limited to heat, drought, and salt.
            4.   Existing healthy plant material may be utilized to satisfy
landscaping requirements.
            5.   Not more than 30% of the number of trees in a landscaping plan
shall be of the same species.
   (G)   Parking and loading. All parking requirements shall follow §
153.060 and specific MU district regulations set forth herein:
      (1)   Off-street parking.
         (a)   Off-street surface parking shall not be allowed between a
building and a sidewalk.
         (b)   Parking area entrances and exits shall be located on secondary
streets or alleys as practical. Access to main frontage roads shall be approved
by the City Council.
         (c)   The number of driveways shall be limited in order to maximize
the amount of on-street parking spaces.
         (d)   Parking lots shall have designated pedestrian routes, including
sidewalks and driveway crossings, shall be provided to connect each parking
space to the front sidewalk, front entrance, and/or rear entrance. Driveways
shall not be utilized as a designated pedestrian route.
         (e)   Off-street parking for residential developments shall be
provided on site and shall be specifically reserved for the use of residents.
Visitor parking for multi-family residential units can be shared with other
uses on site. Designed multi-family residential unit spaces shall not be
counted as part of any shared parking or joint parking agreement.
         (f)   Off-street, non-residential parking should be located in the
rear of the site, on the same lot as the principal use; except where off-lot
parking is provided by an agreement with a neighboring owner.
         (g)   At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, an administrative
waiver of up to 5% of minimum parking requirements can be approved in response
to unique site or use specific characteristics.
         (h)   Within the MU district the Planning Commission and/or City
Council may waive required off-street parking spaces in favor of delineated on-
street parking. On-street parking spaces may replace off-street parking spaces
at a one-to-one ratio.
      (2)   Shared parking facilities. When two or more parking lots have
adjacent rear or side property lines, the parking lots may be connected by a
driveway crossing the side and rear yards. For new or redevelopments, evidence
of a recorded agreement or recorded access easement must be provided to the
city (see Exhibit 2).
      (3)   District parking facilities. Commercial, mixed-use and adjacent
multi-family buildings may utilize a district parking plan, as approved by the
city, evidenced by recorded agreements outlining joint parking rights, access
and cross easements.
      (4)   Loading docks shall not be located in the front yard areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96e14085516423cf5f2f7dee14d1ffa276e7c04d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1431.gif]
 
(Ord. 24-06, passed 8-26-202 4; Ord. 24-09, passed 8-26-2024)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 153.060 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The regulation of off-street parking spaces in
this Zoning Ordinance is to alleviate and/or prevent congestion within the
public right-of-way. The regulations are intended to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for off-
street parking (motorized vehicles) in accordance with the utilization of
various parcels of land. The regulations and requirements set forth herein
shall apply to all off-street parking facilities in all of the zoning districts
within city limits.
   (B)   Site plan requirements. All applications for a building permit,
certificate of occupancy or other planning permits/approvals as required under
this section shall be accompanied by a site plan. Site plans shall be drawn to
scale (and accurately dimensioned) indicating the location of off-street
parking and loading spaces in compliance with the requirements set forth in
this section. All site plans for single-family homes must provide for the
location of at least a two stall garage, except for the R-1 District, where the
plan must provide for the location of at least a one stall garage.
   (C)   General provisions.
      (1)   Floor area. The term "floor area" for the purpose of calculating
the number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined on the
basis of the exterior floor dimensions of the buildings, structures or use
times the number of floors, minus 10%, unless otherwise modified by this
chapter. Where mechanical spaces, storage areas, or other unoccupied areas
exceed 10% of the area of a building or structure, the area in excess of the
10% may be deducted from the gross floor area.
      (2)   Reduction of existing off-street parking space. Off-street parking
spaces existing upon the effective date of this chapter shall not be reduced in
number or size unless said number or size exceeds the requirements set forth
herein for a similar new use.
      (3)   Nonconforming structures. Should a nonconforming structure or use
be damaged or destroyed by fire, it may be re-established if elsewhere
permitted in these zoning regulations, except that in doing so, any off-street
parking or loading space which existed before shall be retained, if deemed
appropriate by the city (for more on nonconforming structures, see §
153.021).
      (4)   Change of use or occupancy of land. No change of use or occupancy
of land already dedicated to a parking area, parking spaces, or loading spaces
shall be made, nor shall any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be
made which reduces area necessary for parking, parking stalls or parking
requirements below the minimum prescribed by these zoning regulations.
      (5)   Change of use or occupancy of buildings. Any change of use or
occupancy of any building or buildings including additions thereto requiring
more parking area shall not be permitted until there is furnished such
additional parking spaces as required by these zoning regulations.
      (6)   Calculating space.
         (a)   When determining the number of off-street parking spaces results
in a fraction, each fraction over one-half shall constitute another space.
         (b)   In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of public
assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar
seating facilities, each 22 inches of such seating facilities shall be counted
as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements.
         (c)   Except as provided for under joint parking and shopping centers,
should a structure contain two or more types of use, the sum of each shall be
calculated separately and shall be used for determining the total off-street
parking required.
   (D)   Stall, aisle and driveway design.
      (1)   Parking space size. Each parking space shall not be less than nine
feet wide and 18 feet in length, and each space shall be served by adequate
access aisles. Accessible stalls shall meet the requirements of the Building
Code.
      (2)   Off-street parking facilities. All off-street parking facilities
shall be designed and constructed with appropriated means of vehicular access
to a public street.
      (3)   Within structures. Off-street parking requirements may be met by
providing space(s) within the principal building or within an attached
structure; however, unless provisions are made, no building permit shall be
issued to convert said parking structure into a dwelling unit, living area or
other activity until verification is provided that all off-street parking
provisions within this section have been satisfactory met.
      (4)   Circulation. Except in the case of single-family, two-family and
townhouse dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation
between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated parking lot and
does not depend upon a public street or alley. Except in the case of single-
family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, parking design which requires
backing into the public street is prohibited.
      (5)   R-1 District. The required parking spaces serving existing
dwellings in the R-1 District may be designed for parking not more than two
vehicles in a tandem arrangement for each dwelling unit in order to comply with
the requirements of this section.
      (6)   Compliance. Except in the case of single-family, two-family and
townhouse dwellings, parking areas and their aisles shall be developed in
compliance with the standards on the Parking Lot Dimension Table.
      (7)   Grade. The grade of any parking area shall not exceed 5%.
      (8)   Surfacing. Except in the case of farm dwellings and operations,
seasonal recreational uses, and residential uses in the TZ District, driveways
and parking stalls shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete. In industrial
zones, driveways and parking stalls may be surfaced with gravel, crushed
concrete, or other materials equivalent in controlling dust and drainage, as
approved by the City Engineer. Gravel (or other similar materials) shall only
be used when fewer than five parking stalls are required. Any approval for
surfaces other than asphalt or concrete shall be contingent upon submittal of a
grading plan and City Engineer approval. Site or construction plans to improve
a driveway (surface improvements/drainage) or parking lots for five or more
vehicles shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review. All grading and
drainage plans are subject to the approval of the City Engineer. At any time an
improvement is made which increases the demand for parking spaces, as a
condition of the building permit or any other permit as authorized under this
chapter, all nonconforming parking lot surfaces or driveways existing on the
lot in question must be brought to full compliance.
      (9)   Striping. Except for single-family, two-family, and townhouse
dwellings, all parking stalls shall be marked with white or yellow painted
lines not less than four inches wide or blue lines as required for disabled
parking.
      (10)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking
area shall be hooded and located to reflect the light away from adjoining
property, abutting residential uses and public rights-of-way.
      (11)   Required screening. All open off-street parking areas of five or
more spaces shall be screened and landscaped from abutting residential
districts.
      (12)   Driveway turn-arounds. In the case of single-family, two-family
and townhouse dwellings, which abut streets designated as collector, minor
arterial or principal arterial (see the city's Comprehensive Plan), the
installation of a vehicle turn-around space, immediately adjacent to the access
driveway shall be considered. Said space shall be no larger than ten feet wide
and 15 feet in length. Where possible, said space shall be located away from
the principal structure and shall be no closer than 20 feet from the street
surface. Said space is not to be utilized for parking purposes.
   (E)   Maintenance responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the principal use, uses or buildings to maintain the parking space,
access ways, striping and required screening.
   (F)   Placement. All off-street parking spaces will be regulated as follows:
      (1)   Location. Off-street parking spaces required by division (I) below
must be on the same lot under the same ownership as the principal use being
served, except off-street parking spaces regulated by divisions (J) and (K).
      (2)   Head-in parking prohibited. Except for single-family, two-family
and townhouse dwellings, head-in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a
public street, with each stall having its own direct access to the public
street, shall be prohibited.
      (3)   No parking area. The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way
may not be used for parking unless approved by the city.
      (4)   Setback area. Required off-street parking shall not be provided in
required front yards or in required side yards in the case of corner lots, in
residentially zoned districts.
      (5)   Location of spaces for one- and two-family dwellings. Required off-
street parking spaces for one- and two-family dwellings must be in the rear
yard, side yards, garage, or car port. Parking spaces, including their access
drives, provided in addition to required spaces must be paved with asphalt or
concrete when such spaces are located in a front or side yard. Spaces in a rear
yard may be surfaced with gravel.
      (6)   Recreational equipment, recreational vehicles, utility trailers or
equipment, and off-road vehicles. Recreational equipment, recreational
vehicles, utility trailers or equipment, and off-road vehicles kept in a front
or side yard must be parked on a paved surface. Recreational equipment,
recreational vehicles, utility trailers or equipment, and off-road vehicles
kept in a rear yard may be parked on an unpaved surface.
      (7)   Enforcement. Violations may be enforced through tagging.
   (G)   Use of required area. Required off-street parking spaces in any
district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods,
repair work, storage of inoperable vehicles and/or storage of snow.
   (H)   Accessible parking spaces. Accessible parking spaces shall be provided
in accordance with the state Building Code.
   (I)   Off-street parking schedule.
Off-Street Parking Schedule
"du" = dwelling unit; "sq. ft." = square feet; "gfa" = gross floor area
Use category Use type Number of spaces required.
Off-Street Parking Schedule
"du" = dwelling unit; "sq. ft." = square feet; "gfa" = gross floor area
Use category             Use type                   Number of spaces required.
Residential uses
                         All use types not listed   2 per du
                         below
                                                    2 per du for one and two
                                                    bedroom units;
                                                    2.5 per du for three or
Household living                                    more bedroom units;
                         Multi-family               - if fee is charged for a
                                                    parking space above and
                                                    beyond the rent it does
                                                    not count towards parking
                                                    space requirements
                         Efficiency unit            1.5 per du
                         Elderly (senior citizen    1 space per unit or as
                         housing)                   determined in coordination
                                                    with the city
                                                    1 space for every 4
                                                    residents/patients plus 1
Group living             Nursing home/assisted      space for every 2
                         living facilities/similar  employees;
                         uses                       - adequate space shall be
                                                    provided for emergency
                                                    response vehicles/
                                                    equipment
                         Child care centers/        1 space per 400 sq. ft. of
                        facilities, residential    gfa and 1 space reserved
Child care center/       facilities/programs or day for the pickup/delivery of
facilities               care facilities within     children per every 800 sq.
                         commercial/industrial zone ft. of gfa
                         districts
Commercial uses
                         Financial institutions     3 spaces per 1000 sq. ft.
                                                    of gfa
Financial                                           1 space for each 2 drive-
                         Financial institution with in units plus drive aisle
                         drive-thru service         stacking space of 50 feet
                                                    for each drive-in unit
                         All use types not listed   1 space per 200 sq. ft. of
Food and beverage        below                      gfa
services                 Restaurant with drive-thru 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of
                                                    gfa
                                                    1 space for each guest
                         All use types not listed   plus 2 spaces for any
                         below                      owner/manager or residents
Lodging facilities                                  that live on the premises.
                         Hotels, motels, lodges and 1 space per room/suite
                         cabins                     plus 2 spaces for every 5
                                                    employees
Professional offices,    All use types              3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
businesses                                          of gfa
                         Medical clinics/dental     1 space per 300 sq. ft. of
                         offices or similar uses    gfa
                                                    1 space for every 2
                                                    patient beds, plus 1
                                                    additional space for each
Health care facilities                              doctor including visiting
                         Hospitals                  doctors, plus 1 space for
                                                    every 2 employees
                                                    (including nurses) and
                                                    loading/unloading space as
                                                    applicable or required
                                                    under this chapter
                         Use types not listed below 5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                    feet of gross floor area
                         Retail sales/service       3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
                         business w/ 50% or more    gfa for area devoted to
                         gfa devoted to storage,    sales/retail and 1 space
Retail sales, service    warehouse or industry      per 1,000 sq. ft. gfa for
                                                    storage/warehouse uses
                                                    3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.
                         Shopping centers           gfa (non-inclusive of
                                                    common areas or unleasable
                                                    gross floor area)
                                                    4 off-street spaces
                                                    (minimum) plus an
                                                    additional 3 spaces for
                                                    each service (repair)
                         Auto service station       stall;
                                                    - Convenience stores auto
Vehicles and equipment                              part stores or retail
                                                    space shall be calculated
                                                    pursuant to the retail use
                                                    category
                         Auto repair (minor and     3 spaces per repair stall
                         major), auto sales and     plus 1 space per employee
                         rental
                                                    3 spaces per alley plus 1
                         Bowling alleys             space per every two
Recreational and                                    employees
entertainment            Theatres, civic centers,   1 space for every 4 seats,
                         stadiums, sports arenas or plus 1 space for every 2
                         similar uses               employees
Public, institutional, and civic uses
                         Public assembly (all use   1 space for every 4 seats,
Community and cultural   types not listed below)    plus 1 space per employee
facilities               Community centers,         1 space per 250 sq. ft. of
                         libraries, museums or      gfa
                         similar uses
Government               Post office                1 space per 400 sq. ft. of
                                                    gfa
                                                    1 space per classroom plus
                         Elementary, junior high    an additional space for
                         (public or private)        every 50 students
Educational institutions                            (capacity)
                                                    1 space for every 7
                         High school, secondary,    students or per design
                         trade, vocational          capacity plus 1 space per
                                                    classroom
                                                    8 off-street spaces
                                                    (minimum) plus 1 space per
Transportation           Transportation terminals   800 sq ft of gfa over an
                                                    initial 1,000 sq. ft.
                                                    limit
Industrial uses
                                                    1 space per every 1 and
                                                    one-half employees on
                                                    shift (based on largest
                         Industrial/manufacturing   shift) plus 1 truck/
                                                    loading space per every
                                                    7,500 sq. ft gfa (or as
                                                    determined appropriate)
                                                    Any office/retail space
                                                    shall comply with the
                                                    applicable use category;
                         Warehouse, storage/        additionally 1 space per
                         handling of bulk freight   employee on shift (based
                                                    on largest shift) and 1
                                                    space per company truck
                                                    (if stored externally)
                                                    1 space per employee on
                                                    shift (based on largest
                         Warehouse/wholesale        shift) plus 1 truck space
                                                    for every 7,500 sq ft gfa
                                                    (or as deemed appropriate)
                         Car wash (drive-thru and   1 space per employee on
                         self-service)              shift minimum 1 space
                                                    required
 
   (J)   Joint facilities. The Council may approve an agreement between one or
more businesses to provide the required off-street parking facilities by joint
use on one or more sites where the total number of spaces provided are less
than the sum of the total required for each business should they provide them
separately.
      (1)   General information.
         (a)   Theaters, bowling alleys, bars, restaurants and similar uses. Up
to 50% of the parking facilities required for these uses may be supplied by
off-street parking facilities for uses (daytime) as specified within division
(d) below.
         (b)   Daytime uses. Up to 50% of the off-street parking facilities
required for any use specified under division (d) as primarily daytime uses may
be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following night time or
Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches,
bowling alleys, dance halls, theaters, bars, apartments, restaurants or similar
uses.
         (c)   Church or auditorium incidental to public/parochial school. Up
to 80% of the parking facilities required by this section for a church or for
an auditorium incidental to public or parochial school may be supplied by the
off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified in division (d) as
primarily daytime uses.
         (d)   Daytime uses defined. For the purposes of this section, the
following uses are considered as primarily daytime uses: banks, business
offices, retail stores, personal service shops, household equipment or
furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing,
wholesale and similar uses.
      (2)   Conditions required for joint use.
         (a)   The building or use for which a request is being made to utilize
the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be
located within 800 feet of such parking facilities;
         (b)   Documentation as specified by the city shall be submitted
demonstrating that there is not substantial conflict in the principal operating
hours of the buildings or uses (for which joint use of off-street parking
facilities is proposed); and
         (c)   A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties
concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to
form and manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City
Administrator and recorded with the Clay County Recorder.
   (K)   Mixed uses. In cases of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall
be the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses, computed
separately.
   (L)   Design standards.
      (1)   All off-street automobile parking facilities shall be designated
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley as well as
maneuvering areas, as applicable. Detailed plans shall be submitted to the
proper official for approval for all curb cuts or driveway openings before a
permit may be obtained.
      (2)   Parking areas shall be paved with an asphalt or concrete surfacing
(unless otherwise set forth under division (D) above), afford adequate drainage
and shall have bumper guards where needed.
      (3)   Off-street parking areas for one or two-family uses shall be in the
rear, side yards, garage, carport, upon a well-defined driveway or in an area
not to exceed 12 feet in width abutting the driveway on one side only in the
front yard. The parking area designated in the front yard abutting the driveway
shall be surfaced with either concrete, asphalt or in cases or existing gravel
driveways; gravel may be used for such additional parking.
      (4)   Off-street parking areas for multiple-family units of three or more
shall park on a designated parking lot. In no case, unless approved by the
Building Official in the issuance of a building permit or by the City Council
in cases of conditional uses, shall parking be permitted on the front yard
except within the limitation as required in the Planned Unit Development
section, §
153.062 of this chapter.
      (5)   Parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only.
Residential parking areas shall not be utilized to complete any type of sales
and shall not be used to store vehicles, complete repair work or dismantle/
servicing of any manner.
      (6)   If lighting is provided, it shall be arranged to reflect away from
the residential area, and also away from any public street or highway.
      (7)   Violations shall be enforced through tagging.
   (M)   Loading space. Facilities and uses that require loading and unloading
space, inclusive of wholesale food markets, warehouses, supply stores,
wholesale distributors, manufacturing, hotels, hospitals, dry cleaning
establishments or buildings that accommodate large amounts of freight shall
meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Buildings in excess of 7,500 square feet of floor area: one loading
space plus one additional loading and unloading space for each additional
12,000 square feet of floor area; and
      (2)   Each loading space shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 35 feet
in length, and 15 feet in height.
   (N)   Parking lots - commercial/industrial uses. At the discretion of the
City Council, permission may be granted, temporary or permanent in nature, for
the use of property within a residential district for vehicular parking,
provided that:
      (1)   The lot shall be authorized only for the parking of passenger
automobiles of employees, customers, or guests associated with the individual/
entity that controls, owns or operates the lot. This individual/entity shall be
responsible for its maintenance;
      (2)   The parking lot shall be adequately screened from the street and
from any adjoining property in a residential district. Screening should include
an obscuring fence or wall not less than five feet high and shall be located
along the property line to mitigate any impacts on adjacent properties; all
lighting shall be arranged to reduce and/or eliminate any unnecessary glare
towards or upon adjoining property in a residential district. The parking lot
surface shall be smoothly graded, hard surfaced, and adequately drained;
      (3)   The parking lot owner/operator is prohibited from charging fees or
any other form of compensation for use of the lot;
      (4)   The lot shall not be used for sales, repair work or any servicing
of any manner;
      (5)   Access to and from the parking lot should be designed/arranged in
such a manner to reduce and/or eliminate any negative impacts that may be
realized by the adjacent residential district(s);
      (6)   No advertising signs or material shall be allowed on the parking
lot;
      (7)   All striped parking spaces shall be located within the setback
regulations as established in the associated zoning district, unless otherwise
issued a variance; and
      (8)   Such other conditions as may be deemed necessary by the City
Council to protect the character of the residential district.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.061 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish
standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of Wind Energy
Conversion Systems (WECS) shall be governed within the city.
   (B)   Application. Wind conversion systems may be allowed as a conditional
use within any non-residential zoning district of the city, subject to the
regulations and requirements of this section.
   (C)   Declaration of conditions. The Council may impose such conditions on
the granting of a WECS conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out
the purpose and provisions of this section.
   (D)   Site plan required. All applications for WECS conditional use permit
shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan drawn to scale and dimension,
displaying the following information:
      (1)   Lot lines and dimensions;
      (2)   Location and height of all buildings, structures, above ground
utilities and trees on the lot, including both existing and proposed structures
and guy wire anchors;
      (3)   Locations and height of all adjacent buildings, structures, above
ground utilities and trees located within 350 feet of the exterior boundaries
of the property in question;
      (4)   Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures located on the
property in question; and
      (5)   Sketch, elevation drawing or diagram of the premises accurately
depicting the proposed WECS and its relationship to structures on adjacent
lots.
   (E)   Compliance with State Building Code. Standard drawings of the
structural components of the WECS and support structures, including base and
footings shall be provided along with engineering data and calculations to
demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the State
Building Code, with specific attention given to wind and ice loads. Drawings
and engineering calculations shall be certified by a registered Minnesota
professional engineer.
   (F)   Compliance with Electrical Code. WECS electrical equipment and
connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the National
Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
   (G)   Manufacturer warranty. The applicant shall provide documentation or
other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the WECS has been
successfully operated in atmospheric conditions similar to the conditions
within the city. The WECS shall be warranted against any system failures
reasonably expected in severe weather operation conditions.
   (H)   Design standards.
      (1)   Height. In determining the height of the WECS, the total height of
the system shall be included. System height shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the highest possible extension of the rotor. The permitted maximum
height of a WECS shall be determined according to the following ways:
         (a)   A ratio of one foot to one foot between the distance of the
closest property line to the base of the WECS to the height of the system; or
         (b)   A maximum system height of 50 feet.
         (c)   The shortest height of the two above mentioned methods shall be
used in determining the maximum allowable height of a WECS system. The height
of a WECS must also comply with FAA Regulation part 77 "Objects Affecting
Navigable Air Space" and/or MnDOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015 "Criteria for
Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation."
      (2)   Setbacks. No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be
located within or above any required front, side or rear yard setback and in no
event shall any part of the system be within ten feet of any property line.
WECS towers shall be set back from the closest property line one foot for every
one foot of system height. WECS shall not be located within 30 feet of an above
ground utility line.
      (3)   Rotor size. All WECS rotors shall not exceed 26 feet in diameter.
      (4)   Rotor clearance. Blade-arcs created by the WECS shall have a
minimum of 30 feet of clearance over any structure or tree within a 200 foot
radius.
      (5)   Rotor design. The blade design and materials are to be designed and
constructed to ensure safe operation in an urban area.
      (6)   Rotor safety. Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and
automatic braking device capable of stopping WECS operation in high wind (40
mph or greater) or in conditions of imbalance.
      (7)   Lightning protection. Each WECS shall be grounded to protect
against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical
Code as adopted by the city;
      (8)   Component compatibility. The wind turbine and wind turbine tower
are to be designed and constructed to be compatible.
      (9)   Tower access. To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must
comply with one of the following provisions:
         (a)   Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within 12 feet of
the ground;
         (b)   A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower; and
         (c)   Any tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a
locked, protective fence at least six feet high.
      (10)   Signs. WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two square feet at
the base of the tower and said sign shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Warning high voltage;
         (b)   Manufacturer's name;
         (c)   Emergency phone number; and
         (d)   Emergency shutdown procedures.
      (11)   Lighting. WECS shall not have affixed or attached any lights,
reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for illumination devices
required by FAA Regulations part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space" and
FAA Advisory Circular 70/7460-1F, September 1978 "Obstruction Marking and
Lighting".
      (12)   Electromagnetic interference. WECS shall be designed and
constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.
      (13)   Noise emissions. Noises emanating from the operation of WECS shall
be in compliance with and regulated by the state Pollution Control Standards,
Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended.
      (14)   Utility company interconnection. No WECS shall be interconnected
with the local electrical utility company until the utility company reviewed
and commented upon it. The interconnection of the WECS with the utility company
shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
   (I)   Ornamental wind devices. Ornamental wind devices that are not a WECS
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section and shall conform to other
applicable provisions of this chapter and the City Code.
   (J)   Building permit required. A building permit shall be required for the
installation of a WECS in the city.
   (K)   Inspection. The city hereby reserves the right upon issuing any WECS
conditional use permit to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located. If
a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety
hazard, the owner shall take expeditious action to correct the situation.
   (L)   Abandonment. Any WECS or tower which is not used for six successive
months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the
property at the expense of the property owner.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.062 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) OVERLAY.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   A Planned Unit Development may be established in any residential or
commercial district under the conditional-use process described under §
153.022. A PUD is a designated parcel of land that encourages a creative
approach to the use of land by allowing considerable flexibility in the design
of the site and buildings. Specific aspects of flexibility (including permitted
uses, dimensional requirements, densities, dedication requirements, and the
like) shall be contingent upon review and approval by the Planning Commission
and the City Council, pursuant to the conditional use permit process, and upon
such approval, shall prevail over conflicting requirements listed elsewhere
within this chapter or within the Dilworth Subdivision Ordinance.
      (2)   The intent of the PUD regulations is to permit greater flexibility
and, consequently, more creative and imaginative design for the development of
residential areas than under conventional zoning regulations. It is further
intended to promote more economical and efficient use of the land while
providing a harmonious variety of housing choices, a higher level of urban
amenities, and preservation of natural scenic qualities of open spaces.
   (B)   Coordinating regulatory documents.
      (1)   It is the intent of this section that subdivision review, under the
Subdivision Ordinance, be carried out simultaneously with the review of a
Planned Unit Development under this section.
      (2)   The development plans submitted under this section must be
submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance for preliminary and final plats.
      (3)   The requirements for both this section and those of the Subdivision
Ordinance shall apply to all Planned Unit Developments, and all actions of the
City Council pertaining to Planned Unit Developments shall be based upon a
recommendation by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Lot requirements.
      (1)   Harmony. The Planned Unit Development shall be planned, designed
and landscaped in such a manner as to blend and harmonize with the surrounding
adjacent areas.
      (2)   Yard requirements. Minimal specifications for yard requirements are
imposed to allow design flexibility. However, side yard and backyard
requirements shall conform along the developments outermost lot line to the
side yard and backyard requirements of the adjacent district. Except in the
case of higher density, multi-family, or non-residential development where
there must be a minimum 30 foot buffer zone along adjacent, low-density
residential districts. The buffer zone must be kept free of buildings or
structures and must be landscaped, screened or protected by natural features,
so that adverse effects on surrounding areas are minimized.
      (3)   Front yard. Minimum front yard setback requirements are intended to
provide privacy and usable yard area for residents. Front yard setbacks may be
reduced at the discretion of the city through the PUD process if the applicant
can implement/accommodate appropriate screening, plantings, traffic reduction,
building orientation or other acceptable mitigation methods.
      (4)   Lot width. Minimum lot widths are intended to prevent the
construction of long, narrow buildings with inadequate privacy, light, and air.
Within the constraints of the PUD process, lot width standards may be reduced
if the project design implements/accommodates provisions that allow light, air
and privacy for all living spaces in an appropriate manner;
      (5)   Building spacing. Requirements for side yard setbacks are based on
several related factors:
         (a)   Privacy. Minimum building space requirements are intended to
provide privacy for dwelling units. Where applicants seek reduced side yard
setbacks it shall be necessary that site plans and building elevations locate
windows and any necessary screening to ensure adequate privacy between units.
         (b)   Light and air. Building spacing shall provide adequate access to
light and air to all dwelling units.
         (c)   Building configuration. Where building configuration is
irregular so that the needs expressed in the above items are met by the
building configuration, reduced building space is permissible, as appropriate.
         (d)   Open space.
            1.   Common open space shall comprise at least 25% of the gross
area of the Planned Unit Development to be used for recreational, park or
environmental amenities for the collective enjoyment by occupants of the
development. Open space dedications are non-inclusive of public or private
streets, driveways, or utility easements, provided, however, that up to 75% of
the required open space may be composed of open space on privately owned
properties dedicated by easement to assure that the open space will be
permanent.
            2.   Recreation facilities, recreational structures and any
accessory uses located in common recreation areas shall be considered open
space under the provision that total impervious surfaces (paving, roofs, and
the like) constitute no more than 5% of the total open space.
      (6)   All land shown on the final development plan as common open space
must be conveyed under one of the following options:
         (a)   It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to
maintain the common open space and any buildings, structures, or improvements
which have been placed on it; or
         (b)   It may be conveyed to trustees provided in an indenture
establishing an association or similar organization for the maintenance of the
Planned Unit Development. The common open space must be conveyed to the
trustees subject to covenants to be approved by the Planning Commission which
shall restrict the common open space to the uses specified on the final
development plan, and which provide for the maintenance of the common open
space in a manner which assures its continued use for its intended purpose.
      (7)   Existing trees shall be preserved, where possible. The location of
trees must be considered when planning the common open space, location of
buildings, underground services, walks, paved area, playgrounds, parking areas,
and finished grade levels.
   (D)   Administration.
      (1)   An application for approval of a PUD shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The PUD applications shall be filed in the name or names of the
recorded owner or owners of property included in the development and/or the
applications may be filed by holder(s) of an equitable interest in such
property.
      (2)   Application process.
         (a)   Fee. An application for approval shall be accompanied by a fee
to be established by the City Council and available at City Hall.
         (b)   Review process. The review process shall follow the conditional
use application procedure as described in §
153.022 and the subdivision review process as outlined in the Dilworth
Subdivision Ordinance. Applications shall be processed concurrently.
   (E)   Enforcement.
      (1)   If construction has not been initiated within 12 months from the
approval date of the PUD, said approval shall lapse and be of no further
effect. The Planning Commission, upon showing of good cause by the applicant,
may extend for period(s) of six months, the time for beginning construction.
      (2)   After general construction commences, the Zoning Administrator
shall review, at least once every year, all building permits issued and compare
them to the overall development phasing program. If the Zoning Administrator
determines that the rate of construction (residential units or nonresidential
structures) substantially differs from the phasing program, city staff shall
notify the applicant and Building Official, in writing; thereafter, the
Building Official may issue such orders to the applicant which may include the
suspension of further construction or other sanctions as deemed appropriate by
the city.
   (F)   Intra-development circulation.
      (1)   PUD districts shall be located with respect to major streets and
highways or other transportation facilities. Consideration should be given to
the means in which the local transportation network is connected with streets,
alleys or roadways within the PUD. Standards of design and construction for
roadways, both public and private, within planned residential development
districts may be modified as is deemed appropriate by the City Council, after
receipt of recommendations from the Fire Chief, Chief of Police, Street
Department and City Engineer. Right-of-way width and street roadway widths may
be reduced as deemed appropriate by the City Council, specifically where the
following is identified: the PUD plan provides for the separation of vehicular
and pedestrian circulation patterns and establishes adequate off-street parking
facilities.
      (2)   If the owners in the future should request that the private streets
be changed to public streets, the owners do fully agree that, before acceptance
of such streets by a local government body, the owners will bear full expense
of reconstruction or any other action necessary to make the streets fully
conform to the requirements applicable at that time for public streets, prior
to dedication and acceptance. Finally, the owners agree that these streets
shall be dedicated to public use without compensation to the owners and without
the owners' expenses in making such streets conform to the requirements
applicable at that time for public streets, if at some future date, a local
governing body so requests.
   (G)   Parking standards. Off-street parking and loading requirements shall
be determined by the Planning Commission based on site specific design
elements. Requirements shall be based on proposed uses, densities, traffic
patterns and other related development specific provisions. Joint/shared
parking facilities are encouraged pursuant to regulations as set forth within
this chapter (see §
153.060(J)).
   (H)   Non-residential uses.
      (1)   Non-residential uses, limited to those specifically approved by the
Planning Commission, are permitted in a Planned Unit Development, provided that
such uses are primarily established for the service/convenience of the
residents of the development.
      (2)   Layout of parking areas, service areas, entrances, exists, yards,
courts and landscaping, and control of signs, lighting, noise or other
potentially adverse influences, shall be such as to protect residential
character within the PUD District and desirable character in any adjoining
residence district.
   (I)   Zoning. Upon approval by the Council of a PUD overlay District, the
official Zoning Map shall be changed to reflect such adoption.
   (J)   Findings required. The Planning Commission and City Council shall, to
ensure the interests of the public, come to the following facts/conclusions
prior to the issuance of any approval for a PUD within city limits:
      (1)   The plan conforms to the city's Comprehensive Plan and Future Land
Use Plan;
      (2)   The plan is designed to form a desirable and unified development
within its boundaries;
      (3)   The proposed uses will not be detrimental to present or future land
uses in the surrounding area;
      (4)   Any exceptions to the standard requirements of the Dilworth Zoning
and Subdivision Ordinances are justified by the design of the development;
      (5)   The plan will not create an excessive burden on parks, schools,
streets, and other public facilities and utilities which serve or are proposed
to serve the PUD; and
      (6)   The PUD will not have a unique or adverse impact on the reasonable
enjoyment of the neighboring property.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.063 MOVING/RE-LOCATION OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   State licensure requirement. No person, except a state licensed house
mover, shall remove, raise or support a building or structure free of its
foundation within the limits of the city. The above shall not be construed as a
measure to prevent the owners of a building or structure from personally
raising, moving or supporting such building or structure upon their own
premises.
   (B)   Permit requirements and application process.
      (1)   Permit required. Every licensed house mover or building owner
shall, before raising, moving or supporting free of its foundation any building
or structure, obtain a permit therefore from the city.
      (2)   A person seeking a permit shall contact the Building Official to
receive an application for inspecting the property and must file the completed
application form with the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall present
plans to the Building Official which at minimum, shall indicate lot size,
orientation of the structure on the property respective to setback requirements
and lot coverage requirements. The plan review shall be charged at 65% of the
building permit fee (§ 107.3 Uniform Building Code) and a mileage charge
(consistent with federal mileage rate) will apply if buildings are located
outside the established metropolitan urban area. The Building Official shall
physically inspect all buildings to be moved within/into the city (unless the
building/structure is new construction and an inspection report from a Building
Official is provided declaring the building/structure consistent with
applicable codes).
      (3)   Upon receipt of a completed moving permit application, which shall
include an inspection report from the Building Official(including filing fee),
the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a hearing before the Planning
Commission to consider the permit application, and mail notices to neighboring
landowners within 350 feet of the boundary of the property to which the
structure is proposed to be located. Such written notice shall be mailed at
least 10 days prior to the hearing and a copy of the hearing notice and list of
the property owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be
attested and made a part of the record of the proceeding. Failure of a property
owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set
forth within this section, provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply
with the notice requirements in this section.
      (4)   Any application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee,
which shall be in an amount equal to the fee charged for a conditional use
permit. Such fee shall not be refundable if the permit is denied.
      (5)   Notice of the hearing and a copy of the application shall be
provided to the Dilworth Public Works Department, Dilworth Police Department,
Northern States Power Company, and Red River Valley Co-op (city staff
requirement).
      (6)   The Planning Commission, in determining whether or not to recommend
approval of the moving permit, shall consider the same criteria that apply to
the issuance of conditional use permits. In addition, they shall consider the
following factors:
         (a)   Whether the building/structure is potentially structurally
unsafe and could endanger persons or property within the city if moved;
         (b)   Whether the structure is structurally sound and capable of
meeting Building Code requirements subsequent to the move; and
         (c)   To note, the Building Official may require code compliance work
to be completed before the structure is allowed to be re-located.
      (7)   Any permit granted must be in compliance with the rules of the
Northern State Power Company, and/or Red River Valley Co-op relative to the
interruption of electrical service to its customers.
      (8)   The Planning Commission, in recommending approval of a permit, may
institute conditions upon the permit which may include, but not limited to the
following.
         (a)   The route to be followed in moving the structure;
         (b)   The date and time limits in which the building may be moved;
         (c)   The amount of time in which Northern State Power Company, and/or
Red River Valley Co-op or other association or corporation owning, operating or
controlling wires or cable that must be moved or displaced to accommodate the
move has to remove or displace wires or cables after receipt of notice of the
time of the move and the amount of cash deposit, performance bond or completion
bond that should be required by the City Council, if any;
         (d)   The amount of a cash deposit or letter of credit for estimated
costs that may be incurred on behalf of the city, as required by the City
Council; and
         (e)   Alterations or repairs that must be made to the structure to
comply with Building Code requirements and/or to upgrade the building to
maintain neighborhood integrity and appearance.
      (9)   After recommendation by the Planning Commission, the matter shall
be placed on the agenda of the next City Council meeting. A favorable vote of a
majority of the Council members present shall be required to approve the
permit.
      (10)   If a permit is approved, a cash deposit, performance bond or
completion bond in an amount set in the permit (if any) shall be filed with the
City Administrator prior to the issuance of the permit, and be signed by a good
and sufficient surety, setting forth the completion date therein. Such bond, if
required, is for the purpose of ensuring that alterations and repairs to the
structure as required within the Building Code or as required as a condition of
the permit, are accomplished. The date of completion shall be set by the City
Council and the Building Official.
      (11)   In cases where a building is being moved outside the city limits
of Dilworth, or in the case where an accessory building or single story garage
are to be moved, the application and application fee shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator, but no hearing or approval of the Planning Commission or
City Council is required unless otherwise deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator. In this circumstance, the Zoning Administrator may approve the
permit and attach any conditions permitted within division (C)(8) above after
providing notice and having consultation with the Dilworth Public Works
Department, the Dilworth Police Department and Northern States Power Company,
and/or Red River Valley Co-op. Any applicant whose moving permit is denied by
the Zoning Administrator under this section may appeal such decision to the
City Council within 14 days of the denial of the permit.
   (C)   Removal of wires, cables and pipes.
      (1)   The person to whom a permit has been issued shall, before raising
or moving any building or structure to which electrical wires, cables or piping
for any purpose are attached, shall notify the persons, associations or
corporations owning or controlling such electric wiring, cables or piping. The
person, association or corporation following notification, shall, within the
time established on the permit, or if no time is established in the permit,
within a reasonable time thereafter, disconnect and make safe the electric
wires, cables or piping.
      (2)   In every case in which a permit is issued as herein provided, it
shall be the duty of the person, association or corporation with ownership or
controlling interests in the wire, cable or pipe to remove or displace the
utility. The cost shall be the burden of the person whom receives the permit,
or as otherwise negotiated between the person and the utility provider.
      (3)   The person to whom a permit has been issued shall notify the
Dilworth Police Department, Dilworth Public Works Department, Northern States
Power Company, and/or Red River Valley Co-op, and the person, association or
corporation owning, operating or controlling such wire, cable or pipe, to
remove or displace the utility concurrently with the removal of said house,
building or structure. Such time shall conform with the conditions of the
permit on time of move, if any, and the period of time in which Northern States
Power Company, Red River Valley Co-op or other association or corporation has
to move or displace overhead wires or cables shall be as set out in the permit,
and if no time is set out in the permit, within a reasonable time thereafter to
remove or displace such wires or cables sufficiently to allow the passage of
said house, building or structure.
   (D)   Conditions of permit. The following conditions shall apply to each
moving permit as issued by the City of Dilworth:
      (1)   Moving buildings across railway tracks. No house, building or
structure shall be moved across any railway track except at such time as
permitted by the persons, associations or corporations owning or controlling
such tracks; and
      (2)   Lighting required on buildings/structures. When any building or
structure is being moved across or through any street or alley, a red light
must be illuminated at each corner of such building or structure from sunset to
sunrise. All ropes, blocks, winches, windlasses or other equipment used in the
moving of said building or structure must, when obstructing the free use of a
street or alley, be protected by suitable lights from sunset to sunrise.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Manufactured structures approved by state and local building
authorities shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, when otherwise
in compliance with §
153.045;
      (2)   A state license will not be required for anyone moving a dwelling
not exceeding 600 square feet in area or a residential accessory building,
storage building, or similar building provided the building does not exceed 900
square feet in area and the loaded width, exclusive of eaves, in all cases does
not exceed 24 feet.
   (F)   Penalty. The following penalty(ies) shall apply:
      (1)   Every person violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, be penalized in accordance with the schedule of fines
established by the City Council.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this penalty provision shall prevent the city
from obtaining a proper injunction or restraining order directed against any
person violating any of the provisions of this section from the District Court
for Clay County, Minnesota, in addition to such other penalties as allowed by
this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.064 SIGNS.
   (A)   Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from the regulations set
forth herein, provided that any exempt sign, if illuminated, shall be
internally illuminated or lit so that the light source is directed away from
adjoining residences, streets, or sidewalks:
      (1)   Signs not exceeding two square feet in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers and names of occupants of premises;
      (2)   A sign not exceeding two square feet in area which is non-
illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building is
allowed for home occupations;
      (3)   Flags and insignias of any government except when displayed in
connection with a commercial promotion;
      (4)   An advertising sign in connection with a lawfully maintained
nonconforming use or conditional use, which complies with the conditions of
approval, if any, and division (B) below;
      (5)   Legal notices, identification, informational or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies;
      (6)   A sign advertising only the sale, rental or lease of the building
or premises, which may not exceed 16 square feet in area and five feet in
height;
      (7)   A sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area is permitted for each
entrance to a subdivision or tract identifying the subdivision or tract name;
      (8)   A sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area is permitted for each
entrance to a subdivision advertising the availability of lots in a
subdivision. All signs meeting this criteria may remain up until 75% of lots in
the subdivision are sold, or three years following substantial completion of
the subdivision development, whichever comes first;
      (9)   Signs measuring not more than 16 square feet in area connected with
political elections and in conformance with Minnesota Statutes;
      (10)   On-site signs during construction, not to exceed 32 square feet,
advertising contractors, financial institutions, or other services associated
with the development of commercial or residential properties; and
      (11)   No exempt sign(s) shall be placed upon city property or right-of-
way without Planning Commission approval.
   (B)   On-premise signs. On-premise signs shall be permitted upon
verification of compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   The on-premise sign is located in a commercial zoning district (C-
1, C-2 or C-3), or an industrial zoning district (I-1 or I-2);
      (2)   On-premises signs for nursing homes, assisted living facilities,
retirement homes, child care centers, publicly owned governmental and cultural
buildings, government and publicly regulated utility buildings and structures,
religious institutions, and day care facilities are permitted;
      (3)   A sign permit must be obtained prior to installation of any
commercial signs, with the exception of signs mounted flat against a building
or that are otherwise not regulated by this chapter;
      (4)   The foundation base and posts of all signs may not be located upon
city property or rights-of-way unless approved by the Planning Commission;
      (5)   No part of any sign or projection may protrude over the public
right-of-way within six feet of the actual or proposed curb line. Signs,
marquees, awnings and similar projections may project over the right-of-way a
maximum of six feet provided no part is within six feet of the curb line and
that it is over eight feet above the sidewalk or the average grade at property
line when no sidewalk is in place. If the street is widened, the sign would
have to be removed or adjusted at the owner's expense to maintain the six foot
distance of the curb regulation;
      (6)   No part of any sign or projection may be located within 30 feet of
the intersecting curb line of an intersection if it shall impede vision between
a height of 30 inches and eight feet;
      (7)   All sources of artificial light other than street lights shall have
a fixed direction and shall be designed to not increase the amount of light to
any abutting residential lot nor to confuse, distract, or be a hazard to
vehicular traffic;
      (8)   All sign installations shall also conform to Minnesota Department
of Transportation and Federal Aviation authorities wherever applicable; and
      (9)   It is the obligation of the installer to check for any or all
underground utilities or services before excavating for sign foundations.
   (C)   Off-premise signs. Off-premise signs shall be permitted upon
verification of compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   A conditional use sign permit must be obtained prior to
installation of any off-premise signs;
      (2)   The foundation base and posts of all signs may not be located upon
city property or rights-of-way unless approved by the Planning Commission;
      (3)   The off-premise sign is located in a zoning district that allows
off-premise signs as a conditional use;
      (4)   Off-premise signs must be set back from residential zoning district
boundaries a distance of 250 feet. Setback dimensions will be a straight line
measurement from the residential district boundary to the center line of the
sign standard;
      (5)   The off-premise sign measures no more than 99 square feet in area,
inclusive of the border and trim, but exclusive of the base or apron, supports,
or other structural members;
      (6)   The height of any off-premise sign, including support structures
measured from the highest centerline grade of any adjacent street, may not
exceed 35 feet when located closer than 100 feet from a property line and not
more than 50 feet when located more than 100 feet from a property line. Height
measurement will be taken from the highest centerline grade of any adjacent
street;
      (7)   No off-premise signs may be located closer than 250 feet apart,
unless separated by an interstate highway or principal arterial. Separation
will be a straight line measurement from the center line of the sign standards;
      (8)   It is the obligation of the installer to check for any or all
underground utilities or services before excavating for sign foundations;
      (9)   All sign installations shall also conform to Minnesota Department
of Transportation and Federal Aviation authorities wherever applicable; and
      (10)   All sources of artificial light other than street lights shall
have a fixed direction and shall be designed so that the source of light is
directed away from adjoining residences, streets, or sidewalks.
   (D)   Off-premise electronic changeable copy and graphic display signs.
      (1)   Off-premise electronic changeable copy or graphic display signs
must be set back from residential zoning district boundaries a distance of 500
feet. Set back dimensions will be a straight line measurement from the
residential district boundary to the center line of the sign standard;
      (2)   The electronic portion of a sign is limited to the allowable size
for off-premise signs;
      (3)   The electronic message must have a display duration of seven
seconds that is static during each individual message. No portion of the
message may flash, scroll, twirl, change color, fade in or fade out, or imitate
movement. The transition from one static display to another must be
instantaneous;
      (4)   The text of the electronic message must be limited to allow the
entire copy to be read with minimal distraction;
      (5)   Every line of copy and graphics in a display must be at least seven
inches in height on a road with a speed limit of 25 - 34 miles per hour, nine
inches on a road with a speed limit of 35 - 44 miles per hour, and 12 inches on
a road with a speed limit of 45 per miles per hour or more;
      (6)   Every off-premise electronic changeable copy or graphic display
sign must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in one position if a
malfunction occurs. The display must also be equipped with the means to
immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must
immediately stop the display when notified by the city that it is not complying
with the standards of this section;
      (7)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the
vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise
interfere with the driver's operation of a motor vehicle:
      (8)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes
with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or signal;
      (9)   The message of an off-premise electronic changeable copy or graphic
display sign may be illuminated by incandescent lamps, LED (light emitting
diodes), or magnetic discs. Regardless of light source, undue brightness is
prohibited. For the purpose of this section, UNDUE BRIGHTNESS will be construed
to mean illumination of a white portion of the sign in excess of the intensity
levels specified below:
         (a)   Day: 7,500 nits; and
         (b)   Night: 500 nits.
      (10)   To ensure compliance with this section, the sign must have an
automatic phased proportional dimmer, which must be used to reduce nighttime
brightness levels (compared to daytime brightness levels). Further, prior to
the issuance of a permit for an electronic message board sign, the applicant
shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light
intensify has been factory preset not to exceed the levels specified above and
the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-
protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the city.
   (E)   Billboard signs. Billboard signs shall be permitted upon verification
of compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   A conditional use sign permit must be obtained prior to
installation of any billboard sign;
      (2)   The foundation base and posts of all signs may not be located upon
city property or rights-of-way unless approved by the Planning Commission;
      (3)   The billboard sign is located in a zoning district that allows
billboard signs as a conditional use;
      (4)   Billboard signs must be set back from residential zoning district
boundaries a distance of 250 feet. Set back dimensions will be a straight line
measurement from the residential district boundary to the center line of the
sign standard;
      (5)   The billboard sign measures no less than 100 square feet but shall
not exceed 300 square feet in area, inclusive of the border and trim, but
exclusive of the base or apron, supports, or other structural members:
      (6)   The height of any billboard sign, including support structures
measured from the highest centerline grade of any adjacent street, may not
exceed 35 feet when located closer than 100 feet from a property line and not
more than 50 feet when located more than 100 feet from a property line. Height
measurement will be taken from the highest centerline grade of any adjacent
street:
      (7)   No billboard signs may be located closer than 5,000 feet apart,
unless separated by an interstate highway or principal arterial. Separation
will be a straight line measurement from the center line of the sign standards:
      (8)   No billboard sign may be located closer than 250 feet from any off-
premise sign, unless separated by an interstate highway or principal arterial.
Separation will be a straight line measurement from the center line of the sign
standards;
      (9)   It is the obligation of the installer to check for any or all
underground utilities or services before excavating for sign foundations:
      (10)   All sign installations shall also conform to Minnesota Department
of Transportation and Federal Aviation authorities wherever applicable:
      (11)   All sources of artificial light other than street lights shall
have a fixed direction and shall be designed so that the source of light is
directed away from adjoining residences, streets, or sidewalks.
   (F)   Billboard electronic changeable copy and graphic display signs.
      (1)   Billboard electronic changeable copy or graphic display signs must
be set back from residential zoning district boundaries a distance of 500 feet.
Set back dimensions will be a straight line measurement from the residential
district boundary to the center line of the sign standard;
      (2)   The electronic portion of a sign is limited to the allowable size
for billboard signs;
      (3)   The electronic message must have a display duration of seven
seconds that is static during each individual message. No portion of the
message may flash, scroll, twirl, change color, fade in or fade out, or imitate
movement. The transition from one static display to another must be
instantaneous;
      (4)   The text of the electronic message must be limited to allow the
entire copy to be read with minimal distraction;
      (5)   Every line of copy and graphics in a display must be at least seven
inches in height on a road with a speed limit of 25 - 34 miles per hour, nine
inches on a road with a speed limit of 35 - 44 miles per hour, and 12 inches on
a road with a speed limit of 45 per miles per hour or more;
      (6)   Every billboard electronic changeable copy or graphic display sign
must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in one position if a
malfunction occurs. The display must also be equipped with the means to
immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must
immediately stop the display when notified by the city that it is not complying
with the standards of this section;
      (7)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the
vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise
interfere with the driver's operation of a motor vehicle;
      (8)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes
with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or signal;
      (9)   The message of a billboard electronic changeable copy or graphic
display sign may be illuminated by incandescent lamps, LED (light emitting
diodes), or magnetic discs. Regardless of light source, undue brightness is
prohibited. For the purpose of this section, UNDUE BRIGHTNESS will be construed
to mean illumination of a white portion of the sign in excess of the intensity
levels specified below:
         (a)   Day: 7,500 nits; and
         (b)   Night: 500 nits.
      (10)   To ensure compliance with this section, the sign must have an
automatic phased proportional dimmer, which must be used to reduce nighttime
brightness levels (compared to daytime brightness levels). Further, prior to
the issuance of a permit for an electronic message board sign, the applicant
shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light
intensity has been factory preset not to exceed the levels specified above and
the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-
protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the city.
   (G)   Portable signs. Any sign which is constructed so as to be movable,
either by skids, wheels, truck or other conveyance; any sign which does not
have a permanent foundation or is not otherwise permanently fastened to the
ground; and cloth signs or banners (of any material) shall be considered
portable signs. When on a trailer, the removal of wheels or undercarriage does
not place the sign in another category, nor does the anchoring of the sign by
means of concrete blocks, sandbags, or other types of temporary anchors.
Portable signs are permitted provided:
      (1)   That the portable sign is located in a business (C-1, C-2 or C-3)
or industrial (I-1 or I-2) zone;
      (2)   On-premise portable signs are used for directing attention to a
business, profession, product, service, activity or entertainment conducted,
sold or offered on the same premises upon which the sign is located. Portable
signs for this purpose can only be erected for up to 30 days at a time.
Entities must wait 60 days following the removal of a portable sign before
erecting another on-premise portable sign;
      (3)   Portable signs advertising special events or fundraisers held
within the city for non-profit organizations are permitted for a period not to
exceed 30 days prior to an event;
      (4)   That no portable sign may exceed 60 square feet in area or 8 feet
in height;
      (5)   That no portable sign may be placed upon public right-of-way
without consent of the Planning Commission;
      (6)   No portable sign may have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights
or other illuminating devices which have a changing intensity, brightness, or
color;
      (7)   Only one portable sign may be placed upon a parcel at any given
time, except in the case of multiple-tenant sites with six or more active
businesses, where two portable signs will be allowed on the parcel at any given
time; and
      (8)   Businesses are allowed to utilize 28 days worth of off-premise
portable signage in a calendar year. These signs are only allowed a maximum of
14 consecutive days. After the removal of an off-premise portable sign,
businesses must wait 60 days before erecting another off-premise portable sign.
   (H)   Sign maintenance. All signs and sign structures must be kept in good
repair and in a proper state of maintenance, including, but not limited to,
replacing lamps, replacing ballast in freestanding signs, replacing
transformers in building identification signs, painting the pole of
freestanding signs and the cabinet of freestanding or wall-mounted signs,
replacing or repairing the sign face, replacing trim, and the replacement of
sign fasteners. If the Zoning Administrator finds that a sign is not in a
proper state of repair, the city may after 30 days written notification,
repair, modify or remove the sign and special assess the charges for said work
against the property owner.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 21-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 153.065 FENCES AND SCREENING
   (A)   Location.
      (1)   Fences may be built up to property lines within the private
property of the person, firm or corporation constructing or causing the
construction of such fence. The City of Dilworth encourages the use and
combination of various screening methods and is not intended to imply or
recommend a continual buffer strip of one type/use/technique. It is the
responsibility of the property owner to locate all property lines.
      (2)   Construction of a fence within an easement may be permitted with
prior authorization from the City of Dilworth. Any fence within an easement is
subject to removal at the owner's expense.
   (B)   Construction and maintenance. Fences shall be constructed of masonry,
brick, finished wood, composite, chain link, or wrought iron material, and
shall be constructed in a substantial workmanlike manner and of substantial
material reasonably suitable for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to
be used. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair
and shall not be allowed to become or remain in a condition of disrepair or
danger, or constitute a nuisance. Any fence which is deemed dangerous to public
safety, health, or welfare, will be classified as a public nuisance.
   (C)   Restrictions. Barbed wire, razor wire, electric fences, rope, cable,
chicken wire, or any material not specifically manufactured for permanent and/
or the purpose of fencing are prohibited in any district except as provided for
below:
      (1)   Electric fences shall only be permitted in the TZ District when
related to farming, hobby farms or similar uses. Additionally, electric fences
shall be permitted on any farm (with operational farm uses) located within any
other zoning district provided the fence shall be a minimum of five feet from
all property lines;
      (2)   Barbed wire fences are not permitted in any districts within the
city except as permitted in division (E) below; and
      (3)   Chicken wire fences are permitted along the perimeter of garden
areas or as a protection means for newly planted trees or shrubs and shall be
seasonal in nature and not permanent.
   (D)   Residential (zoned) district fences. Residential fences shall conform
to the following:
      (1)   Fences in side or rear yards, from the rear lot line to the front
building line, shall not be more than six feet in height above ground elevation
(see Exhibit 1);
      (2)   Corner lots with abutting alley: fences located in side yards
(secondary street side only) of properties abutting a road, shall not exceed
four feet in height and adhere to the opacity requirements as stipulated in
division (H)(3) below (see Exhibit 2);
      (3)   The finished side of fences shall face outwards towards neighboring
properties. The finished side is described as the side of the fence without
exposed supports or posts, unless the fence design has both sides exposed by
supports or posts;
      (4)   Fences shall not obstruct natural drainage; and
      (5)   Swimming pool, spa and hot tub fencing shall be in conformance with
all building codes.
   Exhibit 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96e14085516423cf5f2f7dee14d1ffa276e7c04d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1344.png]
   Exhibit 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/96e14085516423cf5f2f7dee14d1ffa276e7c04d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1346.png]
   (E)   Commercial and industrial district fences. The following provisions
shall apply respective to fences constructed within commercial or industrial
zoned districts:
      (1)   Business and industrial fences may be erected up to eight feet in
height; and
      (2)   Fences which are primarily erected as a security measure may have
arms projecting into the applicant's property on which barbed wire can be
fastened commencing at a point at least seven feet above the ground.
   (F)   Special purpose fences.
      (1)   Fences for special purposes and fences differing in construction,
height, or length may be permitted in any district in the city provided that
the reasons submitted in writing by the applicant to the Zoning Administrator
demonstrate the purpose is necessary to protect, buffer or improve the premises
for which such fence is intended.
      (2)   Snow fences are permitted from November 1 to April 15. Snow fences
must be contained on private property and set back at least ten feet from an
abutting street. Snow fences shall only be constructed of perforated plastic
sheeting, cedar, or other lightweight slated wood.
   (G)   Screening fences.
      (1)   Where any business, industrial use or multi-family building of four
or more units (i.e., structure, parking or storage) abuts or is across the
street from property zoned for residential use, screening shall be provided
along the shared boundary line, unless shared boundary line is a front
elevation/yard; provided, however, that the provisions of this section will not
apply where a multi-family building abuts property also zoned for multi-family
use.
      (2)   In lieu of a screening fence, green belt planting strips are
allowed. A green belt planting strip shall consist of evergreen trees and/or
deciduous trees and plants. The strip shall be sufficient width and density to
provide an effective visual screen. This planting strip shall be designed to
provide substantial visual screening to a minimum height of six feet. Earth
mounding or berms may be used but shall not be used to achieve more than three
feet of the required screen. The planting plan and type of plantings shall
require approval of the city.
      (3)   Screening fence(s) shall be constructed of masonry, brick, finished
wood, composite, or chain link. Such fence shall provide a solid screening
effect six feet in height for multi-family uses and at least six feet for
business and industrial uses. The design and materials used in constructing a
required screening fence shall be subject to the approval of the city.
   (H)   Traffic visibility. The following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Visibility at intersections and/or corner lots. On a corner lot,
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow within 30 feet
from the intersecting curb lines, or within 20 feet from the intersecting
property lines if there is no curb;
      (2)   Visibility from driveway or alley to a public way. No fence, wall
or hedge shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to impede vision where it will interfere with traffic or pedestrian
visibility from a driveway or alley to a public way. For alleyways, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow within 20 feet from the
intersecting curb line. Fences must be set back at least five feet from an
alley; and
      (3)   Opacity. Within ten feet of property lines abutting a street,
fences, walls, hedges or structures shall be at least 75% open space for
passage of air and light.
   (I)   Parking lots/driveways abutting residential areas. Whenever a parking
lot or a driveway to a parking lot is established in any district other than a
residentially zoned district and where the improvement abuts a residentially
zoned property, a sight-obscuring fence of at least five feet in height shall
be constructed and maintained along said side or rear lot line.
   (J)   Outdoor seating and event areas. Liquor establishments and restaurants
that have ancillary outdoor dining, seating and event areas shall meet the
following requirements.
      (1)   A site plan for the outdoor seating and event area shall be
submitted and reviewed by the city for compliance with building and fire codes.
Outdoor seating and event areas shall maintain the same business hours as the
liquor establishment or restaurant it is ancillary to. Occupancy limits may be
set for the area.
      (2)   The site plan shall be accompanied by a narrative describing the
proposed use of the area. The narrative shall address noise and sound control,
emergency and security plans and other items in this section. Serving of food,
alcohol and controlled substances (as applicable) shall also be addressed.
      (3)   Fencing shall be used to control and screen the area to separate it
from other outdoor spaces, buildings, pedestrian areas, parking areas, or uses.
If an outdoor seating and event area is within 150 feet of a residential use,
an eight-foot solid fence is required on any side facing the residential use.
      (4)   Lighting shall be diffused and directed on the outdoor dining,
seating and event area. Lighting shall meet the performance standards of this
chapter.
      (5)   Access to the area shall be through the building occupied by the
business. One-way egress to an outdoor parking area, sidewalk or right-of-way
is allowed.
      (6)   The city may require Planning Commission review of the application.
Any appeal or interpretation of ordinances regarding a specific application is
subject to review of the Planning Commission.
      (7)   All outdoor seating and event areas shall comply with the Minnesota
Clean Indoor Air Act.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 21-07, passed 6-28-2021; Ord. 24-11, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 153.066 DAY CARE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The regulation of day care facilities in these
zoning regulations is to establish standards and procedures by which day care
facilities can be conducted within the city without jeopardizing the health,
safety and general welfare of the day care participants and/or the surrounding
neighborhood. This section establishes the city's minimum requirements for the
establishment of day care facilities, whether identified as a permitted use
(see zoning district use charts) or as a conditional use and of which are not
operated within the confines of a single-family dwelling (see dwelling, single-
family definition). To note, day care facilities other (see DAY CARE definition
within § 153.010) than those defined as permitted uses which operate in a
single-family dwelling as an accessory use shall be subject to §
153.069 and processed as a home occupation.
   (B)   Declaration of conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend and
the Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a day care facility
conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and
provisions of this section. See applicable use charts within each zone
district.
   (C)   General provisions. Day care facilities shall be allowed as a
principal use or as an accessory use, provided that the day care facilities
meet all of the applicable provisions:
      (1)   Lot requirements and setbacks. The proposed site for a day care
facility must have a minimum lot area as determined by the Minnesota Department
of Health and Human Services. The Council may increase the required lot area in
those cases where such an increase is considered necessary to ensure the
compatibility of activities and maintain the public health, safety and general
welfare. The day care facility must meet the minimum setback requirements of
the respective zoning district;
      (2)   Lot requirements and setbacks; accessory use. The site of the
proposed day care facility as an accessory use shall meet all area and setback
provisions of the respective zoning district in which the facility is to be
located;
      (3)   Sewer and water. All day care facilities shall be served by
municipal sewer and water;
      (4)   Screening. Any day care facility that is contained within a
commercial or industrial zone district and/or abuts property that has existing
commercial/industrial uses shall provide adequate screening along the shared
boundary(ies). All required fencing and screening shall comply with the fencing
and screening requirements of §
153.065 ;
      (5)   Parking.
         (a)   For day care facilities as a principal use, there shall be
adequate off-street parking which shall be located separately from any outdoor
play area and shall be in compliance with §
153.060. Parking areas shall be screened from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with §
153.065; and
         (b)   When a day care facility is an accessory use within a structure
containing another principal use, each use shall be calculated separately for
determining the total off-street parking spaces required.
      (6)   Loading. For day care facilities as a principal use, at minimum,
one off-street loading space shall be provided unless otherwise set forth
within §
153.060(I);
      (7)   Signage. All signing and informational or visual communication
devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter relating to
signs; and
      (8)   Compliance with state requirements. The structure and operation
shall be in compliance with State of Minnesota, Department of Health and Human
Service Regulations and be licensed accordingly.
   (D)   Nonconforming use. Existing day care facilities lawfully existing on
the effective date of this chapter may continue as nonconforming uses. Any
existing day care facility that is discontinued for a period of more than 180
days, or is in violation of the provisions of the chapter, under which it was
initially established, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of
this section.
   (E)   Facility/use inspection. The city reserves the right to inspect day
care facilities to ensure conformance with provisions within this chapter,
other city policies and any other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.067 REGULATION OF TOWERS; ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS COMMUNICATION.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. These regulations are established to accommodate
the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community. The regulations set forth
provisions to provide efficient service while minimizing any potential adverse
impacts through regulatory design and dimensional standards.
   (B)   Tower location(s). The following requirements apply to any tower
placed within a residential, commercial or industrial zoned district:
      (1)   Towers supporting amateur radio antennas and conforming to all
applicable provisions of this Code are allowed only in the rear yard of
residential zoned property; and
      (2)   Towers supporting commercial antennas and conforming to all
applicable provisions of this Code are allowed only upon the following
residential/commercial/industrial zoned property under conditional use permits:
         (a)   Church sites, when camouflaged as steeples, bell towers or other
architecturally compatible structures;
         (b)   Park sites or other city owned property, when compatible with
site conditions and adjacent uses; shall be subject to the issuance of a lease
with the City of Dilworth;
         (c)   Government, school, utility, and institutional sites; and
         (d)   Industrial zone property.
   (C)   Co-location requirement. All commercial wireless telecommunication
towers erected, constructed, or located within the city must be approved
through a conditional use permit and comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunications tower
must not be approved unless the applicant proves that the telecommunications
equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing
or approved tower or building within a reasonable search radius of the proposed
tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
         (a)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified
professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced
or modified to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable
cost;
         (b)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
building as documented by a qualified professional engineer and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
         (c)   Existing or approved towers and building within the search
radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
function reasonably as documented by a qualified professional engineer; or
         (d)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
      (2)   Any proposed commercial telecommunications tower must be designed,
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional user.
   (D)   Tower construction requirements. All towers erected, constructed, or
located within the city, and all wiring therefore, must comply with the
Minnesota State Building Code.
   (E)   Tower and antenna design requirements. Proposed or modified towers and
antennas must meet the following design requirements:
      (1)   Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color or other treatments, except in instances
where the color/treatment is dictated by federal or state authorities such as
the Federal Aviation Administration; and
      (2)   Commercial wireless telecommunication towers must be a monopole
design unless the City Council determines that an alternative design would
blend more appropriately into the surrounding environment. Additionally, the
applicant shall be responsible for providing adequate evidence to the city that
an alternative design is necessary to successfully engage in commercial
telecommunication services.
   (F)   Setbacks. Towers shall conform to the following minimum setback
requirements:
      (1)   Towers must meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district and
may not encroach upon any easement, unless otherwise authorized by easement
grantee and any other applicable person/entity, including easement grantor(s);
      (2)   Towers must be setback from the public right-of-way a minimum
distance equal to one-half of the height of the tower including all antennas
and attachments;
      (3)   Towers may not be located between a principal structure and a
public street within a front or side yard, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   In industrial zoning districts, towers may be placed within a
side yard abutting an internal industrially zoned street; and
         (b)   On sites adjacent to public streets (enclosed by public right-
of-way), towers may be placed within a side yard abutting a local street.
      (4)   A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street adjusted, at the sole discretion of the City Council, to allow
the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a
church steeple, light standard, power line support device, or similar structure
or if the applicant provides evidence that a setback reduction is necessary to
successfully engage in commercial telecommunication services.
   (G)   Tower height. All proposed towers must meet the following height
limitations:
      (1)   The height of towers will be determined by measuring the vertical
distance from the tower's center point of contact with the ground or rooftop to
the highest point of the tower, including all antennas or other attachments.
When towers are mounted upon other structures, the combined height of the
structure and tower must meet the height restrictions; and
      (2)   Towers must conform to the following height restrictions:
         (a)   In all residential zoning districts, the maximum height of any
tower, including antennas and other attachments, will be the maximum height
restriction for primary structures within that zoning district;
         (b)   In all non-residential zoning districts, the maximum height of
any tower, including all antennas and other attachments, must not exceed one
foot for each two feet the tower is setback from a residential zoning district
or a maximum height of 150 feet, whichever is less, unless the applicant
provides evidence to the city that the proposed tower height is technically
necessary to successfully engage in commercial communication services; and
         (c)   All towers shall conform to these maximum height restrictions,
unless located upon public buildings and utility structures, church
sanctuaries, steeples and bell towers.
   (H)   Tower lighting. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means
and not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by
the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a
particular tower. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower,
light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas
may be attached to the tower.
   (I)   Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs
other than warning or equipment information is prohibited.
   (J)   Screening. All structures/buildings accessory to the tower must be
screened in accordance with the requirements stipulated in the conditional use
permit.
   (K)   Abandoned or unused towers - portions of towers. All abandoned, unused
towers and associated facilities must be removed within 12 months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the
City Council. In the event that a tower is not removed within 12 months, the
tower and associated facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of
removal assessed against the property.
   (L)   Antennas mounted on roofs, walls and existing towers.
      (1)   The placement of commercial wireless telecommunication antennas in
C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2 Districts on roofs, walls and existing towers may be
approved by resolution of the City Council provided the antennas meet the
requirements of this section. Requests under this division must be accompanied
by a final site plan, building plan and a report prepared by a qualified
professional engineer indicating the existing structure or tower's suitability
to accept the antenna, and the proposed method for affixing the antenna to the
structure. Complete details of all fixtures and couplings, and the precise
point of attachment must be indicated.
      (2)   Private wireless communication antennas, such as satellite dishes
and other similar antennas, are permitted uses in all residential districts to
a maximum height of 15 feet and may not be located in a required front or side
yard setback; except for private wireless communication antennas less than 30
inches in diameter which may be located within a required front or side yard
setback if mounted upon a residential structure.
   (M)   Interference with public safety telecommunication. No new or existing
telecommunications service may interfere with public safety telecommunications.
Before the introduction of new service, changes in frequencies or maximum
signal output, telecommunication providers must notify the city at least ten
calendar days in advance of such changes and allow the city to monitor
interference levels during the testing process.
   (N)   Towers/antennas upon public right-of-way and public property. With the
exception of the necessary electric, telephone service and connection lines
approved by the city, no part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable,
equipment, wire or braces in connection with either may at any time extend
across or over any part of the public right-of-way, public street, highway,
sidewalk, or property line.
   (O)   Additional submittal requirements. In addition to the information
required elsewhere in this section, development applications for towers must
include the following supplemental information:
      (1)   Descriptions of the tower height and design including cross-section
elevation(s);
      (2)   Documentation of the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collated antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas;
      (3)   Descriptions of the tower's capacity, including the number and type
of antennas that can be accommodated;
      (4)   Documentation regarding what steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with established public safety telecommunications;
      (5)   Other information necessary to evaluate the request, as determined
applicable by the city;
      (6)   For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a
letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successor to allow
the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use; and
      (7)   Before the issuance of a building permit, the following
supplemental information must be submitted:
         (a)   Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by Federal Aviation Administration; and
         (b)   A report from a qualified professional engineer which
demonstrates the tower's compliance with the aforementioned structural and
electrical standards.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.068 GENERAL YARD; LOT AREA AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. This chapter further identifies yard, lot area,
building type and height requirements in each zoning district and establishes
general development standards.
   (B)   Useable open space. Except for elderly (senior citizen) housing, each
multiple-family dwelling site shall contain at least 350 square feet of usable
open space (see § 153.010) for each dwelling unit contained therein.
   (C)   Height.
      (1)   Building heights in excess of those standards contained in the
district provisions may be allowed through a conditional use permit, provided
that:
         (a)   The site is capable of accommodating the increased intensity of
use;
         (b)   The increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in
traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets;
         (c)   Public utilities and services are adequate; and
         (d)   For each additional story over the district limitation or for
each additional ten feet above the maximum allowed per district, front and side
yard setback requirements shall be increased by 10%.
      (2)   The building height limits established for district shall not apply
to the following: belfries, chimneys, flues, church spires, cooling towers,
cupolas, domes (non-useable floor space), elevator penthouses, flagpoles,
monuments, parapet walls (not extending more than three feet above the height
of the building), poles, towers, essential services, mechanical/electrical
appurtenances, farm buildings, wind energy conversion systems, communication/
transmission devices or other similar structures/buildings/uses.
      (3)   No excluded roof equipment or structural element extending beyond
the limited height of a building may occupy more than 25% of the area of such
roof nor exceed ten feet unless otherwise authorized under this chapter.
   (D)   Building type and construction.
      (1)   General provisions.
         (a)   No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalum or unfinished
aluminum buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to have
a corrosive designed finish shall be permitted in any zoning district, except
in association with farming operations, or in industrial zones, or as otherwise
allowed by this chapter.
         (b)   Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials comparable
in grade to the following: brick, natural stone, decorative concrete block,
casted concrete panels, pre-cast concrete panels, wood (durable woods such as
cedar, redwood and cypress encouraged), curtain panels (steel, fiberglass and
aluminum - non-structural, load-bearing - provided that such panels are factory
fabricated and finished with a durable non-fade surface and fasteners are
corrosion resistant design), glass curtain wall panels, glass block, stucco,
vinyl, steel siding, aluminum siding, masonite siding or other materials as
deemed appropriate by the Building Official.
      (2)   Special provisions.
         (a)   Neighborhood Business District (C-1) and Central Business
District (C-2). The following special provisions apply to the C-1 and C-
2 Districts: Architectural design shall be of a style to bend with the
surrounding residential neighborhood, as follows:
            1.   Corporate or franchise architecture shall be prohibited unless
demonstrated to fit with the character of the adjacent neighborhood.
            2.   The front of any new business and any side of a building
facing and visible from the street right of way or a residential lot shall be
at least 50% materials other than steel or fiberglass, such as glass, wood,
brick or other like materials found on residential buildings.
            3.   Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened in a matter
that is incorporated in the architectural form of the building.
            4.   Mechanical equipment shall be screened from view of
neighboring properties and public right of way.
            5.   Sidewalk shall connect front doors of business to public
right-of-way. The site design shall promote walkability and compatibility with
surrounding residences.
         (b)   General Business District (C-3). The following special
provisions apply to the C-3 District:
            1.   Buildings shall be attractive and constructed of materials
that will maintain their appearance over the long term.
            2.   All exterior walls shall be of consistent quality and
characteristics.
            3.   Exterior building walls (excluding brick) that abut or face
public right-of-way shall incorporate no fewer than four architectural elements
comparable to those listed below. Architectural elements contributing to this
requirement shall have sufficient visual impact to be noticeable from the
street, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, and may include but not
limited to:
               a.   Accent materials that vary the color, type and/or texture
of the walls;
               b.   Public art;
               c.   Architectural detail, such as tile work and moldings
integrated into the building façade;
               d.   Windows;
               e.   Recesses/projections;
               f.   Roof overhang, which should vary according to building
width as follows: one foot overhang for buildings less than 50 feet in width,
two foot overhang for buildings 50 to 100 feet in width, and three foot
overhang for buildings greater than 100 feet in width;
               g.   Varied roof lines, including gables, dormers, cupolas,
changes in heights and/or styles;
               h.   Articulated cornice line; and/or
               i.   Canopies/awnings/porticos.
            4.   Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened in a matter
that is incorporated in the architectural form of the building.
            5.   Mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from public
right-of-way.
   (E)   Yards.
      (1)   No lot, yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or
dimension so as to make such lot, yard or open space less than the minimum
required by this chapter. If the existing yard or open space is less than the
minimum required, it shall not be further reduced. No required open space
provided for any building or structure shall be included as part of any open
space required for another structure.
      (2)   Yard requirements.
         (a)   The following shall not be considered as encroachments on yard
setback requirements:
            1.   Accessory structures. Accessory structures as governed by this
chapter are permitted in rear yards;
            2.   Balconies, chimneys and ornamental features. Balconies,
chimneys, flues, leaders, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, sills,
cornices, buttresses, eaves, gutters and the like may project not more than 2
and one-half feet into any required yard. Gutters attached to eaves may project
six inches beyond the eaves;
            3.   Walks or steps. Walks or steps for negotiating ground slopes,
retaining walls, hedged and natural growth, paved terraces, paved areas or
similar features;
            4.   Uncovered porches, decks, stairs, stoops and ramps. Uncovered
porches, decks, stairs or stoops may extend to within three feet of a side or
rear lot line and ten feet beyond a front building line but may be no closer
than five feet from a front property line. Multi-family buildings may have the
above enumerated structures extend halfway into a required side or rear yard.
Ramps for access by persons with disabilities may extend to a property line.
Uncovered porches, decks, stairs and stoops for attached single family
dwellings may extend to the same property line as the dwelling;
            5.   Structures for gardening or recreation, heating or air
conditioning equipment. Structures used ornamentally for gardening or for
private recreation purposes, structures for essential services, and heating and
air conditioning equipment, all accessory to and customarily incidental to the
principal use, are permitted in yards and courts. Exception: heating and air
conditioning equipment is not permitted in a front yard;
            6.   Solar energy systems. Solar energy systems not included in the
floor area of the building may extend five feet into any required rear yard and
not closer than three feet from any interior side property line and eight feet
from a side property line adjacent to a street; and
            7.   Fire balconies and escapes. Open work fire balconies and fire
escapes may not extend more than three feet into a required setback.
         (b)   Inconsistencies. Where adjacent structures have front yard
setbacks less than those required, the minimum front yard setback may be the
average of the two adjacent structures. If only one adjacent lot is occupied by
a structure, the minimum front yard may be that of said principal structure.
   (F)   Minimum lot area per unit.
      (1)   The lot area per unit requirement for single-family, two-family,
townhouse, apartment and Planned Unit Developments shall be calculated on the
basis of the total area of the subject property or properties as may be
controlled by an individual or under any form of ownership structure. To note,
this provision does not exempt an applicant from completing lot consolidations
or any other form of lot configuration modification.
      (2)   Lot area requirements.
         (a)   Single-family: as specified in zoning district provisions;
         (b)   Two-family: as specified in zoning district provisions;
         (c)   Elderly housing: 1,000 square feet;
         (d)   Multiple-family: not less than 6,000 square feet for each
building or dwelling group having four dwelling units or less. Dwelling units
in excess of four shall have not less than a 8,500 square foot lot area and the
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall not be less than:
            1.   Efficiency one-room apartment: 1,000 square feet;
            2.   One bedroom apartment: 1,300 square feet;
            3.   Two bedroom apartment: 1,600 square feet; or
            4.   Three or more bedroom apartment: 1,700 square feet.
   (G)   Single-family dwellings. All single-family detached homes except in
the R-5 District shall:
      (1)   Be constructed upon a permanent foundation that meets the
requirements of the state Building Code;
      (2)   Not be less than 22 feet in width. Width measurements shall not
take account of overhang and other projections beyond the principal walls; and
      (3)   Not be less than 700 square feet in size.
   (H)   Dwelling unit restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply:
      (1)   No garage, tent, accessory building, travel trailer or motor home
shall at any time be used as living quarters, temporarily or permanently;
      (2)   Energy conserving designs are encouraged and not intended to be
prohibited by any provision within this chapter. However, dependent upon the
energy conserving mechanism, certain requirements within this chapter may apply
(i.e. screening, height restrictions, and the like) and/or may require the
issuance of a conditional use permit. All structures/appurtenances shall comply
with standards imposed by the state and the Uniform Building Code; and
      (3)   In a multiple-family or attached single-family development, a
building for storage of lawn maintenance or snow removal equipment may be
constructed in addition to any parking garages. The structure may be
constructed on a common or shared lot/parcel and provided the area of the
storage building does not exceed 750 square feet or 10% of the area of the
common lot, whichever is less.
   (I)   Platted and unplatted property. The following regulations shall apply
to platted property and unplatted property:
      (1)   Any person desiring to improve property shall submit to the
Building Official an accurate description of the property to be improved
including front, rear and side yard lot lines of said premises and information
on the location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings, location of
easements crossing the property, encroachments and any other information which
may be necessary to ensure conformance to city provisions. To provide this
information in an accurate manner, applicants may need to contact a
professional/registered land surveyor;
      (2)   All buildings shall be placed to avoid platted or duly dedicated
public right-of-way and any applicable access easements (private or public) to
ensure streets/infrastructure may be constructed/improved by the city; and
      (3)   Except in the case of Planned Unit Developments as provided for in
§
153.062, not more than one principal building shall be located on a lot in a
residentially zoned area, including the R-5 District, but excluding the R-
4 District.
   (J)   Swimming pools. The following regulations shall apply to the
installation of swimming pools within municipal limits:
      (1)   A permit shall be required for all swimming pools (inclusive of
above-ground, in-ground or on-ground pools) with a capacity of 5,000 gallons
and/or two feet or more of depth (per adopted building code). Each application
for a permit to construct or erect a swimming pool shall be accompanied by
plans of sufficient detail to show:
         (a)   The proposed location and its relationship (dimensional) to the
other principal buildings on the lot;
         (b)   The size of the pool;
         (c)   Fencing and other fixtures existing on the lot, including
utility location and trees;
         (d)   The location, size and types of equipment to be used in
connection with the pool, including but not limited to filter unit, pump
fencing and the pool itself; and
         (e)   That the requirements contained in sections below will be
satisfied.
      (2)   All pools for which a permit is required and granted shall be
provided with safeguards to prevent children from gaining uncontrolled access.
This can be accomplished with fencing, screening or other forms of enclosure,
or any combination thereof, of sufficient density as to be impenetrable. If
fences are employed, they shall be at least six feet in height. The bottoms of
the fences shall not be more than four inches from the ground. Fences shall be
of a noncorrosive material and shall be constructed to reduce a person's
ability to climb the fence. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool
enclosure shall be equipped with gates or doors. All gates or doors to swimming
pools shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at a
sufficient height so as to be inaccessible to small children. All fence posts
shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases or
other suitable protection (see §
153.065 for additional information on fencing);
      (3)   Above-ground and below-ground swimming pools are permitted in rear
yards only. A minimum setback of five feet must be maintained from the edge of
the pool to a side or rear property line; and
      (4)   For additional information, see Appendix G, International
Residential Code which regulates swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.
   (K)   Drainage plans.
      (1)   In the case of all residential subdivisions, multiple-family,
commercial and industrial developments, the drainage plans with appropriate
spot site elevations shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review. Final
drainage plans shall be subject to written approval. In the case of such uses,
no modifications in grade and drainage flow through fill, retaining walls or
other such actions shall be permitted until such plans have been reviewed and
received written approval from the City Engineer.
      (2)   Unless authorized in writing by the City Engineer, the top of the
foundation and garage floor of residential dwellings may not be less than 24
inches above the top of the curb. In certain circumstances, some subdivisions
or developments with covenants may require higher floor grades. See §
153.001(E)(2) for additional information on covenants, restrictions and private
agreements.
   (L)   Glare. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area,
signs, architectural elements, structures, or other components of a structure,
shall be arranged to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or
from public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, as produced by floodlights
or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding shall not be
directed into any adjoining property. The source of light shall be hooded or
controlled to eliminate any light spill onto adjacent properties. Light bulbs
(non-hooded/shielded) shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or
public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on
residential property shall not exceed four foot-candles (meter reading) as
measured from said property. This division shall not apply to sports stadiums,
athletic fields or to public recreational facilities; however, the city shall
take appropriate measures to ensure adequate steps are taken to reduce any
negative impact on adjacent properties.
   (M)   Refuse.
      (1)   All dumpsters or comparable refuse handling equipment shall be
appropriately screened from eye-level view from all neighboring uses and the
public right-of-way. This provision shall not apply to the temporary use of
dumpsters or refuse handling equipment for construction activities or other
similar temporary uses.
      (2)   Exterior storage shall require the following:
         (a)   The enclosed trash receptacle area shall be located in the rear
or side yard and shall observe all applicable setback requirements and
easements;
         (b)   The trash enclosure must be in an accessible location; and
         (c)   The trash receptacles must be fully screened from view of
adjacent properties and the public right-of-way by a fence or wall or at least
six feet in height and a minimum opaqueness of 80%.
   (N)   Outside storage.
      (1)   In residentially zoned areas, the following items shall not be
stored on a lot, unless they are within a building or enclosed within a
permissible structure:
         (a)   Racing cars;
         (b)   Recreational vehicles, utility trailers, off-road vehicles, and
similar equipment, in any combination thereof, in excess of two;
         (c)   Construction and landscaping material, unless they are currently
being used on the premises;
         (d)   On and off-street parking of vehicles/trucks/equipment that are
not registered and/or inoperable;
         (e)   Front yard exterior storage of firewood, or any exterior storage
of firewood, which storage is not for the purpose of consumption by the person
or persons on whose property it is stored; or
         (f)   Household storage including lawn maintenance and snow removal
equipment, tools, furniture, recreational tools and equipment, when not in use,
must be kept in a garage, storage building, screened enclosure in a rear yard,
or behind the dwelling so as not to be visible from the street.
      (2)   All non-residential outside storage shall conform to the following
conditions:
         (a)   The area occupied is not within a required front or required
side yard;
         (b)   The storage area is totally fenced or fully screened. For
purposes of this division, storage does not include the display of goods which
are being sold at retail to the general public such as automobiles, trucks,
farm equipment and similar items;
         (c)   The storage area is surfaced to control dust and drainage
according to a plan submitted to and subject to approval of the City Engineer.
Gravel surface storage is permitted when approved by the City Engineer;
         (d)   All lighting shall be hooded and directed in a manner that
complies with division (L) above;
         (e)   The storage area does not encroach upon required parking spaces
or required loading space as required by this chapter; and
         (f)   A site plan documenting the location and grading of the storage
operation shall be submitted and shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.069 GARAGES; ACCESSORY STRUCTURES; USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Residential accessory uses/structures.
      (1)   With the exception of a detached garage, no accessory building,
structure, or use may be placed within a front yard.
      (2)   Accessory structures 200 square feet or less in size do not require
a building permit; however, the structure is subject to the any other
applicable provision(s) within this chapter.
      (3)   A garage (attached or detached) or accessory building or any
combination thereof shall not exceed the ground coverage of the dwelling unit.
      (4)   No structure or combination of structures shall occupy more than
33% of the total lot area.
      (5)   Encroachment. Construction of an accessory building within an
easement may be permitted with prior authorization from the City of Dilworth.
Any accessory structure within an easement is subject to removal at the owner's
expense.
      (6)   Setback requirements. All garages and accessory buildings shall
conform to the setback requirements specified for the respective zoning
district in which they are located.
      (7)   When a garage, storage building, or other accessory structure
contains a loft, attic, or second story, only the footprint of the main floor
of the building shall be used to determine its size.
      (8)   If a principal building is removed from the property for any reason
and not replaced with another permitted principal structure, all accessory
buildings or structures remaining that result in a nonconformity or increase
the properties nonconformance with this chapter shall be removed if a building
permit is not issued for the principle structure within 180 days.
   (B)   Size requirements.
      (1)   Property with an attached garage.
         (a)   Maximum garage size: 1,150 square feet;
         (b)   Maximum accessory structure size (only one permitted): 330
square feet;
         (c)   Maximum height: not to exceed height of principal structure, but
no larger than 16 feet.
      (2)   Property without an attached garage.
         (a)   Accessory structure guidelines: two accessory buildings
permitted, not to exceed a total of 1,270 square feet.
         (b)   Maximum accessory structure size: 1,150 square feet.
         (c)   Maximum height: not to exceed height of principal structure, but
no larger than 16 feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.070 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a means
through the establishment of specific standards and procedures by which home
occupations can be conducted in residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing
the health, safety and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
   (B)   Applicability. Subject to the nonconforming use provision of this
chapter, all occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter. This section shall not be construed, however, to apply to home
occupations accessory to farming.
   (C)   General provisions. All home occupations shall comply with the
following general provisions:
      (1)   No home occupation shall produce light glare, noise, fumes, odor or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
neighboring properties;
      (2)   No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be used
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the
premises;
      (3)   Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the residential use of the premises. Not more than 25% of the main floor of the
dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the conduct of the
home occupation. It should not change the residential character thereof, and
shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding
residential uses;
      (4)   No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations
or involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except
where required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations;
      (5)   There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or material used in
the home occupation, except personal automobiles used in the home occupation
may be parked on the site;
      (6)   The home occupation shall meet all applicable ordinances, fire and
building codes;
      (7)   There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior
display or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling unit with
the exception of directional and identification/business signs to the extent
authorized by the provisions of §
153.064 relating to signs;
      (8)   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless said occupation is contained entirely within the
principal building and will not require any on-street parking facilities;
      (9)   Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of
that which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is
parked closer than 15 feet from the curb line or edge of paved surface;
      (10)   Not more than one person other than those who customarily reside
on the premises shall be employed;
      (11)   The home or occupation shall not involve any of the following:
small engine or auto repair or reconditioning or manufacturing, or sale of THC
products or manufacturing or sales of cannabis, hemp and/or cannabinoid
products; and
      (12)   All permitted home occupations must be conducted entirely within a
building and must comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 23-01, passed 4-24-2023; Ord. 24-09, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 153.071 TRANSIENT MERCHANT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish
minimum guidelines for transient (i.e. temporary, mobile) merchants wishing to
conduct business within the City of Dilworth. This section provides
requirements that promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
the citizens of Dilworth, Minnesota and establish reasonable and uniform
regulations for transient merchants.
   (B)   Definitions.
      TRANSIENT MERCHANT/BUSINESS. Includes any person, individual, co-
partnership, limited liability company, and corporation, both as principal and
agent, who engage in, do, or transact any temporary and transient business in
Dilworth, MN, either in one locality, or in traveling from place to a place
within Dilworth, selling goods, wares, and merchandise; and who, for the
purpose of carrying on such business, hire, lease, occupy, or use a building,
structure, vacant lot, or railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such
goods, wares, and merchandise. The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT does not include a
seller or exhibitor in a firearms collector show involving two or more sellers
or exhibitors.
   (C)   Procedure for operating as a transient merchant. The following will
apply to transient merchants within any of Dilworth's commercial or industrial
zoning districts (zones C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2). Transient merchants are
prohibited in all other zoning districts:
      (1)   Anyone wishing to operate a transient merchant must first obtain a
permit from Dilworth City Hall. No person shall operate as a transient merchant
in the city without an issued permit. Said permit will cost $200 (non-
refundable) and go into the City of Dilworth's general fund revenue.
      (2)   The permit will be reviewed by Dilworth staff to ensure zoning
compliance.
      (3)   If during the time the permit is in effect the transient merchant
fails to maintain the required conditions pursuant to this section, the City of
Dilworth may revoke the permit and the transient merchant activity shall be
terminated.
      (4)   Transient merchants may appeal a City of Dilworth zoning action in
accordance with §
153.025.
   (D)   Required conditions. Approval of a transient business permit is
subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Transient merchants are permitted in all commercial and industrial
zoning districts (C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2).
      (2)   A copy of a lease agreement, deed, or similar document from the
property owner is required.
      (3)   All signage must comply with §
153.064.
      (4)   Transient merchants may not be permitted at a location more than 90
days per calendar year. The owner/operator may reapply for a permit at the end
of their duration, but the transient merchant must be relocated at a minimum of
1000 feet (measured in radial distance) from the prior location.
      (5)   A site plan must be submitted for review and approval. The site
plan shall include a mapped location of the proposed business, including
existing parking spaces, roadways, sidewalks, and buildings; it should also
entail measurements of distance from proposed display/enclosure to nearby
parking spaces, roadways, sidewalks, setbacks, and buildings. Aerial
photography, existing surveys, or plat will suffice for this purpose. The site
plan shall include any photography of tents, trailers, stands, and the like
that will be used. The City of Dilworth has the right to review and/or reject
any site plan submitted. Once approved by the city, all site plans must be
maintained by the transient merchant with the duration of the permit. Any
deviation from the site plan by the transient merchant may result in revocation
of the permit and the business activity shall be terminated.
      (6)   If a transient merchant distributes or prepares food products, a
copy of a permit issued by Clay County Environmental Health is required to be
kept on file. Revocation of the permit will constitute revocation of the
transient merchant license.
      (7)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any general sale,
fair, auction, Loco Daze, or bazaar sponsored by any religious, education,
public service, or charitable organization.
      (8)   Failure to comply with this chapter is subject to the "Violations"
division of the City of Dilworth Zoning Ordinance (§
153.020).
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Section
   
154.01   General provisions
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Administration and enforcement
   
154.04   Procedures for filing and review
   
154.05   Plat and data requirements
   
154.06   Subdivision design standards
   
154.07   Required improvements
   
154.08   Subdividing in flood areas
§ 154.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title and effective date. The official title of this chapter is the
Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Dilworth, Minnesota. This Subdivision
Ordinance shall become effective on May 26, 2015 and is referred to within this
chapter as either the "Subdivision Ordinance," "chapter," or "Ordinance".
   (B)   Purpose. All divisions of land thereafter submitted to the city must
fully comply with the regulations to:
      (1)   Provide for and guide the orderly, economic, and safe development
of land, urban services, and facilities;
      (2)   Encourage well-planned, efficient, and attractive subdivisions by
establishing adequate and impartial standards for design and construction;
      (3)   Provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of residents by
requiring the necessary services such as properly designed streets and adequate
wastewater and water service;
      (4)   Place the cost of improvements against those benefitting from their
construction;
      (5)   Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands; and
      (6)   Set the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
   (C)   Scope of legal authority.
      (1)   The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivision of land
contained herein will apply within the boundaries of the city and within all
unincorporated areas from the city's boundary for a distance of two miles as
permitted by M.S. § 462.358. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction within
the prescribed area, the extent of overlapping jurisdiction will be determined
and agreed upon between the city and the other municipality or municipalities
concerned. This title is not intended to repeal, annul, or in any way impair or
interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances, or with
restrictive covenants running with the land except those specifically repealed
by or in conflict with this chapter.
      (2)   The city has the power and authority to review, amend, and approve
subdivisions of land already recorded in the office of the County Recorder if
such plats are entirely or partially undeveloped.
      (3)   The plat will be considered to be entirely or partially undeveloped
if it meets one or both of the following criteria:
         (a)   The plat has been recorded with the County Recorder without
prior approval by the city where approval was required. This applies to all
plats within the corporate limits and all plats filed after February 21, 1973,
that fall within Dilworth's two mile subdivision jurisdiction.
         (b)   The plat has been approved by the city and the approval has been
granted more than three years prior to granting a building permit on the
partially or entirely undeveloped land and the subdivision or zoning
regulations for the district in which the subdivision is located have been
changed subsequent to the original final subdivision approval.
   (D)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare and to implement
the Comprehensive Plan. The City Council and/or Planning Commission has the
option, however, to deviate from the standards set forth herein as part of a
preplanned, coordinated development project processed as a Planned Unit
Development or land subdivision as governed by the Subdivision Ordinance.
Moreover, as specified herein, developer's agreements approved by the city and
the applicant may be utilized to accommodate special situations.
   (E)   Existing law.
      (1)   General. This Subdivision Ordinance is intended to compliment other
local, state, and federal regulations that affect zoning and land use. This
chapter is not intended to revoke or repeal any other public law, ordinance,
regulation, or permit. However, where conditions, standards, or requirements
imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more or less restrictive
than comparable standards imposed by other public law, ordinance, or
regulation, the provisions that are more restrictive or that impose higher
standards or requirements, as determined by the city, shall govern.
      (2)   Private agreements. This Subdivision Ordinance is not intended to
revoke or repeal any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However,
where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement, then the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Regulations
within this chapter shall not be construed to modify or repeal any private
covenant, deed restriction, or agreement; however, such private covenant,
restriction, or agreement shall not provide a means to avoid compliance with
this chapter. The city is not obligated in any manner to enforce or administer
provisions established within private covenants, agreements, or restrictions.
   (F)   Severability. If any section or provision of this chapter is declared
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part,
thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
   (G)   Relation to the adopted Comprehensive Plan. Enforcement, amendment,
and administration of this chapter will be accomplished with due consideration
of the recommendations contained in the Comprehensive Plan for the City of
Dilworth, Minnesota, as adopted and periodically amended by the Planning
Commission and City Council. The City Council recognizes the Comprehensive Plan
as the principle guidance for regulating land use and development in accordance
with the policies and purpose set forth in this chapter.
   (H)   Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority granted by
the Municipal Planning Act, M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.363.
   (I)   Public purpose. Regulation of subdivision of land and the attachment
of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police
power delegated by the state to this municipality. The developer has the duty
of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the Planning Commission
for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land to conform
to the physical and economic development of the city and to the health, safety,
and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the
community at large.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
present tense includes the future tense, the singular includes the plural, and
the plural includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may"
is permissive.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access
to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a
street.
   APPLICANT. The owner, their agent or person having legal control, ownership
and/or interest in the land proposed to be subdivided.
   ATTORNEY. The attorney employed or retained by the city unless otherwise
stated.
   BIKEWAY. A public right-of-way or easement across a block or within a block
to provide access for bicyclists and in which a path or trail is installed.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is bounded by streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, drainage ditches, or boundary
lines of municipalities.
   BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and
the property line.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattel, or movable property of any kind, and includes any
structure.
   BUILDING CODE. The Building Code adopted by the State of Minnesota.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. Representatives of the city who have been appointed by
the City Council and/or assigned the responsibility of enforcing provisions of
this chapter.
   BWSR. State of Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources or its successor.
   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY. A document prepared by a registered land surveyor
which precisely describes area, dimensions, and location of a parcel of land.
   CITY. The City of Dilworth.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Dilworth, Minnesota.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE. Any open space including private parks, nature areas,
playgrounds, trails, and recreational buildings and structures, which is an
integral part of a development and is not owned on an individual basis by each
owner of the dwelling unit.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Unless otherwise stated, it is the general plan for land
use, housing, transportation, and community facilities prepared and maintained
by the City Council for the municipality.
   CONTOUR MAP. A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by
lines connecting points of equal elevation. CONTOUR INTERVAL will mean the
vertical height between contour lines.
   COPY. A print or reproduction made from an original.
   COUNTY. Clay County, Minnesota.
   DESIGN STANDARDS. Specifications that applicants proposing to subdivide land
must follow when preparing plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among
other things the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as
rights-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots.
   DEVELOPMENT. The act of building structures and installing site
improvements.
   DRAINAGE COURSE. A watercourse or indenture for the drainage of surface
water.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for
residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, or boarding houses.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residence designed for or occupied by two or
more families living independently of each other, with separate housekeeping
and cooking facilities for each unit.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A residence designed for or occupied by one family
only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A residence designed for or occupied by two families
only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. This would
include single-family homes with an apartment in the basement. A two-family
dwelling (duplex) with a rooming unit(s) shall be considered and classified as
a multi-family dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT. A residential building or portion thereof intended for
occupancy by one or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking,
and eating, but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, seasonal cabins,
boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes, or trailers.
   DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY. Any one room unit having cooking facilities and
used for combined living, dining, and sleeping purposes.
   EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other
than the owner.
   ENGINEER OF CITY or CITY ENGINEER. The registered engineer employed or
retained by the city, unless otherwise stated.
   FINAL PLAT. A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the
requirements of the city and in such form as required by Clay County for the
purpose of recording.
   FLOOD RELATED.
      (1)   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. Method of determining the location of
encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each
side of a stream are reduced by an equal amount when calculating the increases
in flood stages due to floodplain encroachments.
      (2)   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency
      (3)   FLOOD. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in
inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel.
      (4)   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The average frequency, statistically determined,
for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be
equaled or exceeded.
      (5)   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in
the flood insurance study for the city.
      (6)   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. The areas included in the floodway and flood
fringe as indicated on the official Zoning Map and the Flood Insurance Study
and Flood Insurance Rate Map which have been officially adopted by the city.
      (7)   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. The Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the city.
      (8)   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The Flood Insurance Study prepared for the
city by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated May 19, 1981, and, as
applicable and allowed by law, the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for Clay County and dated April 17, 2012.
      (9)   FLOOD PLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse which has been or
hereafter may be covered by the 100-year flood as determined by the use of the
100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood
Insurance Study.
      (10)   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
      (11)   FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
regional flood determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other
supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study.
      (12)   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse of regulatory flood hazard area
which might impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either
in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by the water, or that is
placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of
life or property.
      (13)   ONE-HUNDRED(100)-YEAR FLOOD. A flood which is representative of a
large regional flood known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and
reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average
frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval as determined by
the use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting technical data in
the Flood Insurance Study.
      (14)   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by the natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
      (15)   REGULATORY FLOOD PROJECTION ELEVATION. A point not less than one
foot above the water surface profile associated with the 100-year flood as
determined by the use of the 100-year flood profile and supporting technical
data from the flood insurance study plus any increase in flood height
attributed to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which
uses regulated by this chapter are required to be elevated or flood proofed.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Dilworth City Council
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. An artificial or natural surface through which water,
air, or roots cannot penetrate.
   KEY MAP. A small or large scale map which definitively shows the area
proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical features (e.g., town
center, lakes, and streets).
   LANDSCAPING. Planting, such as trees, flowers, grass, shrubs, and may
include the reshaping of the land by moving earth or other physical
improvements.
   LOT. A parcel or portion of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum
zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an
improved public street.
   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines, exclusive of any
portion of the right-of-way of any public roadway.
   LOT, BASE. Lots meeting all specifications in the zoning district prior to
being subdivided into a two-family dwelling.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
   LOT COVERAGE. Those areas covered by principal buildings, accessory
buildings, and garages but does not include areas used for walkways, access
drives, parking spaces, open patios, swimming pools, tennis courts, and
landscaping elements.
   LOT DEPTH. Lot depths shall be considered to be the distance between the
midpoint of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines
in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on two streets.
   LOT FRONT. The front of a lot shall be considered to be that boundary
abutting a public right-of-way having the least width. In a through lot where
the lot abuts a limited access street, the front of the lot will be on the
street opposite from the limited access street.
   LOT IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, place, work of art or other
object, or improvement of the land on which it is situated, a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership; except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-
of-way.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street. In the case of a corner lot it shall be the shortest dimension
on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front line
shall be designated by the owner and filed with the Building Official.
   LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.
If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line of ten feet in length
within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or rear
lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved
and filed, or one unit of an auditor's outlot or a registered land survey, or a
parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered but for which a deed,
auditor's subdivision or registered land survey has been recorded in the Office
of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Ordinances for Clay County prior to
May 26, 2015.
   LOT, SUBSTANDARD. A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded
in the office of the Clay County Recorder upon or prior to May 26, 2015 which
does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks or other dimensional
standards of this chapter.
   LOT UNIT. Lots created from the subdivision of a two-family dwelling having
different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional base lots within
the zoning district.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the
setback line as established by this chapter, or if no setback line is
established, the distance between the side lot lines along the measured street
line.
   METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION. A description of real property which is not
described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by
starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the
lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a fractional
portion of a section, lot, or area by described lines or portions thereof.
   NATURAL WATERWAY. A natural passageway on the surface of the earth, so
situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows
through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area.
   OPEN SPACE. Any open area not covered by structures, but not limited to the
following uses: required or established yard areas, parking areas, sidewalks,
trails, recreation areas, water bodies, shorelands, watercourses, wetlands,
groundwater recharge areas, floodplain, floodway, flood fringe, erodible
slopes, woodland, and soils with severe limitation for development.
   OUTLOT. A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is
intended as open space or other future use, for which no building permit shall
be issued.
   OWNER. An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation,
trust, or any other legal ownership interest in land buildings, structures,
dwelling unit(s), or other property.
   PARCEL. An individual lot or tract of land.
   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. Public land and open space in the city dedicated or
reserved for recreational purposes.
   PEDESTRIANWAY. A public right-of-way or easement across or within a block to
provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the installation of
paths or trails.
   PERCENTAGE OF GRADE. Along a centerline of a street, the change in vertical
elevation in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal
distance, expressed as a percentage.
   PERSON. Any individual or legal entity; includes an owner or representative
of the owner, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or
corporation as well as an individual.
   PLANNER. The Dilworth City Planner.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Dilworth Planning Commission.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A detailed drawing or map of a proposed subdivision,
meeting the requirements of this chapter and in compliance with the
Comprehensive Plan, submitted to the Planning Commission and governing body for
their consideration.
   PRIVATE STREET. A street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels
of land which is not dedicated to the public and is owned by one or more
private parties.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts entered into between owners and holders of
mortgages constituting a restriction on the use of property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners.
   PUBLIC. Pertaining to municipal, school district, county, state, or other
governmental units.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water system, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-
street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the city may
ultimately assume ownership, responsibility for maintenance and operation, or
which may affect an improvement, for which local government responsibility is
established.
   PUBLIC USES. Uses owned or operated by municipal, school districts, county,
state, or other governmental units.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts entered into between all owners and holders
of mortgage constituting a restriction on the use of property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and providing mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of property value and economic integrity
of any given area.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land acquired by reservation, dedication, or otherwise
intended for public use, and intended to be occupied or occupied by a street,
trail, railroad, utility lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, or other similar uses.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distances between a structure and the
property line nearest thereto.
   SIDEWALK. A paved portion of the street right-of-way between the curb lines
and adjacent property lines intended for pedestrian travel.
   SKETCH PLAN. A conceptual plan to facilitate discussion between the
applicant and city staff regarding a proposed subdivision. The sketch plan may
show the proposed layout of streets, lots, proposed playgrounds and parks, the
100-year flood contour line, zoning, approximate lot sizes, and as much
relevant information as possible.
   STATE. The State of Minnesota.
   STREET. A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, through way, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designation, which has been
dedicated to the public for public use and which affords principal means of
access to abutting property.
   STREET LINE. The right-of-way line of a street.
   STREET PAVEMENT. The wearing or exposed surface of a street or roadway used
by vehicular traffic.
   STREETS, ARTERIAL. Those streets carrying larger volumes of traffic and
serving as links between various sub-areas of the city. Arterial streets are
intended to provide for collection and distribution of traffic between highways
and collector streets; hence regulation of direct access to property is
critical.
   STREETS, COLLECTOR. Those streets intended to provide a balance between
mobility and access, serve moderate traffic volumes, and provide for collection
and distribution of traffic from local streets to streets of higher
classification. Collector streets provide access to neighborhoods and important
travel generators. A limited degree of direct land access is acceptable for
safe and efficient operation.
   STREETS, CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal or terminals for the safe and convenient reversal of
traffic movement.
   STREETS, LOCAL. Those streets intended to provide direct access to various
land uses. Local streets provide low mobility and serve the lowest traffic
volumes. Typically, the local street is a two lane road.
   STREETS, MARGINAL ACCESS (FRONTAGE ROAD). Those local streets which are
parallel and adjacent to high volume arterial streets and highways; and which
provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the curb lines of a street.
   STRUCTURE. Anything which is built, constructed, or erected; an edifice or
building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner whether temporary or
permanent in character. Among other things, structures including buildings,
manufactured homes, walls, fences, towers, antennas, swimming pools,
billboards, and poster panels.
   SUBDIVIDING. The process of dividing land.
   SUBDIVISION. The dividing of an area, parcel, or tract of land into two or
more parcels, tracts, lots, or long term leasehold interests where the creation
of the leasehold interest necessitates the creation of streets, roads, or
alleys for residential, commercial, industrial, or other use or any combination
thereof. This term includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the
context, will relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
Subdivision will apply as outlined herein except for these separations:
      (1)   Where the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests will be 20
acres or larger in size and 500 feet in width for residential uses and five
acres or larger in size of commercial and industrial uses;
      (2)   Creating cemetery lots; and
      (3)   Resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot line by the
relocation of a common boundary.
   SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered under Minnesota state laws.
   TRACING. A plat or map drawn on transparent paper, film, or cloth which can
be reproduced by using regular reproduction procedure.
   USABLE OPEN SPACE. A required ground area or terrace area on a lot which is
graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and maintained for
either active or passive recreation or both, available to and usable by all
persons occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit on the lot and their guests.
Such areas shall be grassed and landscaped or covered only for recreational
purpose. Roofs, driveways, and parking areas shall not constitute usable open
space.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied, utilized, or
maintained, and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by
the performance standards of this chapter.
   USGS. United States Geological Survey.
   VARIANCE. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of Chapter 153 where such
variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and
undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for
area, size of structure, size of yards, setback and side yard requirements, and
parking requirements; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited
shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of
the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or adjoining zoning
districts.
   WATERSHED. The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage system,
bounded peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage
areas.
   WETLANDS. An area where water stands near, at, or above the soil surface
during a significant portion of most years, saturating the soil and supporting
a predominately aquatic form of vegetation, and which may have the following
characteristics:
      (1)   Vegetation belonging to the marsh (emergent aquatic), bog, fen,
sedge meadow, shrubland, southern lowland forest (lowland hardwood), and
northern lowland forest (conifer swamp) communities. (These communities
correspond roughly to wetland types 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 described by the
United States Fish and Wildlife Services, Circular 39, Wetlands of the U.S.
1956);
      (2)   Mineral soils with gley horizons or organic soils belonging to the
Histosol order (peat and muck);
      (3)   Soil which is water logged or covered with water at least three
months of the year; and
      (4)   Swamps, bogs, marshes, potholes, wet meadows and sloughs are
wetlands, and such property may be shallow waterbodies, the waters of which are
stagnant or actuated by very feeble currents, and may at times be sufficiently
dry to permit tillage, but would require drainage to be made arable. The edge
of a wetland is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
   ZONING MAP. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as part thereof,
designating the zoning districts.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Dilworth.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Administration. This chapter will be administered by the City Council
or its designee.
   (B)   Amendments. The provisions of this chapter may be amended by action of
the City Council.
   (C)   Unapproved subdivisions.
      (1)   No conveyance of land to which these regulations are applicable
should be filed or recorded if the land is described in the conveyance by metes
and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after
April 21, 1961, or to an unapproved plat made after such regulations became
effective. The foregoing provision does not apply to a conveyance if the land
described:
         (a)   Was a separate parcel of record on April 1, 1945, or the date of
adoption of subdivision regulation under Laws 1945, Chapter 287, whichever is
the later, or of the adoption of subdivision regulations pursuant to a home
rule charter; or
         (b)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into
prior to such time; or
         (c)   Was a separate parcel of not less than two and one-half acres in
area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966; or
         (d)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and
300 feet in width on July 1, 1980; or
         (e)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less
than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance
does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels,
any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet in width; or
         (f)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not
less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots
or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet in
width.
      (2)   In any case in which failure to comply does not interfere with the
purposes of the Subdivision Ordinance, the city may waive such compliance
pursuant to the provisions of §
154.04(A).
   (D)   Building permits. No building permit may be issued for any
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, demolition, or moving of any
building or structure on any lot or parcel until all the requirements of these
regulations have been fully met.
   (E)   Resubdivision of land. A proposed subdivision must conform to the
city's Comprehensive Plan, or similar document, growth area plans, neighborhood
plans, related policies adopted by the City Council, and to the Zoning
Ordinance.
   (F)   Variances. A proposed subdivision must conform to the city's
Comprehensive Plan, or similar document, growth area plans, neighborhood plans,
related policies adopted by the City Council, and to the Zoning Ordinance.
   (G)   Violations and penalty.
      (1)   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats. It is a misdemeanor to sell,
trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in
conformity with, any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located
within the jurisdiction of this chapter unless the plan, plat, or replat has
first been recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
      (2)   Recording unapproved plats. It is unlawful for a person to record
in any public office any plans, plats of land laid out in building lots and
streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to
public or private use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting
on or adjacent thereto, and located within the jurisdiction of this chapter,
unless the same bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the
City Council.
      (3)   Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
may be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day during which compliance is delayed or
such violation continues or occurs will constitute a separate offense and may
be prosecuted as such.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.04 PROCEDURES FOR FILING AND REVIEW.
   (A)   Administrative and minor subdivision. When in the best interest of the
city and in cases of administrative or minor subdivision, the platting
procedures of this title may be waived in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Administrative subdivisions.
         (a)   The following shall be considered an administrative subdivision:
            1.   A boundary adjustment relocating a property line between
adjoining parcels, provided the subdivision does not create a new tax parcel
and each parcel retains sufficient lot size required by
Chapter 153;
            2.   A split of an existing platted lot to accommodate the separate
ownership of each unit in a single-family attached dwelling, provided the
subdivision does not increase the density beyond the maximum number of units
allowed for that parcel by
Chapter 153 or a developer's agreement approved by the City Council; or
            3.   A combination of two or more contiguous tax parcels into one
parcel of record.
         (b)   The city may waive the platting requirement and administratively
approve a subdivision in these instances.
      (2)   Minor subdivisions.
         (a)   The following shall be considered a minor subdivision:
            1.   A subdivision, other than a division of a single-family
attached dwelling, that contains not more than three splits;
            2.   A subdivision by metes and bounds description which would
increase the density of a tax parcel beyond what is allowed by its zoning
classification; or
            3.   Any other subdivision of property by metes and bounds
description, including a subdivision within the unincorporated area from the
city's boundary for a distance of two miles, which is not defined as an
administrative subdivision by division (A)(1) of this section.
         (b)   The city may waive the platting requirement and approve a minor
subdivision in these instances.
      (3)   Approval. Administrative and minor subdivisions may be approved
provided that:
         (a)   There is no need for public improvements as a result of the
subdivision;
         (b)   The subdivision does not violate any provision of the Zoning
Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, or any other state or local ordinance;
         (c)   The subdivision does not adversely affect public health, safety,
and general welfare;
         (d)   The subdivision is not part of a continuing scheme of lot
splitting for a particular area;
         (e)   Any platted lot may be split up to four times through
administrative or minor subdivision; and
         (f)   A completed City of Dilworth application form, legal description
of the proposed parcels, drawing of the existing and proposed parcels, drawing
of the existing and proposed parcels, setback of existing structures to the
proposed property lines, and an explanation of any encroachments are provided
to the City of Dilworth Planner and City Administrator.
      (4)   The applicant shall submit documentation that the respective
township has received and approved the proposed subdivision and related use, as
applicable.
   (B)   Preliminary plat.
      (1)   Application requirements. Prior to the filing of an application of
a preliminary plat, the applicant shall meet with the City of Dilworth Planner
and City Administrator for informal discussion of the proposed plat. A sketch
plan may be used to facilitate discussion between the applicant and city staff
regarding a proposed subdivision. After the pre-application meeting(s), the
applicant must prepare and file with the city an electronic version and two
large copies 22 inches by 34 inches, two 11 inch by 17 inch copies, and one
reduced scale eight and one-half inch by 11 inch copy of a preliminary plat and
supportive information which is in conformity with the requirements of §
154.05(A) and pay the appropriate review fee as established by the City
Council, at least 15 working days prior to the regularly scheduled or special
Planning Commission meeting at which it is proposed to be heard.
      (2)   Official application. The applicant must include any citizen action
request form necessary to zone or rezone the proposed subdivision plat or
development area, and for any anticipated variance(s) from the provisions of
this chapter, as set out in §
154.03(C). The plat will be considered as being officially submitted when all
of the information requirements are complied with and the appropriate review
fee(s) paid.
      (3)   Subdivision jurisdiction. If the subdivision lies outside the city
limits and within Dilworth's two mile subdivision jurisdiction and there are no
immediate plans to annex, the city must refer one copy of the preliminary plat
to the appropriate Township Planning Commission and one copy to the County
Planning Commission for their review and comment. The applicant or owner may be
required to appear at the Township Planning Commission or County Planning
Commission. The Township Planning Commission and County Planning Commission are
requested to forward their written comments to the City Planner within 60 days
of receipt of the preliminary plat.
      (4)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of the completed application as
outlined in division (B)(1) of this section, the City Planner will set a public
hearing for public review of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission.
The hearing will be held within 60 days of the completed filing of the
application. The applicant and/or their representative(s) must appear at the
public hearing. Notice of the hearing may be legal or display advertisement and
will consist of a legal property description, description of request, and must
be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing.
      (5)   Review by other Commissions, jurisdictions, and/or utility
companies. The applicant will refer copies of the preliminary plat to county,
state, or other municipal jurisdictions, as well as utility companies, for
their review and comment, where appropriate and when required.
      (6)   Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission will report its
findings and make its recommendation to the City Council no later than 60 days
after the close of public hearing described in division (B)(4) of this section.
If the Planning Commission has not acted upon the preliminary plat within 60
days following the close of public hearing on such and in compliance with this
chapter, the Council may act on the preliminary plat without the Planning
Commission's recommendation.
      (7)   Preliminary plat approval. The Planning Commission's approval of
the preliminary plat will not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it
will be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the
preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat, which will be
submitted to the Planning Commission, at a future date, and subsequent
recommendation forwarded to the City Council for final plat approval and
recording with the County Recorder, upon fulfillment of the requirements of
these regulations and the conditions of conditional approval, if any.
      (8)   City Council action.
         (a)   The Council will approve or disapprove the preliminary plat
within 60 days following the recommendation and report from the Planning
Commission.
         (b)   If the preliminary plat is not approved by the City Council, the
reasons for such action must be recorded in the proceedings of the Council and
must be transmitted to the applicant. If the preliminary plat is approved, such
approval will not constitute final acceptance of the design and layout.
Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals and other
features and requirements as specified by this chapter to be indicated on the
final plat. The City Council may impose such conditions and restrictions as it
deems appropriate or require such revisions or modifications in the preliminary
play or final plat as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety,
comfort, general welfare, and convenience of the city.
         (c)   The City Council reserves the right to decline approval of a
preliminary plat if due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural
features, such as topography, trees, and watercourses.
      (9)   Following City Council approval of a preliminary plat, the
applicant must submit a final plat to the City Planner, to be reviewed and a
recommendation made by the Planning Commission to the City Council, within 60
days of preliminary plat approval by the City Council unless a request for time
extension is submitted in writing and approved by the City Council. If an
extension is not made and the 60 day timeline passes, then approval of the
preliminary plat will be considered void.
      (10)   If substantial modifications are necessary on an approved
preliminary plat, the plat must be resubmitted for preliminary plat approval.
However, if only minor modifications are necessary, the plat may be submitted
as a final plat.
   (C)   Final plat.
      (1)   Submittal. After the preliminary plat has been approved, a final
plat must be submitted for review as set forth in the divisions which follow.
The final plat, which must be prepared by a certified land surveyor, will
incorporate all minor corrections, modifications, and revisions required by the
city and associated utility agencies, and conform to the approved preliminary
plat. The applicant must complete a city action request form for final plat
approval attaching the appropriate review fee.
      (2)   Compliance. All final plats must comply with the provisions of
Minnesota State Statutes and requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Review of a final plat. The applicant must prepare and file with
the city an electronic version and two large copies 22 inches by 34 inches, two
11 inch by 17 inch copies, and one reduced scale, eight and one-half inch by 11
inch copy of a final plat and supportive information which is in conformity
with the requirements of §
154.05(B), complete a city action request form, and pay the appropriate review
fee as established by City Council, at least 15 working days prior to the
regularly scheduled or special Planning Commission meeting at which it is
proposed to be heard.
      (4)   Upon receipt of the completed application as outlined in division
(C)(3) of this section, the City Planner must set a public hearing for public
review of the final plat by the Planning Commission. The hearing will be held
within 60 days of the completed filing of the application. The applicant and/or
their representative(s) must appear at the public hearing. Notice of the
hearing may be a legal or display advertisement and will consist of a legal
property description, description of request, and will be published in the
official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing.
      (5)   The applicant will refer copies of the final plat to county, state,
or municipal jurisdictions, as well as utility companies, for their review and
comment, where appropriate and when required.
      (6)   Prior to recording of a final plat, the city must have approved the
developer's agreement with the property owner, which controls the installation
of all municipal improvements, utility systems, sidewalks and boulevard trees,
and other development issues. Said agreement will require all improvements to
comply with approved engineering standards and applicable regulations.
      (7)   The Planning Commission will report its findings and make its
recommendation to the City Council not later than 60 days after the close of
public hearing described in division (C)(4) of this section. If the Planning
Commission has not acted upon the final plat within 60 days following the close
of public hearing on such and in compliance with this chapter, the Council may
act on the final plat without the Planning Commission's recommendation.
      (8)   The City Council must take action on a final plat within 60 days
after receiving the report and recommendation from the Planning Commission. If
the final plat is not approved by the City Council, the reasons for such action
will be recorded in the official proceedings of the city and will be
transmitted to the applicant.
      (9)   Upon receiving final plat approval by the City Council the
applicant or his/her agent must, within 60 days, provide the City Planner with
all necessary mylars and hard boards for city designated representative
signatures. After all city signatures have been applied to the mylars and hard
boards the applicant will record said plat with the County Recorder within 60
days, or the approved final plat will be considered void unless the applicant
receives an extension from the City Planner. Upon delivery of the final plat to
the County Recorder, the applicant will be required to ensure that all
applicable fees and taxes are paid.
      (10)   Upon recording of the final plat, the City Planner will notify the
applicant or his/her agent of the recording and make available a signed copy of
the plat.
      (11)   Upon receiving final plat approval, the applicant or his/her agent
must submit a copy of the plat in electronic format compatible with software in
use by the city at the time of submittal and with the Fargo-Moorhead
Metropolitan Council of Governments layering scheme. The computerized plat must
be referenced as county coordinates and provide a seamless edge match to the
existing city database. Coordinates of existing plats will be provided by city
staff.
   (D)   Denial of plat. The Planning Commission may recommend denial and the
Council may deny a subdivision if it makes any of the following findings:
      (1)   Conflicts: that the proposed subdivision is in direct conflict with
adopted applicable general and specific Comprehensive Plans of the city,
county, or township;
      (2)   Physical characteristics: that the physical characteristics of this
site, including, but not limited to, topography, percolation rate, soil
conditions, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to
flooding, water storage, drainage, and retention, are such that the site is not
suitable for the type of development, design, or use contemplated;
      (3)   Density: that the site is not physically suitable for the proposed
density of development;
      (4)   Environmental damage: that the design of the subdivision or the
proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage;
      (5)   Public health: that the design of the subdivision or the type of
improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;
      (6)   Conflict with easement: that the design of the subdivision or the
type of improvements will conflict with easements of record or with easements
established by judgment of a court;
      (7)   Outside of boundaries: that the proposed subdivision is outside the
boundaries of the city;
      (8)   Flooding provisions: that the proposed subdivision, its site, or
its design adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the floodway,
increases flood stages and velocities, or increases flood hazards within the
floodway fringe or within other areas of the city;
      (9)   MEQB policies: the proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the
policies of the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board (MEQB), as may be
amended, and could adversely impact critical environmental areas or potentially
disrupt or destroy historic areas which are designated or officially recognized
by the City Council in violation of federal and state historical preservation
laws;
      (10)   The county, township, or developer has not certified in writing
that they will assume all responsibility for repair and maintenance of
dedicated streets until annexed to the city; and/or
      (11)   The township or county has not certified in writing that it has
the capacity for and will provide police and fire protection and on-site sewer
system inspections to ensure proper installation.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.05 PLAT AND DATA REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Preliminary plat. The applicant must prepare and submit a preliminary
plat, together with a completed city action request form and appropriate fee.
The preliminary plat should contain the information set forth in the divisions
which follow. Upon specific request, the city may exempt an applicant from the
submission of data which is not considered relevant to the application:
      (1)   Identification and description.
         (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision; names must not duplicate
or be alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat recorded in the city or
begin with the wording "replat;"
         (b)   Name of the owner(s) of record, or any agent having control of
the land, and the land surveyor;
         (c)   Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section,
quarter section, or quarter-quarter section lines comprising a legal
description of the property;
         (d)   Graphic scale not less than one inch to 100 feet for large scale
copies, 22 inches by 34 inches;
         (e)   North point/arrow;
         (f)   Date of preparation;
         (g)   Existing conditions;
         (h)   Boundary lines to include bearings and distances;
         (i)   Location of existing rights-of way, recorded easements, parks,
and other land dedicated for public use; and
         (j)   One hundred-year flood elevations, the regulatory flood
protection elevation, and boundaries of floodway and flood fringe areas, if
known, taking into consideration the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance
Rate Map.
      (2)   Proposed subdivision features.
         (a)   Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths and
proposed names of streets in conformance with city and county street
identification policies. The name of any street heretofore used in the city or
its environs should not be used unless the proposed street is a logical
extension of an already named street, in which even the same name should be
used;
         (b)   Each plat must provide at least two points of entry to adjacent
streets, unless otherwise approved by the City Council;
         (c)   Locations and of proposed alleys and pedestrianways;
         (d)   Site(s) dedicated for parks, playgrounds, or other public uses
to include size of such dedications;
         (e)   Areas, other than streets, alleys, bikeways, pedestrianways, and
utility easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use,
including the size of such area or areas in acres;
         (f)   Lot lines, lot numbers, and block numbers;
         (g)   Lot dimensions; and
         (h)   Total acreage of proposed plat area.
      (3)   Supplementary information. Any or all of the supplementary
information requirements set forth in this division should be submitted
separately from the plat when deemed necessary by the city staff, consultants,
advisory bodies, and/or City Council to adequately address the application and
site in question:
         (a)   Plan showing the locations of sidewalks and bikeways;
         (b)   Grading plan which must include the proposed grading and
drainage of the site, including provisions for stormwater detention and
drainage;
         (c)   Proposed fill, levees, channel modifications, and other methods
to overcome flood or erosion hazard areas in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance and by use of the 100-year flood profile and other supporting
technical data in the Flood Insurance Study;
         (d)   Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting the
subdivision;
         (e)   Minimum front and side street building setback line, including
those located on curves and within cul-de-sacs;
         (f)   Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry, or other non-public uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings;
         (g)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or
other underground facilities within the preliminary plat area and to a distance
of 150 feet beyond. Such data as grades and locations of catch basins,
manholes, hydrants, and street pavement width and type also must be shown;
         (h)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of
not more than one-half foot shown on a contour/topographic map. Watercourses,
marshes, wooded areas, rock outcroppings, power transmission poles and lines,
and other significant features also must be shown. USGS datum must be used for
all topographic mapping where feasible;
         (i)   Subsurface conditions on tracts for subdivisions utilizing
individual water and wastewater disposal systems; location and results of tests
to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions and
availability; location and results of soil percolation tests;
         (j)   Other conditions on the tract: water courses, marshes, rock
outcroppings, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more in
diameter, existing houses, barns, and other significant features;
         (k)   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of buildings
with number of proposed dwelling units or type of business or industry, so as
to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, park facilities, fire
hazards, and congestion of population. The city may require the applicant to
have formal traffic studies performed to the city's satisfaction which show the
effect of the proposed development on traffic, fire hazards, and congestion;
         (l)   If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan
for the areas, including dimensions, must be shown. Such proposed zoning plans
will be for information only and will not vest any rights in the applicant;
         (m)   A stormwater management plan both during construction and after
development has been completed. Such plans are to be in accordance with best
management practices (BMPs) as provided by city ordinance, the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, and the Board of Water and Soil Resources;
         (n)   A statement certifying the environmental condition of the site
including the presence of any hazardous substance as defined in M.S. § 115B.02,
subd. 8. Such statement may be required to be based upon an environmental
assessment of the site by an environmental engineering firm acceptable to the
city;
         (o)   An environmental assessment worksheet must be submitted if the
city, city consultants, Minnesota Environmental Quality Board or other groups
or agencies determine that one is required by law;
         (p)   Total square footage of each lot and block; and
         (q)   Such other information as may be required by the city.
   (B)   Final plat. The applicant must submit a final plat together with a
completed city action request form, appropriate fee, and any necessary
supplementary information. The final plat, prepared for recording purposes,
must be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and
Clay County regulations, and such final plat must contain the following
information:
      (1)   The final plat must be prepared and certified by a land surveyor
who is registered in the state and must comply with the provisions of the law
and this chapter;
      (2)   Name of the subdivision, which must not duplicate or too closely
approximate the name of any existing plat recorded in the county or begin with
the wording "replat;"
      (3)   Location by section, township, range, county, and state, and
including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate
traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions;
      (4)   The location of monuments must be shown and described on the final
plat. Locations of such monuments must be shown in reference to existing
official monuments on the nearest established street lines, including true
angles and distances to such reference points or monuments;
      (5)   Location of lots, outlots, street rights-of way, public highways,
alleys, and parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and
decimals of feet, with the length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with
all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground must be
shown. Dimensions must be shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines;
      (6)   Lots must be numbered clearly, blocks are to be numbered, with
numbers shown clearly in the center of the block.
      (7)   Total square footage per lot, acreage per block, and total acres in
the plat, to be submitted separately from the plat;
      (8)   The exact locations, widths, and names of all streets to be
dedicated;
      (9)   Location, purpose, and width of all easements to be dedicated;
      (10)   Scale not less than one inch to 100 feet of plat for large scale
copies, 22 inches by 34 inches (the scale to be shown graphically on a bar
scale), date, and north arrow;
      (11)   A written statement from the county or township submitted
separately, if the subdivision lies outside the boundaries of the city and is
not to be annexed certifying the following:
         (a)   That the road authority, county, township, or developer will
assume all responsibility for repair and maintenance of dedicated streets until
annexation to the city; and
         (b)   That the township or county has the capacity for and will
provide police and fire protection and on-site sewer system and well
inspections to ensure proper installations.
      (12)   An executed copy of restrictive covenants to be submitted
separately from the plat;
      (13)   Statement dedicating all easements as follows: "Easements for
installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved
over, under, and along the designated areas marked ‘utility easements;'"
      (14)   Statement dedicating all streets, alleys, and other public areas
not previously dedicated as follows: "Streets, alleys, and other public areas
shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so
dedicated;" and
      (15)   Such other information that may be required by the city.
   (C)   Certification required.
      (1)   Certification by a registered land surveyor in the form required by
M.S. § 505.03, as amended.
      (2)   Execution of all owners of any interest in the land and holders of
a mortgage thereon of the certificates required by M.S. § 505.03, as amended,
and which certificate must include a dedication of the utility easements and
other public areas in such form as approved by the City Council.
      (3)   Space for certificates of approval by the Planning Commission and
City Council in the following form in a substantially similar form:
CITY PLANNER/PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATION
At a regular meeting of the PLANNING COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF DILWORTH,
MINNESOTA, on the _____ day of ___________________, 20_____, the plat of
_____________________________ to the City of Dilworth, Clay County, Minnesota,
was duly recommended for approval to the City Council.
_________________________________________________________________________________
(NAME OF CURRENT PLANNING COMMISSION CHAIR)      Chair
City of Dilworth, Minnesota
CITY COUNCIL CERTIFICATION
At a regular meeting of the CITY COUNCIL, OF THE CITY OF DILWORTH, MINNESOTA, on
the _____ day of ___________________, 20_____, the plat of
_____________________________ to the City of Dilworth, Clay County, Minnesota,
was duly approved.
_________________________________________________________________________________
(NAME OF CURRENT CITY ADMINISTRATOR)         City Administrator
City of Dilworth, Minnesota
CITY ENGINEER APPROVAL
_________________________________________________________________________________
(NAME OF CURRENT CITY ENGINEER)            City Engineer
City of Dilworth, Minnesota
 
   (D)   Metes and bounds.
      (1)   Except in unique situations as may be allowed by the City Council
or in cases of minor subdivisions, conveyances by metes and bounds will be
prohibited where any lot or lots involved are less than five acres in area or
have a width of less than 300 feet at the building setback line.
      (2)   When a conveyance by metes and bounds is made and the parcels
involved are between five acres and 20 acres in size, a survey of the parcels
involved must be submitted to the City Planner before any building permits will
be issued for those parcels, and a copy of the survey must be attached to the
deed when it is submitted to the Clay County Recorder's Office for recording.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.06 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Conformity with Dilworth's Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance. A
proposed subdivision must conform to the city's Comprehensive Plan, or similar
document, growth area plans, neighborhood plans, related policies adopted by
the City Council, and to the Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Land requirements.
      (1)   Land should be suited to the purpose for which it is to be
subdivided. No plan will be approved if the site is not suitable for the
purposes proposed by reason of potential flooding, topography, or adverse soil.
      (2)   Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property will not be
subdivided until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plan.
      (3)   Proposed subdivisions will be coordinated with surrounding
jurisdictions and/or neighborhoods, so that the city as a whole may develop
efficiently and harmoniously.
   (C)   Blocks.
      (1)   Accommodation. Block length and width or acreage within bounding
streets must accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by
the Zoning Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control,
and safety of street traffic.
      (2)   Block length. In general, intersecting streets should be provided
at such intervals so as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing
streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential
subdivisions should not exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 300 feet in length,
except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from this
minimum.
      (3)   Block width. The width of the block should normally be sufficient
to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth as required by the Zoning Ordinance
except adjoining a lake, stream, river, railroad or arterial, or where one tier
or lot is necessary because of topographic conditions. Blocks intended for
business or industrial uses should be of such width as to be considered most
suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street
parking, deliveries, and loading. Such facilities should be provided with safe
and convenient limited access to the street system.
   (D)   Lots.
      (1)   Area. The minimum lot area, width, and depth should not be less
than that established by the city Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of
adoption of the final plat.
      (2)   Side lot lines. Side lines of lots should be at perpendicular to
street lines, radial to curved street lines, or radial to accommodate site
specific topographic conditions.
      (3)   Frontage on two streets. Double frontage, or lots with frontage on
two parallel or nonintersecting streets should not be permitted, except where
lots back on arterial streets or highways, or where topographic or other
conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
      (4)   Driveway restrictions. In the case where a proposed plat is
adjacent to a limited access highway, other major highway, principal or minor
arterial streets, no direct vehicular access from individual lots to such
streets and roads will be permitted.
   (E)   Streets.
      (1)   Conformance. Proposed streets must conform to state, metropolitan,
and county highway plans which have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as
prescribed by law.
      (2)   Topography. Streets should be logically related to the topography,
so as to produce usable lots and reasonable grades.
      (3)   Access. Access must be given to all lots and portions of the tract
in a subdivision and to adjacent unsubdivided parcels, unless the topography
clearly indicates that such connection is not feasible. Reserved strips and
landlocked areas must not be created.
      (4)   Continuation. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions should
make provision for the appropriate continuation of existing streets in
adjoining areas.
      (5)   Projection. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, but in the
future may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision
should make provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas
by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at
appropriate locations. A temporary turnaround facility may be required at the
closed end, in conformance with cul-de-sac size requirements. Temporary
facilities will not require curb and gutter and the construction standards will
be established by the City Engineer.
      (6)   Arrangement. The arrangement of arterial and collector streets
should be considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of
traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to public
convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the area to be served.
      (7)   Provisions for resubdivision of large lots and parcels. When a
tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels which have
the potential for further subdivision, such lots or parcels should be so
arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future streets and
appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections for
such resubdivision.
      (8)   Dead ends. Dead end streets will be prohibited, except as stated in
this section.
      (9)   Private streets. Private streets are prohibited, except in the case
of a Planned Unit Development and/or approval of the City Council. No public
street improvement will be approved for any private street.
      (10)   Service streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing
or planned major arterial or a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately
parallel to and on each side of such arterial and right-of-way may be required
for adequate protection of residential properties and separation of through and
local traffic. Such service streets must be located at a distance from the
major arterial or railroad right-of-way suitable for appropriate use of the
intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for
commercial and industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances
should be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades
and future grade separations.
      (11)   Design. The street design should not be such as to cause hardship
to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing
convenient access to it.
      (12)   Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets permanently designed as
such, must not exceed 600 feet in length, including a terminal turnaround which
must be provided at the closed end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than
60 feet. The length will be measured along the centerline from the nearest
intersection to the center point of the cul-de-sac.
   (F)   Street design.
      (1)   Widths. Street right-of-way widths will be as determined in the
Comprehensive Plan and on the official street map, and where applicable, must
conform to county and state standards for trunk highways. In cases where no
standard is provided, the following standards will apply:
 Paved curb to curb width (minimum) in Right-of-way width (minimum) in feet
 feet
                            Paved curb to curb width  Right-of-way width
                            (minimum) in feet         (minimum) in feet
All uses:
Minor arterial              40                        120
Collector                   28                        76 - 80
Local collector, parking on 38                        80
both sides of street
Local collector, parking on 32                        80
one side of street
Local collector, no on-     26                        80
street parking
Cul-de-sac turnaround       40 foot radius            60 foot radius
Marginal access/frontage    26                        50
road
Residential uses:
Multiple-family local,
parking both sides of       38                        70
street
Multiple-family local,      32                        60
parking one side of street
Single-family local,
parking on both sides of    36                        66
street
Single-family local,
parking on one side of      30                        60
street
Single-family local, no on- 26                        50
street parking
 
      (2)   Street intersections. Insofar as practical, streets should
intersect at right angles. In no case will the angle formed by the intersection
of two streets be less than 75 degrees or more than 105 degrees. Intersections
having more than four corners will be prohibited.
      (3)   Tangents. A tangent of at least 100 feet must be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
      (4)   Deflections. When connecting street lines deflect from each other
at one point by more than ten degrees, they should normally be connected by a
curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of not less than 500
feet for arterials, 300 feet for collectors, and 200 feet for all other
streets. The Planning Commission may allow greater or lesser sight distances.
      (5)   Street intersection jogs. Street intersection jogs with centerline
offsets of less than 150 feet are prohibited.
      (6)   Access to principal arterials. Full access to such principal
arterials should normally be at intervals of not less than one-half mile and
through existing and established crossroads where possible. Conditional access
may be allowed at intervals of not less than one-fourth mile.
      (7)   Access to minor arterials. Full access to such minor arterials
should normally be at intervals of not less than one-fourth mile and through
existing and established crossroads where possible. Conditional access may be
allowed at intervals of not less than one-eighth mile.
      (8)   Access to collectors. Full access to such collectors should
normally be at intervals of not less than one-eighth mile and through existing
and established crossroads where possible.
      (9)   Access to local collectors. Full access to such local collectors
should normally be at intervals of not less than 330 feet.
      (10)   General access. Access to principal arterials in the urban core.
Access to such roadways may be granted at the discretion of the City Engineer
at intervals of not less than 300 feet to 660 feet.
      (11)   Platting of small tracts. In the platting of small tracts of land
fronting on a principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector where there is
no convenient access to existing entrances and where access from such plat
would be closer than one-fourth mile from an existing access point, a temporary
entrance permit may be granted. Provision will be made in such plats for the
connection of roads to neighboring land. As the neighboring land is platted and
developed and access becomes possible at a preferred location, such temporary
entrance permits will become void at the discretion of the city.
      (12)   Half streets. Half streets are prohibited except where it will be
practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half street may be
permitted. The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the
remainder must be considered in this decision.
      (13)   Inadequate street width. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an
existing street of inadequate width, sufficient additional width will be
provided to meet the above standards.
      (14)   Additional width. Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may
be required to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions
require it.
      (15)   Corner radii. Roadways of street intersections will be rounded by
a radius of not less than 20 feet. Corners at entrances to the turnaround
portions of cul-de-sacs must be rounded by a radius of not less than 20 feet.
      (16)   Curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter will be included as part
of the required street surface improvement and will be designed for
installation along both sides of all roadways. With the exception of multiple-
family development, mountable curbing may be allowed with residential
subdivisions. Barrier curb and gutter will be required in multiple-family,
commercial, and industrial subdivisions.
      (17)   Street designation. Whenever practical, streets and avenues will
be designated numerically. The following policies may be generally applied when
designating awkward street and avenue configurations:
         (a)   Cul-de-sacs less than 300 feet will assume the designation of
the street or avenue they abut; and
         (b)   Loops must be designated avenues, streets, or a combination of
both, depending on the depth of the configuration. Generally, the longer the
length or depth, the greater the applicability for a separate street and avenue
designation. For short loops, the word "circle" must be used to indicate the
configuration. Upon approval of the City Council, streets may be named when
such streets are not through streets; and
         (c)   No street names will be used that duplicate or may be confused
with the names of existing streets, unless a new street is a continuation of or
in alignment with the existing or platted street. In that event, it must bear
the same name of the existing or platted street. Street names must conform to
the city's street naming and property numbering system as applicable.
      (18)   Minimum standards. Private streets, at a minimum, must be designed
to provide 24 feet of access lanes and be constructed in accordance to design
specifications by the City Engineer for required strength and durability.
   (G)   Alleys.
      (1)   Alleys shall be constructed in accordance to the grade, width, and
slope established by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Location permitted. Alleys or service drives may be provided in
commercial and industrial districts.
      (3)   Surfacing. All alleys must be hard surfaced with concrete or
asphalt, with concrete valley gutter.
   (H)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   All new subdivisions within the city shall provide sidewalks on
both sides of all arterial, collector, local and cul-de-sac streets. A
developer, in connection with the platting of a new subdivision or replatting a
subdivision, shall submit a sidewalk plan for approval by the Planning
Commission and City Council, which shall be incorporated into a developer's
agreement for that plat.
      (2)   A sidewalk plan may be submitted by the developer which illustrates
the placement of sidewalks on one side of a street or areas with no sidewalks.
Factors that the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider include,
but are not limited to:
         (a)   The expected population density of the area;
         (b)   The location of pedestrian traffic generators within walking
distance;
         (c)   The relationship of the subdivision to adjacent existing and
projected land uses;
         (d)   Design of the subdivision for which sidewalks are required; and
         (e)   Existing and/or planned sidewalk connections adjacent to the
subdivision.
      (3)   All sidewalks proposed for a subdivision must conform to the
standards outlined in §
154.08(C).
   (I)   Bike paths. Bike paths will be required for those subdivisions within
the city where such need has been identified within the Metropolitan Bicycle
and Pedestrian Plan or within an applicable growth area plan.
   (J)   Boulevard trees. All subdivisions within the city will be required to
provide boulevard trees in conformance with the city's Tree Ordinance and
Sidewalk Plan.
   (K)   Wastewater disposal and storm drainage for areas without central or
public services.
      (1)   On-site sewer system. In areas being platted without central or
public sewers, the on-site sewer system, including the size and relative
location of same, must be in conformance with county, township, state, and
federal requirements including any FEMA rules and regulations pertinent to site
sewer and water. When such requirements conflict, the most restrictive will
apply. Subdivisions and/or developments utilizing on-site wastewater systems
are required to connect to public facilities in accordance with this code, and
pay any proportionate costs or applicable fees, when such facilities become
available.
      (2)   Stormwater drainage facilities. Stormwater drainage facilities,
where required, must be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without
damage to persons or property. The system must ensure drainage at all points
along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings to accommodate
frequent floods. Drainage plans must be consistent with local and regional
drainage plans. The facilities must be designed to protect against surface
erosion and siltation of surface water and to prevent the discharge of excess
runoff onto adjacent properties.
   (L)   Drainage. A complete and adequate drainage system design approved by
the City Engineer will be required for all subdivisions and may include a storm
sewer system or system of open ditches, culverts, pipes, catch basins and
ponding areas, or a combination thereof.
   (M)   Easements.
      (1)   All easements must be dedicated by appropriate language on the
final plat as required by law and provisions of this title.
      (2)   Utility easements. Easements of a minimum of ten feet wide centered
on rear and other lot lines, must be provided for public and private utilities
where necessary. When it is not practical to center easements, the fully
required easement width may be required along one property line. Aid easements
must have continuity of alignment from block to block. The easements, when
approved, must not thereafter be changed without the approval of the City
Council pursuant to the city charter, as may be amended.
      (3)   Drainage. Easements must be provided along each side of the
centerline of any natural watercourse or drainage channel to a width sufficient
to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for stormwater
runoff. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding with lot lines must
be provided. Such easements for drainage purposes will not be less than 20 feet
in width or a width equal to the required side yard setback established by the
respective zoning district in which the property is located, whichever is
least.
      (4)   Sight. Sight easements beyond required zoning setback regulations
may be required by the city and state Department of Transportation to protect
major intersections on the state trunk highway system, on arterial and
collector streets, and at the intersection of railroad crossings.
   (N)   Protected areas. Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed
environmentally sensitive by the city due to the existence of wetlands,
drainageways, watercourses, and/or floodable areas, the design of said
subdivision must clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to ensure
against adverse environmental impact. Based upon the necessity to control and
maintain certain sensitive areas, the city will determine whether said
protection will be accomplished through lot enlargement and redesign or
dedication of those sensitive areas in the form of outlots. In general,
measures of protection must include design solutions which allow for
construction and grading involving a minimum of alteration to sensitive areas.
Where these areas are to be incorporated into lots within the proposed
subdivision, the applicant will be required to demonstrate that the proposed
design will not require construction on slopes over 18%, or result in
significant alteration to the natural drainage system such that adverse impacts
cannot be contained within the plat boundary.
   (O)   Park land dedication requirements.
      (1)   General requirements.
         (a)   Because new residential development increases the population of
the community and demand on the parks system, as a prerequisite to residential
plat approval and at the sole determination by the city, applicants must
dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces, trails or bikeways,
and/or must make a cash in lieu of dedication to the city.
         (b)   City staff will confer with the Park Board, at the time the
preliminary plat is under consideration, to secure their recommendation as to
the location of any property that should be dedicated to the public, such as
parks, playgrounds, or other public property. Such contribution requirement
recommendation(s) will be sent to the Planning Commission for review and
comment and subsequently to the City Council for their approval.
         (c)   Park land and open space dedication shall be considered in
relation to the city Comprehensive Plan, growth area plans, and parks master
plan, should such planning documents exist at the time of plat, or is as
determined to be in the best interest of the city.
         (d)   Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is
provided in a proposed subdivision, such areas may be used for credit, at the
discretion of the city, against the requirement of dedication for park and
recreation purposes provided, the city finds it is in the public interest to do
so.
         (e)   The city may elect at its sole discretion to receive a
combination of cash and land dedication.
         (f)   During preliminary plat submission the applicant must provide
the city with the number and type of residential units which will occupy the
platted area. If during development the number or type of units are altered,
the applicant will be required to make a cash dedication to account for the
increased density of the project. However, if the number of units are
decreased, the applicant will not be refunded that amount of cash or land
dedicated during original plat approval.
         (g)   Property being replatted with the same number of units will be
exempt from all park land dedication requirements. If the number of units is
increased or if land outside the previously recorded plat is added, then the
park land dedication and/or park cash contributions will be based on the
additional units added to the plat.
      (2)   Park land dedication.
         (a)   In all new residential subdivisions, land must be dedicated for
public recreation use or open space as established by the City Council. The
dedicated land must be in addition to property dedicated for streets, alleys,
easements, water detention, or other public ways unless otherwise provided
herein. The amount of land dedicated will be based on the type of development
according to the following:
 
Type of Dwelling Unit Minimum Area Dedicated per Dwelling Unit
Single or two-family  930
Multiple-family       670
 
         (b)   Land to be dedicated must be reasonably suitable for its
intended use as determined by the city and must be at a location convenient to
the public to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed
park and recreation areas must include size, shape, topography, geology,
hydrology, tree cover, access, and location.
         (c)   When land is dedicated and deeded to the city for park purposes,
it will be the responsibility of the city to maintain such dedicated property.
         (d)   Land dedication to the city must be in the form of outlots.
         (e)   The preliminary plan must show the location and dimensions of
all areas to be dedicated in this manner.
         (f)   When a proposed park, playground, recreational area, or other
public ground has been indicated on the city's official Map, within the
Comprehensive Plan, Growth Area Plan, or Park Master Plan and is located in
whole or in part within a proposed plat, it must be dedicated to the
appropriate governmental unit, at the sole discretion of the city.
         (g)   Land area conveyed or dedicated to the city will be used in
calculating allowable density per the city Zoning Ordinance.
         (h)   Wetlands, ponding areas, and drainageways accepted by the city
may not be considered in the park land and/or cash contribution to the city,
where such areas have been determined to have a park function, as approved by
the City Council.
      (3)   Payment in lieu of dedication.
         (a)   When, in the opinion of the city and at its sole discretion, it
is impractical, inappropriate, and/or in the best interest of the city for a
subdivision to not make a dedication of land for public use or make only a
partial dedication of land, the applicant will be required to pay a cash fee
based on the type and number of dwelling units. Cash payments in lieu of
parkland dedication will be made in accordance with the following:
 
Type of Dwelling Unit Minimum Amount of Cash Dedicated per Dwelling Unit
Single or two-family  $650
Multiple-family       $450
 
         (b)   Park cash contributions are to be calculated and paid in full at
the time of final plat approval.
         (c)   Cash contributions for parks and trails will be deposited in
either the city's Park Fund or similar fund and will only be used for
acquisition and development of future parks and trails or development of
existing sites as determined by the city. Additionally, to the extent possible,
said funds should be utilized in a timely manner within a benefitting area to
the development.
         (d)   Purchase and assessment of park land. The requirement for park
land dedication or payment in lieu of dedication may be waived by the city when
an agreement incorporated into a developer's agreement has been executed
between the city and developer. Such agreement must require the developer to
petition for park improvements to be assessed against the property owned by the
developer, which may include property outside the current plat. The agreement
must set forth the land to be purchased by the city for park purposes and the
purchase price for the land. In addition, the agreement must set forth the
general type of improvements to be included in the petition for park
improvements, as well as the maximum amount of money that may be assessed. Such
maximum amount may be based on a sliding scale based on the density of the
development. The city may enter into such an agreement only if the City Council
determines that such an agreement results in a more favorable result to the
city than the imposition of the standard park land dedication or payment in
lieu of dedication requirements.
   (P)   Dedication of stormwater retention areas. Upon approval by the
Council, the applicant may be required to dedicate to the public up to 6% of
the land proposed to be subdivided for stormwater retention areas. The 6%
dedication may be considered in addition to the park land dedication required
by division (O) of this section. Additional land may be required for stormwater
facilities as identified in an approved growth area plan, storm water master
plan, or to satisfy the requirements of the Stormwater Ordinance.
   (Q)   Other requirements. The design features set forth in this chapter are
minimum requirements. The city may impose additional or more stringent
requirements concerning lot sizes, streets, and overall design as deemed
appropriate considering the property being subdivided based upon site
considerations and the Dilworth Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.07 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Monuments.
      (1)   Location. Monuments must be placed at all block and lot corners,
angle points, points of curves in streets, and at intermediate points as will
be required by the city.
      (2)   Specification. Block corner monuments and permanent control markers
must consist of a number five deformed reinforcement rod, a minimum of 30
inches long, and are to be placed in concrete six inches in diameter. All other
monuments must consist of a number five deformed reinforcement rod, a minimum
of 30 inches long.
      (3)   Depth. All monuments are to be placed at least 18 inches below the
graded surface. Monuments must be in place at the time of petition for local
improvements.
      (4)   Easements. Stakes showing the locations of easements must be
provided by the subdivider upon the request of the city. The stakes must be
wood lathes and will be used only to ensure the proper location of utilities on
the easements. The stakes must not be intended to be permanent survey
monuments.
   (B)   Streets and alleys.
      (1)   Grading. The full width of the right-of-way of each street and
alley dedicated in the plat must be graded in accordance with the plan approved
by the City Engineer. Grading should provide for easy installation of sidewalks
at some future date.
      (2)   Paving. For subdivisions within the city, all streets and alleys
must be improved with a concrete or bituminous surface. Streets to be paved
must be surfaced for a seven ton axle weight capacity using current Minnesota
Department of Transportation design standards. Streets not to be paved must be
improved in accordance with the county or city standards, whichever applies. No
building permit will be issued for any lot or parcel in a subdivision prior to
the installation of the first lift of bituminous surfacing or concrete
surfacing on the streets thereof.
      (3)   Concrete curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter of a city
approved design will be required for all paved streets.
      (4)   Boulevards. All boulevards must have four inches of top soil (black
dirt) placed on them and then be sodded or seeded.
      (5)   Street signs. Street signs of standard design approved by the city
must be installed at each street intersection.
      (6)   Traffic control signs. Traffic control signs must be installed at
the request of the city.
   (C)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks, where required, shall be constructed in
accordance to the grade, width, and slope established by the City Engineer.
   (D)   Bike paths. Bike paths, where required, shall be constructed in
accordance to the grade, width, and slope established by the City Engineer.
   (E)   Public utilities.
      (1)   Water main. A minimum water main of six inch PVC pipe or other
approved pipe will be required. Mains over six inches in size may be required,
and the additional cost will be allocated pursuant to established city
policies. In cul-de-sac streets of more than 150 feet, provisions must be made
to loop feed water mains as "dead end" water mains are not permitted, unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Fire hydrants. Installation must be pursuant to plans approved by
the City Engineer and City Fire Chief. A hydrant will be required in the
turnaround area of all permanent cul-de-sac streets.
      (3)   Sanitary sewer. Unless otherwise required, a sanitary sewer of
eight inch pipe must be installed as the minimum size, placed at grades
approved by the City Engineer. Mains over eight inches in size may be required,
and the additional cost will be allocated pursuant to established city
policies. Service wyes must be a minimum of four inches in diameter.
      (4)   House services. Each house service must be run from the main to the
property line, where a cap or plug will be placed until the service is extended
to the structure. A one inch Type K copper water service, or approved equal;
corporation stop, curb box and stop; and four inch PVC schedule 40 pipe, or
approved equal, sewer service must be the minimum requirements, and they may be
placed in a common trench.
      (5)   As built drawings. Reproducible "as built" drawings showing all
utilities and improvements must be furnished to the city by the applicant of
all required improvements in developments where the applicant has been
responsible for improvements. Such "as built" drawings must be certified to be
true and accurate by the registered engineer responsible for the installation
of the improvements.
   (F)   Sanitation. Water and sewer lines must be installed and connected to
the public system to serve all lots within the proposed subdivision under the
provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances. The City Council will require
the installation of water and sewer mains, at the applicant's expense or under
the provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances.
   (G)   Wastewater disposal.
      (1)   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections must be installed to
serve all lots in the subdivision and must be connected to the public system
when within the city limits and/or utility service area.
      (2)   When a subdivision lies outside of the city limits all applicable
state and county requirements must be satisfied.
   (H)   Drainage. All surface and underground drainage systems must be
installed by the applicant to adequately remove all natural drainage that
accumulates on the developed property. All such systems must provide complete
removal and a permanent solution for the removal of drainage water and will be
subject to city review and approval.
   (I)   Utilities location. Except for utilities installed by the city, all
utilities must be placed underground. All underground work must be completed
prior to street surfacing. All utility lines for telephone and electrical
service must be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles.
   (J)   Construction plans, inspection, and warranty.
      (1)   For municipal improvements which are publicly financed,
construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects
with the standards and ordinances of the city shall be prepared by the city.
The city may contract with a professional engineer licensed in the state, with
input from the owner/developer, to complete the design work. The owner/
developer must acknowledge and approve, in writing, proposed project costs and
any related special assessments as outlines in the preliminary engineering
report prior to award of a construction bid. The city and/or city's contracted
professional engineer will complete construction observation and contract
administration. All project costs shall be eligible for public financing.
      (2)   For municipal improvements which are privately financed,
construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects
with the standards and ordinances of the city shall be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the state contracted by the owner/developer.
A preliminary engineering report and construction plans, together with the
quantities of construction items and estimated cost, must be reviewed and
approved by the city prior to award of a construction bid. The owner/developer
must provide written approval of proposed project costs, as outlined in the
preliminary engineering report. A plan review fee, as established by the City
Council, shall be charged. The owner/developer shall contract with a
professional engineer licensed in the state to complete construction
observation and contract administration. Upon completion of construction, the
owner/developer must provide to the city a written warranty certified by a
professional engineer licensed in the state that all required improvements on
the site meet or exceed all city standards, that such improvements have been
inspected and tested in accordance with city standards, and that such
improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans. The
owner/developer shall be responsible for the cost of all inspections and
testing. Upon certification and delivery of as built plans, the city will
accept and maintain all public improvements. All plans will become part of the
written agreement.
      (3)   For municipal improvements which are publicly financed in part,
construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects
with the standards and ordinances of the city shall be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the state contracted by the owner/developer.
A preliminary engineering report and construction plans, together with the
quantities of construction items and estimated cost, must be reviewed and
approved by the city prior to award of a construction bid. The owner/developer
must acknowledge and approve, in writing, proposed project costs and any
related special assessments as outlined in the preliminary engineering report
prior to award of a construction bid. A plan review fee, as established by the
City Council, shall be charged. The city and/or city's contracted professional
engineer will complete construction observation and contract administration.
The municipal improvements, construction observation, and construction contract
administration costs shall be eligible for public financing.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.08 SUBDIVIDING IN FLOOD AREAS.
   (A)   Warning and disclaimer of liability for flooding.
      (1)   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain
districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter will not create liability on the part
of the City of Dilworth or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decisions lawfully made thereunder.
      (2)   No responsibility or liability will arise from the design or
operation of subdivision drainage facilities dedicated to the city until the
city has accepted such dedication.
   (B)   Land requirements. As stated in §
154.06(B), land use must be suited to the purpose for which it is to be
subdivided. No plat will be approved if the site is not suitable for the
purposes proposed by reason of potential flooding.
   (C)   Subdividing flooding and flood control.
      (1)   No land will be subdivided if the Council finds the land unsuitable
for subdividing due to flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply, or
wastewater treatment facilities in accordance with this chapter and the Zoning
Ordinance. Any building sites on lots within the flood fringe district must be
constructed in accordance with this chapter and the Zoning Ordinance. All
subdivisions must have water and sewer disposal facilities that comply with the
provisions of this chapter, and any applicable building, health or safety
codes, including the Minnesota State Building Code. Each of the above
requirements must take into consideration the 100-year flood profile and other
supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance
Rate Map.
      (2)   In reviewing proposed subdivisions in the floodway or flood fringe
overlay districts, all criteria of the Zoning Ordinance shall be considered.
   (D)   Building site improvements for flood prone areas.
      (1)   Should the City Council determine that only a part of a proposed
plat can be safely developed, it will limit development to that part and
require that the specifications for development be consistent with its
determination.
      (2)   When someone other than the applicant intends to develop the plat,
and the City Council determines that additional use controls are required to
ensure safe development, it may require the applicant to impose appropriate
deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions must be inserted in every
deed and noted on the face of the final recorded plat.
   (E)   Plat and data requirements. The applicant must prepare and submit a
preliminary plat which includes the following flood related data; as stated in
§
154.05(A), a preliminary plat must include:
      (1)   One hundred-year flood elevations, the regulatory flood protection
elevation, and boundaries of floodway and flood fringe areas, if known, taking
into consideration the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map; and
      (2)   Proposed fill, levees, structural flood works, channel
modifications, and other methods to address flood or erosion hazard areas in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance and by use of the 100-year flood profile
and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study. This
information must be submitted when requested by the city staff, consultants,
advisory bodies, the Planning Commission, and/or City Council to address site
specific questions.
   (F)   Denial of plat. As stated in §
154.05(D), the Planning Commission may recommend denial and the Council may
deny a subdivision if it makes any of the following findings related to
subdivision in flood prone areas:
      (1)   That the physical characteristics of this site, including, but not
limited to, topography, percolation rate, soil conditions, susceptibility to
erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage, drainage, and
retention, are such that the site is not suitable for the type of development,
design, or use; and
      (2)   That the proposed subdivision, its site, or its design adversely
affects the flood carrying capacity of the floodway, increases flood stages or
velocities, or increases flood hazards within the floodway or flood fringe or
within other areas of the city.
(Ord. passed - -)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   REZONING
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
77-4 6-22-  Annexing Outlot A-11 in Section 11, Township 139, Range 48, consisting of
     1977   62.03 acres.
     11-13- Annexing the south 940.82 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 1,
78-3 1978   Township 139 North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian,
            consisting of 57.036 acres, more or less.
     10-24- Annexing Lots 7 to 18, inclusive, Block 7 of Gullings’ Subdivision of the
79-3 1979   northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 139
            North, Range 48 West, consisting of five acres, more or less.
            Annexing portions of Burlington Northern, Inc. main line right-of-way and
81-3 9-14-  adjacent property in the north half of the northwest quarter and in the
     1981   northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 7, Township 139
            North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian.
90-1 2-26-  Annexing part of the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 3,
     1990   Township 139 North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian.
90-5 11-28- Annexing that part of the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 3,
     1990   Township 139 North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian.
     1-13-  Annexing all that part of the north half of the southwest quarter of
92-1 1992   Section 2, Township 139 North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal
            Meridian, consisting of 72.55 acres, more or less.
     9-14-  Annexing the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 139
92-5 1992   North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, consisting of 80.0
            acres, more or less.
05-  9-12-  Annexing that part of the northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 139,
08   2005   Range 48, consisting of 40 acres, more or less.
           
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Granting permission to Northern States Power Company to erect a gas plant,
78-1 - -    and to use the streets, alleys and public grounds for the purpose of
     1978   installing, enlarging, operating, repairing and maintaining the necessary gas
            pipes, mains and appurtenances for 20 years.
     - -    Granting permission to Northern States Power Company to construct, operate,
78-2 1978   repair and maintain an electric distribution system and transmission lines
            for 20 years.
     12-27- Granting permission to Red River Valley Cooperative Power Association to
78-4 1978   construct, operate, repair and maintain and electric distribution system and
            transmission lines, within the limited areas of the city, for 20 years.
80-1 5-14-  Creating and awarding a cable television franchise to Spectrum Communication
     1980   Services for 15 years.
     5-11-  Granting permission to Northern States Power Company to construct, operate,
98-4 1998   repair and maintain an electric distribution system and transmission lines
            for 20 years.
     5-11-  Granting permission to Northern States Power Company to erect a gas
98-5 1998   distribution system for the purpose of constructing, operating and repairing
            the necessary gas pipes, mains and appurtenances for 20 years.
98-6 8-10-  Amending the electric franchise agreement with Northern States Power Company.
     1998
     11-9-  Granting permission to Red River Valley Cooperative Power Association to
98-8 1998   construct, operate, repair and maintain and electric distribution system and
            transmission lines for 20 years.
03-  5-12-  Repealing Ord. 80-1 and granting a cable television franchise to Cable One,
02   2003   Inc. for 15 years.
09-  5-11-  Amending and reenacting § 1-12-1 of Ord. 03-02 relating to cable franchises,
04   2009   granting a non-exclusive franchise to Midcontinent Communications.
17-  10-23- Repealing Ord. 80-1 and granting a franchise to Cable One, Inc.
04   2017
18-  2-26-  Granting permission to Northern States Power Company to construct, operate,
02   2018   repair and maintain an electric distribution system and transmission lines.
18-  2-26-  Granting permission to Northern States Power Company to erect a gas
03   2018   distribution system.
18-  2-26-  Implementing an electric service franchise fee on Northern States Power
04   2018   Company.
           
 
TABLE III: REZONING
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Rezoning to I-1, Light Industrial District, that part of Section 11, Township
            139 North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, described as a tract
     7-27-  of land bounded on the south by the centerline of the westbound main line
83-2 1983   track of the Burlington Northern Railroad Company; bounded on the north by the
            southerly right-of-way line of Second Avenue; bounded on the east by a line
            parallel with 80.00 feet easterly of the east line of Section 11; bounded on
            the west by the centerline of Fourth Street southwest.
83-3 10-26- Rezoning to C-1, Central Business District, Lot 7, Block 1 of Lyman’s Second
     1983   Addition.
     9-8-   Rezoning two parcels to C-2, General Business District both located in the
86-2 1986   Southwest Quarter of Section 2, Township 139 North, Range 48 West of the Fifth
            Principal Meridian.
90-2 3-28-  Rezoning:
     1990
            1. To R-4, Multi-Family District, approximately 8.83 acres of land being that
          part of the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 139
            North, Range 48 West; and
            2. To C-2, General Business District, approximately 11.17 acres of land being
          that part of the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township
            139 North, Range 48 West.
91-1 2-26-  Rezoning to C-1, Central Business District, Lot 12, Block 6 in the original
     1991   townsite of the city.
     9-25-  Rezoning to R-4, Multi-Family District, a tract of land located in the
91-3 1991   southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 139 North, Range 48 West of the Fifth
            Principal Meridian.
            Rezoning to R-1, Single-Family and Limited Two-Family District, the portion of
            the land in the north half of the southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 139
     3-25-  North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian described as Lots 1
92-3 1992   through 12, Block 1; Lots 1 through 20, Block 2; Lots 1 through 12, Block 3;
            Lots 1 and 2, Block 4; Lots 1 through 4, Block 5; Lots 1 through 6, Block 6;
            Lots 1 through 4, Block 7; Lots 1 through 13, Block 8; and Lots 1 through 7,
            Block 9 of Kroshus Estates.
     11-25- Rezoning to R-2, Single- and Two-Family District, that part of the north half
92-6 1992   of the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 139 North, Range 48 West of
            the Fifth Principal Meridian.
     5-26-  Rezoning to R-2, Single- and Two-Family District, the land described as Lots 1
93-4 1993   through 6, Block 1 of Jensen’s First Addition and part of B-11 in Section 11,
            Township 139, Range 48.
96-3 5-13-  Rezoning:
     1996
            1. To R-1, Single-Family and Limited Two-Family District, that portion of land
          described as Lots 1 through 4, Block 1; Lots 1 through 12, Block 2; Lots 1
            through 7, Block 3; Lots 1 through 6, Block 4; Lots 1 through 20, Block 5;
            Lots 1 through 17, Block 6, all of Kroshus Estates Second Addition; and
          2. To R-3, Limited Multiple-Family District, that portion of land described as
            Lots 1 through 3, Block 7 of Kroshus Estates Second Addition.
00-  4-10-  Rezoning to C-3, General Business District, that portion of land described as
01   2000   Lot 1, Block 1 of the Norris Addition.
01-  6-11-  Rezoning that portion of land in the southwest quarter of Section 1, Township
02   2001   139 North, Range 48 West from TZ, Transition Zone, to various zoning
            districts, all located in Woodbridge First Addition.
            Subdividing and rezoning: Lots 18 and 19, Block 1 of Woodbridge First Addition
            have been changed to Lots 1 through 7, Block 2A and Lots 1 through 8, Block 3A
02-  8-12-  in Woodbridge Second Addition from R-4, Multiple-Family District to R-2,
02   2002   Single- and Two-Family District; Lots 1 through 8, Block 2 of Woodbridge First
            Addition have been changed to Lots 1 through 6, Block 1A of Woodbridge Second
            Addition, the zoning to remain R-2, Single- and Two-Family District; and
            clarifying Ord. 01-02.
03-  6-23-  Rezoning approximately 20 acres of the western half of Lot 20, Block 1 of
03   2003   Woodbridge Addition to C-3, General Business District.
03-  6-23-  Rezoning approximately 24.71 acres located west of Clay County Road No. 9 and
04   2003   north of Fourth Avenue N.W. due to replat of this area to various zoning
            districts.
03-  7-28-  Rezoning to R-1, Single-Family District, various lots in Woodbridge First
06   2003   Addition.
04-  5-10-  Rezoning parcels of property that were in the Oakview First Addition and now
02   2004   identified in a replat called Oakview Second Addition various lots to R-2,
            Single- and Two-Family District, and R-1, Single-Family District.
04-  6-14-  Rezoning the northern 32 feet of Lot 7, Block 7 of the original townsite from
03   2004   R-2, Single- and Two-Family District, to C-2, Central Business District.
05-  1-10-  Rezoning and subdividing approximately 14.10 acres due to the replat of part
01   2005   of Lot 21, Block 1 of Woodbridge First Addition now as East View Second
            Addition to various zoning districts.
            Rezoning approximately 20 through 55 acres due to the platting of Woodbridge
05-  1-10-  Third Addition and the replatting of Lots 10 through 14, Block 7 of Woodbridge
02   2005   First Addition to R-1, Single-Family District and R-2, Single- and Two-Family
            District.
05-  5-9-   Rezoning 30.289 acres, more or less, due to the Summerwood First Addition to
05   2005   R-1, Single-Family District and R-2, Single- and Two-Family District.
05-  8-8-   Rezoning Lots 7 and 8, Block 1 of Summerwood First Addition from R-1, Single-
06   2005   Family District to R-2, Single- and Two-Family District.
06-  4-10-  Rezoning 11.775 acres, more or less, due to the platting of Summerwood Second
01   2006   Addition to R-1, Single-Family District.
06-  6-12-  Rezoning Lot 1, Block 2 of Norris Addition to R-4, Multiple-Family District.
03   2006
06-  6-12-  Rezoning 12.41 acres, more or less, due to the platting of Woodbridge Fourth
04   2006   Addition, Lots 1 through 11, Block 1 and Lots 1 through 19 of Block 2 to R-1,
            Single-Family District.
06-  6-26-  Rezoning 30.65 acres, more or less, due to the platting of Oakview Third
05   2006   Addition, Lots 1 through 4, Block 1 to C-3, General Business District.
            Rezoning three parcels of property from R-2, Single- and Two-Family District
06-  9-11-  to R-3, Limited Multiple-Family District, the south half of Lot 2 and all of
06   2006   Lot 3, Block 2; all of Lot 4 and the north half of Lot 5, Block 2; and the
            south half of Lot 5 and all of Lot 6, Block 2; all in Second Outlot Addition.
            Rezoning three parcels from R-2, Single- and Two-Family District, to C-1,
06-  11-13- Neighborhood Business District, Lots 1 through 3, Block 2; Lots 4 through 6,
07   2006   Block 2; and Lots 7 and 8, Block 2, all in Dilworth Improvement Companies
            First Addition.
            Rezoning the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 3, Township
07-  1-8-   139 North, Range 48 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, containing 40 acres,
01   2007   more or less from TZ, Transition Zone District to C-3, General Business
            District.
07-  2-12-  Rezoning Lots 9 through 12, Block 2 of Dilworth Improvement Companies First
02   2007   Addition from R-2, Single- and Two-Family District to C-1, Neighborhood
            Business District.
09-  3-9-   Rezoning 11 parcels from R-2, Single- and Two-Family District to R-1, Single-
01   2009   Family District, Lots 1 through 8, Block 1 and Lots 1 through 4, Block 4 of
            Summerwood First Addition.
10-  6-14-  Rezoning from R-2, Single- and Two-Family District to C-1, Neighborhood
03   2010   Business District the west half of Lot 10 and all of Lots 11 and 12 of
            Dilworth Improvement Companies First Addition (parcel #52-100-0050).
12-  4-23-  Rezoning Lots 2 and 3, Block 1 of East View Third Addition, due to the replat
04   2012   of Lot 8, Block 1 of East View Second Addition to TZ, Transition Zone District
            and C-3, General Business District.
12-  8-13-  Rezoning Lot 2, Block 1 of Shoppes on 34th First Addition from C-3, General
06   2012   Business District, to R-3, Limited Multiple-Family Residential District.
12-  9-10-  Amending Ord. 12-06, changing the rezoning of Lot 2, Block 1 instead of Lot 2,
07   2012   Block 1 in Shoppes on 34th First Addition.
17-  9-11-  Rezoning E1/2, W1/2, NW1/4, Less Summerwood 1st and 2nd additions 1-139-48;
03   2017   Section 01, Township 139, Range 048 from TZ (Transitional) to R-1
            (Residential), approximately 19 acres in size.
            Rezoning Section 01, Township 139, Range 048, (more specifically 14th Street
            NE between US Highway 10 and the north property line of the existing
18-  2-12-  Woodbridge development, 4th Avenue NE from 14th Street extending east to 60th
01   2018   Street). An approximate 80 acre tract of land identified as the north section
            of Parcel ID 52.900.0001 from TZ (Transitional) to R-2 (Single Two Family
            District).
            Rezoning approximately 8.4 acres of land from C3 Commercial (General Business
20-  9-14-  District) to R4 Residential (Multi-Family District) - property located between
05   2020   12th Street NE and 14th Street NE at 3rd Avenue NE - North Section of Lot 20,
            Block 1, Woodbridge 1st Addition - (Parcel ID 52.853.0200).
24-  3-11-  Rezoning properties from 5th Street NW/4th Street SW to 4th Street East,
03   2024   between 1st Avenue North and 1st Avenue South to MU1: Traditional Mixed-Use.
24-  4-8-   Rezoning property at 706 Center Avenue East (Block 1, Lot 2 Eastview 9th
05   2024   Addition) from TZ: Transitional Zone to C3 Commercial Zone (Central Business
            District).
24-  8-26-  Rezoning properties from 14th Street NE to 16th Street NE, between 1st Avenue
08   2024   NE and Southwood Drive to MU2: Rail Mixed-Use.
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Minnesota Rules
References to 1963 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S Section Code Section
M.S Section                 Code Section
Chapter 13                  32.01
14.57—14.69               111.36,
                            111.99
15.73, subd. 3              93.03
16.852                      153.002
16B.61                      153.002
84.92(8)                    74.01
84.92—84.928              74.04
86B.005 subd. 9             110.01
89.001                      92.12
89.01                       92.12
89.51—89.64               92.12
Chapter 103F                151.001
Chapter 103G                151.053,
                            151.126
103G.005, subd. 15          53.02
105.37. subd. 6             153.002
Chapter 115                 52.02
115B.02, subd. 8            154.05
115.01, subd. 5             52.02
115.01, subd. 22            53.02
115.07                      52.02
Chapter 116                 52.02
144D                        153.041,
                            153.042
144G                        153.002
144G.03                     153.002
Chapter 152                 132.01,
                            132.02
152.01 et seq.              152.20
157.16                      111.03
157.16, subd. 3(d)          111.03
168.002, subd. 35           110.01
168.27, subd. 1(j)          110.01
Chapter 168B                75.03
Chapter 169                 70.21,
                            70.23
169.70                      74.02
169.999                     10.98
205.065                     30.02
205.07                      30.02
216B.02, subd. 4            93.03
216B.02, subd. 6            93.03
Chapter 216D                93.06,
                            93.15
216D.01 through 216D.09     93.15,
                            93.24
216D.04, subd. 3            93.03
237.04                      93.03
237.16                      93.01
237.79                      93.01
237.81                      93.01
                            93.01,
237.162                     93.03,
                            93.17
237.162, subd. 4            93.03
                            93.01,
237.163                     93.03,
                            93.17
237.163, subd. 2(b)         93.02
237.163, subd. 6            93.29
Chapter 238                 93.03
238.086                     93.01
Chapter 245                 153.002
245A                        153.002
245A.02                     153.002
260B.007                    152.20
260B.198                    131.99
290.05, subd. 1, clause (i) 116.02
290.05, subd. 1, clause (k) 116.02
290.09                      153.002
290.13                      153.002
297F.01, subd. 3            112.02
299C.61                     32.01
299C.62                     32.01
299F.035                    32.01
300.06                      93.07
Chapter 308A                93.03
326B.101 et seq.            150.01
326B.121                    150.02
326B.121, subd. 1           150.03
326B.133, subd. 3           150.02
326B.148                    150.03
326B.44                     150.04
327.31 subd. 6              152.02
                            111.01,
                            111.02,
Chapter 340A                111.20,
                            111.36,
                            111.99
340A.101                    111.03,
                            111.22
340A.285                    111.22
Ch. 340A.301, subd. 6       111.23
340A.301, subd. 6A          111.22
340A.301, subd. 6(a)        111.22
340A.301, subd. 6(d)        111.22
340A.301, subd. 6(i)        111.22
340A.301, subd. 6(j)        111.22
340A.301, subd. 7           111.22
340A.301, subd. 7(b)        111.22
340A.4011, subd. 1          111.22
340A.404, subd. 1(4)        111.37
340A.404, subd. 1(b)        111.22
340A.404, subd. 4(a)        111.22
340A.404, subd. 4(b)        111.22
340A.404, subd. 5           111.22
340A.408                    111.23
340A.408, subd. 2(b)        111.22
340A.408, subd. 3           111.22
340A.408, subd. 5           111.23
340A.409                    111.25
340A.413                    111.37
340A.413, subd. 3           111.20
340A.414                    111.35
340A.414, subd. 6           111.22
340A.504                    111.33.
340A.504, subd. 3           111.22
340A.504, subd. 3(b)        111.22
340A.509                    111.02
340A.701                    152.20
340A.702                    152.20
340A.801                    111.25
                            119.01,
Chapter 342                 119.04,
                            119.05,
                            119.07
342.01                      119.02,
                            119.09
342.09                      119.02
342.22                      119.05,
                            119.08
342.22, subd. 5(e)          119.99
342.24, subd. 4             119.10
342.27                      119.10
342.27, subd. 8             119.10
342.27, subd. 9             119.10
342.27, subd. 10            119.10
342.27, subd. 11            119.10
342.28, subd. 3             119.10
342.39                      119.11
42.39. subd. 2              119.11
342.40                      119.11
342.46                      119.10
342.46, subd. 8             119.10
342.46, subd. 10            119.10
347.50 to 347.565           90.22
347.51                      90.22
347.515                     90.22
347.52                      90.22
347.52(a)                   90.22
347.52(c)                   90.22
349.11 - 349.23             116.02
349.12, subd. 6             116.06
349.26                      116.05
349.26, subd. 13            116.08
349.31                      116.05
364.06                      32.01
364.09                      32.01
412.231                     150.99
Chapter 424A                31.03
                            93.22,
Chapter 429                 94.078,
                            152.18
444.075, subd. 3            51.24
Chapter 453                 93.03
Chapter 453A                93.03
                            93.22,
Chapter 462                 151.001 ,
                            153.022 -
                            153.025
462.351 - 462.363           153.001,
                            154.01
462.357                     153.041 -
                            153.044
462.357, subd. 1e           153.021
462.357, subd. 6            153.025
462.358                     154.01
462.359, subd. 4            153.025
462.3593                    153.002
462.3593, subd. 9           153.002
463.21                      95.05
463.151                     95.05
463.251                     95.01,
                            95.05
463.251, subd. 2            95.02
463.251, subd. 3            95.02
463.251, subd. 4            95.04
505.03                      154.05
515.A1-101 - 515.A.4-118    153.002
582.031, subd. 1(b)         95.02
582.032, subd. 7            95.02
609.033                     150.99
609.034                     150.99
609.66                      152.20
609.72                      152.20
609.75 - 609.763            116.02
609.75, subd. 8             116.01
609.205(4)                  90.22
609.224                     152.20
609.226, subd. 1            90.22
609.321 though 609.324      152.20
609.415                     35.01
609.531 to 609.5318         132.04
609.535                     33.01
609.5316, subd. 1           132.04
626.862                     10.20
631.48                      10.99
                            
 
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA RULES
Minn. Rules Code Section
Minn. Rules                                Code Section
1300 subpart 1 and 2                       150.02
Chapter 1300                               150.01,
                                           150.03
Chapter 1301                               150.01
Chapter 1302                               150.01
Chapter 1303                               150.01
Chapter 1305                               150.01,
                                           150.02
Chapter 1307                               150.01
Chapter 1309                               150.01
Chapter 1311                               150.01
Chapter 1315                               150.01
Chapter 1322                               150.01
Chapter 1323                               150.01
Chapter 1325                               150.01
Chapter 1330                               150.01
Chapter 1335                               150.01
Chapter 1335, parts 1335.0600 to 1335.1200 150.01
Chapter 1341                               150.01
Chapter 1346                               150.01
Chapter 1350                               150.01
Chapter 1360                               150.01
Chapter 1361                               150.01
Chapter 1370                               150.01
Chapter 4215                               150.01
Chapter 4715                               150.01
4720.5100, subpart. 13                     53.04
Chapter 7030                               94.002
7077.0105, subpart 41(b)                   53.02
7090.0080, subp. 4                         53.02
Chapter 7560                               93.15,
                                           93.17
7560.0150, subpart 2                       93.22
7819.0050 through 7819.9950                93.01
7819.1000, subpart 3                       93.08
                                           93.03,
7819.1100                                  93.12,
                                           93.17
7819.1250                                  93.26
7819.1300                                  93.18
7819.3000                                  93.12
7819.3100                                  93.23
7819.3200                                  93.26
7819.4000                                  93.22
7819.4100                                  93.22
7819.5000                                  93.17,
                                           93.23
7819.5100                                  93.23
9502                                       153.002
9502.0315 - 9502.0445                      153.041,
                                           153.042
9503                                       153.002
74600.0300                                 74.11
                                           
 
REFERENCES TO 1963 CODE
1963 Code 2015 Code
1963 Code 2015 Code
20.01     30.15
20.02     30.16
20.03     30.17
20.04     30.18
30.01     30.01
33.01     51.01
33.02     51.02
33.03     51.03
33.04     51.04
33.05     51.05
33.06     51.06
34.01     51.20
34.02     51.21
34.04     51.23
34.05     51.24
40.01     70.01
40.02     70.02
40.03     70.03
40.04     70.04
40.05     70.05
40.06     70.06
40.07     70.07
40.08     70.08
40.09     70.09
40.10     70.10
40.11     70.11
40.12     70.12
40.13     70.13
40.14     70.14
40.15     70.15
40.16     70.16
40.17     70.17
40.18     70.18
40.19     70.19
40.23     70.20
40.24     70.21
40.25     70.23
41.01     71.01
41.02     71.02
41.03     71.03
41.04     71.04
41.05     71.05
41.06     71.06
41.07     71.07
41.08     71.08
41.09     71.09
41.10     71.10
41.11     71.11
41.12     71.12
41.13     71.13
42.01     72.01
42.02     72.02
42.03     72.99
51.01     110.01
51.02     110.02
51.03     110.03
51.04     110.04
57.01     110.30
57.02     110.31
60.03     130.01
60.04     130.02
60.07     130.05
61.01     130.04,
          130.99
70.01     91.001
70.02     91.002
70.03     91.003
70.04     91.004
70.05     91.005
70.06     91.020
71.01     91.021
71.02     91.022
72.01     91.035
72.02     91.037
72.03     91.038
72.04     91.039
73.01     91.040
101       90.01
102       90.02
103.02    90.16
103.03    90.17
103.04    90.18
103.05    90.19
103.07    90.21
          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
14-05    12-22-      34.01
-        6-12-1972   130.04,
                     130.99
                     90.16—
-        7-10-1972   90.19,
                     90.21
73-1     1-8-1973    32.03
73-2     1-8-1973    32.02
                     50.01—
73-5     5-14-1973   50.09,
                     50.99
74-1     3-11-1974   30.02
-        9-9-1974    50.03,
                     50.07
-        10-12-1976  30.15
-        4-11-1977   130.05,
                     130.99
77-4     6-22-1977   TSO I
77-7     10-18-1977  153.01
78-1     - -1978     TSO II
78-2     - -1978     TSO II
-        10-10-1978  50.03
78-3     11-13-1978  TSO I
78-4     12-27-1978  TSO II
                     116.01—
79-2     10-9-1979   116.08,
                     116.99
79-3     10-24-1979  TSO I
                     92.01—
80-3     5-12-1980   92.11,
                     92.99
80-1     5-14-1980   TSO II
81-3     9-14-1981   TSO I
-        1-27-1982   90.21
83-2     7-27-1983   TSO III
83-3     10-26-1983  TSO III
-        4-8-1985    130.01
                     115.01—
85-2     9-25-1985   115.11,
                     115.99
-        10-14-1985  50.01
                     92.01—
85-3     11-26-1985  92.11,
                     92.99
86-2     9-8-1986    TSO III
                     51.20,
-        7-11-1988   51.23,
                     51.24
                     51.20,
88-3     8-8-1988    51.23,
                     51.24
90-1     2-26-1990   TSO I
90-2     3-28-1990   TSO III
                     51.40,
90-3     6-11-1990   51.41,
                     51.99
90-5     11-28-1990  TSO I
91-1     2-26-1991   TSO III
91-3     9-25-1991   TSO III
92-1     1-13-1992   TSO I
92-3     3-25-1992   TSO III
92-5     9-14-1992   TSO I
92-6     11-25-1992  TSO III
                     50.01—
93-2     5-10-1993   50.09,
                     50.99
93-3     5-26-1993   92.04,
                     92.06
93-4     5-26-1993   TSO III
-        7-12-1993   90.16
-        7-12-1993   90.18
94-4     6-22-1994   70.22,
                     70.99
94-5     10-11-1994  33.01
                     110.01—
94-6     11-14-1994  110.05,
                     110.99
                     152.01—
95-2     7-26-1995   152.11,
                     152.20—
                     152.26
95-3     10-25-1995  91.036,
                     91.037
                     94.050—
96-8     - -1996     94.055,
                     94.999
                     94.035—
96-9     - -1996     94.037,
                     94.999
96-1     1-24-1996   31.35—
                     31.39
                     52.01—
96-2     3-27-1996   52.14,
                     52.99
96-3     5-13-1996   TSO III
96-5     9-9-1996    92.04
97-3     7-23-1997   152.02,
                     152.18
                     114.01—
97-5     11-24-1997  114.08,
                     114.99
97-6     11-24-1997  90.35,
                     90.36
98-1     1-28-1998   152.20
                     112.01—
                     112.05,
98-3     3-25-1998   112.08 -
                     112.12,
                     112.99
98-4     5-11-1998   TSO II
98-5     5-11-1998   TSO II
98-6     8-10-1998   TSO II
98-8     11-9-1998   TSO II
99-1     2-8-1999    130.06
00-01    4-10-2000   TSO III
01-02    6-11-2001   TSO III
                     52.25—
01-03    6-11-2001   52.27,
                     52.99
02-02    8-12-2002   TSO III
03-02    5-12-2003   TSO II
03-03    6-23-2003   TSO III
03-04    6-23-2003   TSO III
03-06    7-28-2003   TSO III
03-07    11-10-2003  51.04
                     150.01—
04-01    3-8-2004    150.04,
                     150.99
04-02    5-10-2004   TSO III
04-03    6-14-2004   TSO III
05-01    1-10-2005   TSO III
05-02    1-10-2005   TSO III
05-05    5-9-2005    TSO III
05-06    8-8-2005    TSO III
05-08    9-12-2005   TSO I
06-01    4-10-2006   TSO III
06-03    6-12-2006   TSO III
06-04    6-12-2006   TSO III
06-05    6-26-2006   TSO III
06-06    9-11-2006   TSO III
06-07    11-13-2006  TSO III
07-01    1-8-2007    TSO III
07-02    2-12-2007   TSO III
07-03    10-8-2007   92.04
08-01    11-24-2008  51.20
09-01    3-9-2009    TSO III
09-02    4-13-2009   54.01—
                     54.15
                     91.070,
09-03    4-27-2009   91.071,
                     91.999
09-04    5-11-2009   TSO II
10-01    4-12-2010   31.15—
                     31.21
10-02    4-12-2010   32.01
10-03    6-14-2010   TSO III
                     94.020—
10-04    6-28-2010   94.024,
                     94.999
11-03    7-25-2011   51.24
12-01    1-23-2012   132.01—
                     132.04
                     151.001—
                     151.003,
                     151.015—
                     151.023,
                     151.035,
                     151.036,
                     151.050—
                     151.053,
                     151.065—
12-02    2-27-2012   151.069,
                     151.080,
                     151.081,
                     151.095—
                     151.097,
                     151.110—
                     151.112,
                     151.125—
                     151.130,
                     151.999
                     93.01—
12-03    3-26-2012   93.29,
                     93.99
12-04    4-23-2012   TSO III
12-06    8-13-2012   TSO III
12-07    9-10-2012   TSO III
13-01    7-8-2013    92.04
13-02    8-26-2013   32.04
14-02    7-14-2014   113.01—
                     113.04
                     73.01—
14-03    7-14-2014   73.06,
                     73.99
14-04    8-11-2014   34.01
15-01    1-12-2015   51.20
15-02    2-9-2015    53.01—
                     53.04
                     53.15—
15-03    2-9-2015    53.32,
                     53.99
15-04    4-27-2015   34.01
-        6-8-2015    34.01
15-08    8-10-2015   Adopting Ordinance
                     112.01—
                     112.05,
15-09    10-12-2015  112.08,
                     112.10—
                     112.12,
                     112.99
15-10    12-14-2015  34.01
15-11    12-28-2015  34.01
                     51.04,
16-01    1-25-2016   51.20,
                     51.21,
                     51.25
16-02    1-25-2016   50.03
16-03    1-25-2016   50.08
16-08    8-22-2016   34.01
16-09    8-22-2016   117.03
16-10    9-26-2016   50.10
16-11    11-14-2016  90.15
16-12    12-19-2016  34.01
                     116.01—
17-01    2-13-2017   116.08,
                     116.99
                     111.01—
                     111.05,
17-02    7-26-2017   111.20—
                     111.37,
                     111.99
17-03    9-11-2017   TSO III
17-04    10-23-2017  TSO II
17-05    12-20-2017  34.01
18-01    2-12-2018   TSO III
18-02    2-26-2018   TSO II
18-03    2-26-2018   TSO II
18-04    2-26-2018   TSO II
18-05    3-26-2018   51.04
18-07    7-9-2018    95.01-
                     95.05
18-09    8-27-2018   52.09
18-10    10-8-2018   34.01
18-11    12-10-2018  30.02
18-12    12-10-2018  34.01
19-02    5-13-2019   34.01
19-03    5-28-2019   34.01
                     50.01 -
                     50.03,
                     50.05,
19-04    7-8-2019    50.07,
                     50.08,
                     50.10 -
                     50.12
19-05    7-8-2019    73.07
19-06    7-8-2019    94.002
19-09    7-22-2019   34.01
19-11    12-9-2019   71.05
19-12    12-23-2019  110.30
19-13    12-23-2019  34.01
20-01    1-13-2020   34.01
                     96.01 -
20-02    1-27-2020   96.06,
                     96.99
                     118.01 -
20-03    3-9-2020    118.03,
                     118.99
                     113.03,
20-04    3-9-2020    113.04,
                     113.99
20-05    9-14-2020   TSO III
20-06    9-28-2020   75.01 -
                     75.03
20-07    12-14-2020  34.01
                     153.001 -
                     153.003,
                     153.020 -
- -      - -         153.026,
                     153.040 -
                     153.050,
                     153.060 -
                     153.071
- -      - -         154.01 -
                     154.08
                     112.02 -
                     112.05,
21-01    5-10-2021   112.08 -
                     112.12,
                     112.99
21-02    3-8-2021    153.003,
                     153.064
                     90.03,
21-03    4-12-2021   90.16 -
                     90.19
21-04    4-12-2021   10.20
                     152.08,
21-05    4-26-2021   152.11,
                     152.99
21-06    7-26-2021   150.05
21-07    6-28-2021   153.065
                     35.01,
                     94.001,
                     94.002,
                     94.020,
                     94.023,
                     94.036,
                     94.040 -
                     94.043,
21-08    11-8-2021   94.051,
                     94.054,
                     94.055,
                     94.070,
                     94.071,
                     94.075,
                     94.078,
                     94.079,
                     94.999
21-09    12-28-2021  34.01
22-01    2-28-2022   34.01
22-02    2-28-2022   152.02
                     152.02,
22-03    4-11-2022   152.10 -
                     152.21
22-04    7-25-2022   90.04
                     74.01 -
                     74.04,
22-05    9-26-2022   74.10 -
                     74.13,
                     74.99
22-06    9-26-2022   34.01,
                     35.01
                     94.002,
                     94.070,
22-07    9-26-2022   94.071,
                     94.078,
                     94.079,
                     94.999
                     53.03,
22-08    9-26-2022   53.27,
                     53.99
22-09    12-27-2022  34.01
                     118.03,
23-01    4-24-2023   153.047,
                     153.048,
                     153.070
                     119.01 -
23-02    8-14-2023   119.03,
                     119.99
23-03    9-11-2023   73.06,
                     73.07
23-04    12-26-2023  34.01
24-01    2-12-2024   150.05,
                     152.26
24-02    3-11-2024   153.003,
                     153.051
24-03    3-11-2024   TSO III
24-04    4-8-2024    153.003,
                     153.048
24-05    4-8-2024    TSO III
24-06    8-26-2024   153.052
24-07    5-13-2024   53.33
24-08    8-26-2024   TSO III
                     118.03,
24-09  8-26-2024   153.047 -
                     153.052,
                     153.070
                     119.01,
                     119.02,
24-10    8-26-2024   119.04 -
                     119.11,
                     119.99
24-11    11-12-2024  153.003,
                     153.065
24-13    12-23-2024  34.01
                    
 
