HINCKLEY, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-5 Supplement contains
Local legislation current through 7-17-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 04-2018
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF HINCKLEY MINNESOTA,
AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city to
cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book,
NOW THEREFORE the City Council of the City of Hinckley Minnesota, ordains:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for violations
of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall constitute the
"Code of Ordinances of the City of Hinckley." This Code of Ordinances also
adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules of the State of
Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles:   
   I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   II.   ADMINISTRATION
   III.   PUBLIC WORKS
   IV.   TRAFFIC CODE
   V.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
   VI.   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   VII.   GENERAL OFFENSES
   VIII.   LAND USAGE
   IX.   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Section 3. All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the Code
of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part
in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provision of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain person,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporaiy or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of Ordinances.
All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this code shall remain in
effect unless amended in this code or until an ordinance adopting a fee
schedule is adopted or amended.
Section 4. This ordinance adopting the Code or Ordinances shall be a sufficient
publication or any ordinance included in it and not previously published in the
City's official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause a substantial
quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general distribution to
the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code of Ordinances to
the County Law Library or its designated depository. The official copy of this
Code of Ordinances shall marked and be kept in ihe office of the City Clerk.
Section 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of the
law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.
Section 6. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the
City's official newspaper.
Pass by the City Council of the City of Hinckley, Minnesota this              
day of                       , 2018.
                                          APPROVED:
                                       
                                                                                         
                                          Don Zeman
                                          Mayor
ATTEST:
 
                                        
Kyle H. Morell
City Administrator/Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
 
   
10.98   Administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Hinckley City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense.
      (2)   However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Hinckley, Minnesota. The term CITY, when used in this
code, may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Pine County, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided,
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
      (2)   If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be
excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk-Administrator for public inspection. The Clerk-Administrator shall
provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk- Administrator shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall
have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and
any person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or
continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk-Administrator and any city official or employee
designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this
code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any
property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises,
inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk-Administrator, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting
the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only
to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Clerk-Administrator or any other authorized city
officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being
complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit
the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination
of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice
shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
the property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner,
resident or other person in control of the property shall be given an
opportunity to appear before the City Clerk- Administrator to object to the
termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the Clerk-Administrator’s
decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.98 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   Administrative procedures and penalties.
      (1)   Purpose. The City Council finds that there is a need for
alternative methods to enforce portions of the city code. While criminal fines
and penalties have been used historically as enforcement mechanisms, negative
consequences for both the city and the public can result. The delay inherent in
the criminal justice system does not always ensure prompt resolution of
offenses that immediately impact the livability of the community. Citizens may
resent being labeled criminals for violations of administrative regulations.
The higher burden of proof and the potential of incarceration are not always
appropriate for many administrative violations. The criminal justice system
often cannot give priority to city code violations due to caseloads and more
serious cases in the system. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the use
of administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is a
legitimate and necessary alternative method of enforcement and a way to reduce
the burdens on our court system.
      (2)   Scope. The administrative procedures and penalties in this chapter
may be used for violations of the Hinckley City Code. The provisions of this
chapter may be used concurrently with, as an alternative to, or in addition to
any other procedure or remedy, criminal or civil, the city may pursue under
city code, state law, or federal law, including but not limited to the
abatement provisions contained in §
10.98(B). Nothing herein restricts the right of government agents to enter
property or to seek other remedies in emergency or other situations as
authorized by city code, state law or federal law.
      (3)   Definitions.
         BOARD. A quorum of the City of Hinckley Planning Commission.
         CITATION. An administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter.
         CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The Hinckley City Administrator or designee.
         CITY CODE. The Hinckley City Code of Ordinances.
         CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL. The Hinckley City Administrator or designee.
      (4)   Administrative offenses; schedules of fines and fees.
         (a)   A violation of any provision of city code is an administrative
offense subject to a citation and civil penalties pursuant to this chapter.
Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
         (b)   Each count of an administrative violation is subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed the maximum fine that may be imposed for the same
violation if it were prosecuted as a misdemeanor offense, abatement, or both
unless otherwise provided.
            1.   The civil penalty for a particular count shall be established
as provided in division (A)(4)(d) hereof;
            2.   If a violator remedies a count of a violation and demonstrates
that fact prior to the compliance date, the civil penalty for that count will
be waived.
         (c)   A second or subsequent citation issued within 180 days of any
same or similar citation is subject to a civil penalty of at least twice the
previously imposed penalty, but within the limits of any fine that could be
imposed if the violation were prosecuted as a misdemeanor offense. If the
violator remedies the violation prior to the compliance date, the full civil
penalty for that particular citation will be waived. Civil penalties for
previous citations will not be waived.
         (d)   The City Council may adopt by resolution a schedule of
recommended fines for offenses initiated by citation, and may designate those
offenses for which a fine must be paid even if the violation is remedied. The
resolution may also identify violations for which a fine only may be imposed
for a first offense occurring within a specified time period, not to exceed
three years. The resolution may also specify a filing fee to appeal to the
board. If no resolution is adopted, the following fees shall apply:
            1.   First administrative citation. One hundred dollars ($100). If
the violation is remedied by the compliance date, the fee will be nullified;
            2.   Second administrative citation. Two hundred dollars ($200)
and/or abatement of nuisance;
            3.   Third administrative citation. Four hundred dollars ($400)
and/or abatement of nuisance;
            4.   Fourth administrative citation. Eight hundred dollars ($800)
and/or abatement of nuisance; and
            5.   Fifth administrative citation. One thousand dollars ($1,000)
and/or abatement of nuisance.
            6.   Appeal filing fee. Five dollars ($5).
         (e)   The City Clerk is authorized to promulgate rules and forms to
affect the procedures herein.
      (5)   Citation; authorization to issue and contents.
         (a)   The Code Compliance Officer is authorized to issue a citation,
in a form adopted by the City Council that minimally complies with this
chapter, upon reasonable belief that a code violation has occurred. The
citation must be issued in one of the following ways:
            1.   By personal service upon the owner of the property or an
occupant of suitable age residing at the property where the violation occurred,
or in the case of a business or corporation, the citation may be served upon an
employee on the premises or to a corporate officer;
            2.   By U.S. first class mail to a person identified in division
(A)(5)(a)1.;
            3.   By posting the citation in a conspicuous place on or near the
main entrance where it reasonably appears the property is occupied but the
occupants are not available or willing to accept personal service; or
            4.   By posting the citation in a conspicuous place on or near the
main entrance and mailing by first class U.S. Mail a notice of the citation to
the owner of record where it reasonably appears the property is vacant or
abandoned.
         (b)   Contents of citation. The citation must state the date, time,
and nature of the offense; the identity of the person issuing the citation; the
amount of the scheduled fine; the manner of paying the fine or appealing the
citation; a date by which the fine must be paid; a compliance date or range of
dates, if any; and the manner and time for taking an appeal. If a compliance
date or range of dates is given, the citation must state the action that must
be taken to achieve compliance, and it must conspicuously state that if
compliance is not achieved within the stated time, the city may thereafter
abate the violation without further warning and with assessment of the costs
therefore to the subject property. Any compliance date must be not less than
seven nor more than 30 days following the date the citation is issued;
provided, however, that in an emergency situation that poses an immediate
threat to public safety, health or welfare, an earlier compliance date may be
set. The compliance date may be extended by the Code Compliance Official for up
to 30 days following the date of the citation upon a determination by the Code
Compliance Official that a reasonable plan for remedying the violation exists.
The plan must be agreed to in writing by the owner of the property for an
extension to be granted. Unless an appeal is taken or compliance is achieved
before the compliance date, no further notice is necessary prior to the entry
on the property by city officials or their agents and assignees to abate the
violation and assess the costs of abatement to the property.
         (c)   The owner or occupant of the property must pay the fine and, if
required, come into compliance, or appeal, in a manner consistent with division
(A)(5)(d), within any time period specified on the citation. Unless the
violation is a second or subsequent violation pursuant to division (A)(4)(c) or
is a violation for which a fine is imposed pursuant to division (A)(4)(d), the
fine will be waived if compliance is achieved by the compliance date. Voluntary
compliance after the citation is issued and/or payment of the fine constitutes
admission of the violation. The Code Compliance Official may extend the time
for appeal only on a showing of good cause. Payment of the fine does not
forgive continued violation of city code.
         (d)   Contents of appeal. The appeal must be in writing and executed
by the owner of the property. The appeal must minimally state the name and
mailing address of the person that caused the violation, that person's
relationship to the property involved, and a brief statement why the citation
is in error.
      (6)   Appeal procedure.
         (a)   The City Clerk, upon receipt of a proper notice of appeal, shall
stay any fine or abatement action until the time for appeals under this chapter
has run.
         (b)   Within ten days of the date of the citation or prior to the
deadline for compliance, whichever is sooner, any party aggrieved by the
citation may appeal the citation to the board. The appeal must comply with
division (A)(5)(d), and must be served in person or by U.S. Mail on the City
Clerk.
         (c)   Upon receipt of a proper appeal under division (A)(6)(b), the
City Clerk shall place the matter before the board for a hearing which shall be
held no earlier than ten days after receipt of the notice, unless otherwise
agreed to by the parties. Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by
U.S. Mail on the person or persons to whom the citation was issued. At the
hearing, the parties may present documents and testimony, and may question
witnesses, and the Planning Commission Chairman shall preside over the hearing.
The board must record the hearing and receive testimony and exhibits. The board
must rule by majority vote on objections, and receive and give weight to
evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence that possesses probative value
commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their
affairs. The hearing may be continued from time to time at the discretion of
the board.
         (d)   At any time before the hearing, or before the hearing is
adjourned, the Code Compliance Official may modify the citation to change
counts or include additional counts, with notice to the person bringing the
appeal. If not made during the hearing, the notice must be in writing and given
to the person or served by U.S. Mail.
         (e)   The board must affirm or rescind the citation, as it may have
been modified under division (A)(6)(d), and provide written notice of its
determination to the parties. If a citation consists of more than one count,
the board may consider each count independently. A majority of the members
present must agree in order to affirm a citation or any particular count. A
failure to adopt a motion to affirm constitutes a rescission. The board may
reconsider the motion to affirm at any time before the hearing is finally
adjourned. The board's determination, if the citation or any particular count
of the citation is affirmed, revokes the stay of the applicable fine and
compliance dates, if any, and payment and compliance must occur within ten days
of the date of the notice of determination, unless an aggrieved party perfects
a court-ordered stay with the deposit of an appropriate supersedeas bond under
the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure.
         (f)   The board's decision is final without any further right of
administrative appeal. Further appeal shall only be by writ of certiorari to
the Minnesota Court of Appeals.
      (7)   Recovery of civil penalties.
         (a)   If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it
constitutes:
            1.   A personal obligation of the violator; and
            2.   A lien upon the real property upon which the violation
occurred if the property or improvements on the property were the subject of
the violation and the property owner was given notice of the violation.
         (b)   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the
same manner as taxes.
         (c)   A personal obligation may be collected by any appropriate legal
means.
         (d)   If a payment in full is not received by the City of Hinckley by
October 1, an 8% fee will be added to the fine when it is assessed.
         (e)   During the time that a civil penalty remains unpaid or the
violator remains out of compliance, no city approval will be granted for a
license, permit, or other city approval sought by the violator or for property
under the violator's ownership or control.
         (f)   Failure to pay a fine or otherwise comply with a citation is
grounds for suspending, revoking, denying, or not renewing a license or permit
associated with the violation.
   (B)   Abatement of public nuisances.
      (1)   Declaration of policy. The City Council of the City of Hinckley has
determined that the health, safety, good order, general welfare, and
convenience of the public are threatened by certain public nuisances on
property within the city limits. It is declared to be the intention of the
Council to abate these nuisances, and this chapter is enacted for that purpose.
      (2)   Application. This chapter shall apply to the abatement of all
public nuisances as defined anywhere within this code unless another procedure
is specifically provided.
      (3)   Hearing Examiner.
         (a)   Position created. The position of Hearing Examiner is hereby
created. The Hinckley City Planning and Zoning Administrator will act as the
Hearing Examiner for all public nuisance hearings.
         (b)   Duties of Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner shall have the
following duties:
            1.   Set dates for all hearings on appeals of citations issued by
the Code Compliance Official and ensure that notice thereof is properly given.
            2.   Make a complete record of all appeal hearings.
            3.   Ensure that the board's decisions on appeals of citations are
properly served on the parties who appeal.
      (4)   Inspection and investigation.
         (a)   Periodic inspection. The Code Compliance Official in conjunction
with the Pine County Sheriff's Office shall cause to be inspected all public
and private places within the city which might contain a public nuisance as
defined in this code as often as practicable to determine whether any such
conditions exist. The Code Compliance Official in conjunction with the Pine
County Sheriff's Office shall also investigate all reports of public nuisances
located within the city.
         (b)   Entry on public and private places. The Code Compliance Official
or their duly authorized agents may, with the owner or occupant's consent,
enter upon all public and private places at any reasonable time for the
purposes of inspecting those places for public nuisances and general compliance
with applicable local, state and federal laws. If the owner or occupant refuses
to consent to such inspection, the Code Compliance Official or duly authorized
agents are authorized to obtain administrative search warrants to allow for the
inspection; provided, however, that no search warrant is needed in the case of
emergencies, plain view searches, and other situations where neither state nor
federal law requires a search warrant.
      (5)   Abatement of nuisances. Upon a determination by the Code Compliance
Official that a public nuisance exists on any public or private property within
the city, the Code Compliance Official shall cause an administrative citation
to be issued pursuant to this chapter.
      (6)   Procedure for removal of public nuisance.
         (a)   If a nuisance is not abated within the compliance period stated
in the citation, the city may proceed with abatement as set forth in this
chapter.
         (b)   The city shall take no action to abate any nuisance prior to the
expiration or the compliance period stated in a citation or while any appeal of
the matter is still pending.
         (c)   The Code Compliance Official shall keep a record of the costs of
abatements done under this chapter and shall report monthly to the City Clerk
or other appropriate officer all work done for which assessments are to be
made, stating and certifying the description of the land, lots or parcels
involved and the amount assessable to each.
         (d)   On or before October 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall list
the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel
to which they are attributable under this chapter. The Council may then spread
the charges, or any portion thereof, against the property involved as a special
assessment under other pertinent statutes, for certification to the County
Auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes. Such
assessment shall be payable in no more than ten equal annual installments,
pursuant to M.S. § 429.01, subdivision 2.
      (7)   Interference prohibited. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
prevent, delay or interfere with the Code Compliance Official or their agents
while they are engaged in the performance of duties set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 02-2022, passed 4-12-2022)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including state statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98 of this chapter, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with
any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct
or abate the violation.
   (F)   (1)   Recovery of costs. The owner of the premises shall be personally
liable for the costs to the city for remediation, correction, abatement or
other action necessitated by the violation(s) including legal and
administrative costs, and attorney fees. As soon as the work has been completed
and the costs determined, the Clerk-Administrator or other official designated
by the City Council shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
Clerk-Administrator. If amount is not paid within 30 days, the city may proceed
by obtaining a judgment against the owner of the premises, or as outlined in §
10.99(F)(2) below.
   (2)   Assessment. If the city is not fully reimbursed for all its reasonable
costs incurred, the costs may be assessed in the manner of a special assessment
under M. S. Ch. 429 against the lot or property to which the costs, charges,
and fees are attributed. The city council shall certify the assessment to the
County Auditor for collection along with the real estate taxes for the
following year or in annual installments, not exceeding three years, as the
city council may determine in each case.
(Ord. 4-2019, passed 6-11-2019)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
33.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
34.   PERSONNEL
      
35.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
      
36.   ELECTIONS
      
37.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
38.   FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Compensation
§ 30.01 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The compensation of the Mayor and the compensation of each Council
member shall be established from time to time by City Council ordinance
pursuant to M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended from time to time. Increases in
compensation must be adopted no later than October in a municipal election year
in order to become effective the following year.
   (B)   The salary of the Mayor shall be $180 per month. The salary for City
Council members shall be $150 per month. Salaries shall be paid monthly.
Attendance for additional meetings will be paid at $10 per hour at a $50
maximum for out-of-town meetings and at $25 per meeting for additional meetings
in town. The City Council members, for attendance at conferences and training
seminars, on an individual case-by-case basis.
(Prior Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 614, passed 10-22-2002; Ord. 629, passed 8-3-2004;
Ord. 643, passed 10-3-2006)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Clerk-Administrator
§ 31.01 CLERK-ADMINISTRATOR.
   The offices of the City Clerk and City Treasurer are combined into one
office to be known as that of “Clerk-Administrator”. Any reference to “Clerk”
or “Treasurer” shall mean the person appointed by the Council to serve as the
Clerk-Administrator. Unless otherwise provided in this code or by ordinance, or
by other action of the Council, the Clerk-Administrator shall be assigned all
statutory duties of the City Clerk and the City Treasurer, as well as perform
such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the Council. Unless
otherwise prohibited by this code, or by ordinance or other action of the
Council, or state law, any duties assigned to the Clerk-Administrator may be
performed by his or her authorized designee.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
CHAPTER 32: VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
32.01   Volunteer Fire Department continued; appointment of officers
   
32.02   Duties of Chief
   
32.03   Duties of Fire Marshal
   
32.04   Records
   
32.05   Practice drills
   
32.06   Assistant Chief
   
32.07   Firefighters
   
32.08   Loss of membership
   
32.09   Compensation
   
32.10   Interference with Volunteer Fire Department
   
32.11   Rules and regulations
   
32.12   Charge for emergency fire services
§ 32.01 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT CONTINUED; APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   There is continued in the city a Volunteer Fire Department, which
department shall have the following officers: a Chief; Assistant Chief; four
Captains; and a Secretary.
   (B)   The Chief and Assistant Chief of the city’s Volunteer Fire Department
shall be appointed by the City Council in accordance with the procedure laid
out in the Hinckley Fire Department’s Organizational Handbook. The four
Captains and Secretary shall be elected by the city’s Fire Department members
in accordance with the procedure laid out in the Hinckley Fire Department’s
Organizational Handbook. All officers shall serve a two-year term.
   (C)   Firefighters and probationary firefighters shall be appointed by the
Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department, subject to confirmation by the City
Council. Firefighters shall continue as members of the Volunteer Fire
Department during good behavior until retirement, but may be removed by the
City Council for cause after a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 32.01) (Ord. 03-2017, passed 2-14-2017)
§ 32.02 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   The Chief shall have control of all firefighting apparatus and shall be
responsible for its care and condition. The Chief shall make a report semi-
annually to the City Council at its meeting in March and in September as to the
condition of the equipment and needs of the Volunteer Fire Department. The
Chief may submit additional reports and recommendations at any meeting of the
City Council, and he or she shall report each suspension by him or her of a
member of the Volunteer Fire Department at the first meeting of the City
Council following such suspension. The Chief shall be responsible for the
proper training and discipline of the members of the Volunteer Fire Department,
and may suspend any member for refusal or neglect to obey orders pending final
action by the City Council on his or her discharge or retention.
(Prior Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.03 DUTIES OF FIRE MARSHAL.
   The office of Fire Marshal may be held by the Chief or Assistant Chief, if
the City Council approves. The Fire Marshal shall be charged with the
enforcement of all city ordinances and laws of the state for fire prevention.
The Fire Marshal shall have full authority to inspect all premises and to cause
the removal or abatement of all fire hazards.
(Prior Code, § 32.03)
§ 32.04 RECORDS.
   The Chief shall keep in convenient form a record of all fires. Such record
shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire, if known,
type of building, name of owner or tenant, purpose for which occupied, value of
building and contents, members of the Volunteer Fire Department responding to
the alarm and such other information as he or she may deem advisable or as may
be required from time to time by the City Council or state law or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 32.04)
§ 32.05 PRACTICE DRILLS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief, when the weather permits, to hold a
monthly practice drill of at least one-hour duration for the Volunteer Fire
Department and to give the firefighters instruction in approved methods of
firefighting and fire prevention.
(Prior Code, § 32.05)
§ 32.06 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In the absence or disability of the Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department,
the Assistant Chief shall perform all functions and exercise all of the
authority of the Chief.
(Prior Code, § 32.06)
§ 32.07 FIREFIGHTERS.
   Firefighters shall not be less than 18 years of age and able-bodied. They
shall become members of the Volunteer Fire Department only after a 12-month
probationary period. The City Council may require that each candidate, before
he or she may become a probationary firefighter, must possess certain minimum
height, weight, education, mental and physical health requirements and any
other qualifications which may be specified by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.07)
§ 32.08 LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Firefighters shall forfeit membership in the Volunteer Fire Department
for unreasonable inattention to duties or lack of attendance at meetings or
calls or disobedience of orders or other due cause, and any firefighter may be
suspended by the Chief pending hearing upon his or her removal.
   (B)   The minimum requirements for maintaining active status as a
firefighter are:
      (1)   Attendance at 30% of the combination of all meetings and all fire
and first responder calls received during assigned shift per calendar year;
      (2)   Attendance at 12 hours of firefighting training per year;
      (3)   Attendance at three hours of first responder training per every two
years; and
      (4)   Health and fitness requirements as established by the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.08)
§ 32.09 COMPENSATION.
   The members and officers of the Volunteer Fire Department shall receive such
compensation as provided by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.09)
§ 32.10 INTERFERENCE WITH VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or
made, an alarm of fire without probable cause, or to neglect or refuse to obey
any reasonable order of the Chief or other firefighter at a fire, or to
interfere with the Volunteer Fire Department in the discharge of its duties.
(Prior Code, § 32.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.11 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Volunteer Fire Department may adopt rules and regulations for its
government, which rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.11)
§ 32.12 CHARGE FOR EMERGENCY FIRE SERVICES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. Pursuant to M.S. §§ 366.011, 366.012 and 415.01,
as they may be amended from time to time, the city shall have the authority to
charge the recipient of fire service response calls in the city limits and
within any area served under a mutual aid agreement. The charge shall be at the
rate set on the city fee schedule adopted from time to time.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FIRE SERVICE. The deployment of firefighting personnel or equipment or
both to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to
protect equipment, life or property in an area threatened by fire. The term
also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel and equipment or both to
provide fire suppression, rescue, vehicle extrication, vehicular accident scene
safety, traffic control and other related services as may be necessary at the
scene of an emergency.
      FIRE SERVICE CHARGE. The charge imposed by the city for providing fire
service.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle designed and originally
manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not
operated exclusively upon railroad tracks. The term includes semi-trailers, but
does not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all-terrain vehicles or park
trailers.
      MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and a town or other
city for the city’s Fire Department to provide assistance to the fire
department of a town or other city.
   (C)   Parties affected. The following parties are affected:
      (1)   Owners of property within the city who received fire service;
      (2)   Anyone who receives fire service within or outside of the city; and
      (3)   Owners of property in towns to which the city provides fire service
pursuant to a fire protection contract.
   (D)   Billing and payment for fire services.
      (1)   Parties requesting and receiving fire services may be billed
directly by the city. Additionally, if the party receiving emergency services
did not request fire services, but a fire or other situation exists which, at
the discretion of the Fire Department personnel in charge, requires fire
service, the party will be charged and billed. All parties will be billed
whether or not the fire service is covered by insurance. Any billable amount of
the fire service charge not covered by a party’s insurance remains a debt of
the party receiving the fire service.
      (2)   Parties billed for fire service will have 60 days to pay. If the
fire service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered delinquent
and the city will send a notice of delinquency.
      (3)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the
notice of delinquency is sent, the city will use all practical and reasonable
legal means to collect the fire service charge. The party receiving fire
service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by the city
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
      (4)   (a)   City residents. If the fire service charge of a resident of
the city remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice of delinquency is sent,
the City Council may also, on or before October 15 of each year, certify the
unpaid fire service charge to the County Auditor for collection with property
taxes, The County Auditor is responsible for remitting to the city all charges
collected on behalf of the city. The city must give the property owner notice
of its intent to certify the unpaid emergency service charge by September 15.
         (b)   City non-residents. If the fire service charge of a party who is
not a resident of the city remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice of
delinquency is sent and, if the party is a resident of a township that is
receiving fire services under a mutual aid agreement (the township), the City
Council will send the bill for the fire service charge to the township for
payment. The city will provide the township with all necessary records and
information so as to allow the township to pursue further collection of the
fire service charge against the delinquent party.
      (5)   False alarms will be billed as an emergency call or charged a rate
set on the city fee schedule.
      (6)   When the city’s Fire Department provides fire service to another
fire department pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, the billing will be
determined by the mutual aid agreement.
      (7)   All collected fire service charges will be used to offset the
expenses of the city’s Fire Department in providing fire services.
(Prior Code, § 32.12) (Ord. 624, passed 12-2-2003; Ord. 636, passed 1-3-2006;
Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-1-2007; Ord. 5-2011, passed 7-5-2011)
CHAPTER 33: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Park and Recreation Board
   
33.01   Established
   
33.02   Composition; compensation
   
33.03   Appointment of members; terms of office; vacancies
   
33.04   Officers
   
33.05   Meetings; quorum
   
33.06   Removal of members
   
33.07   Powers and duties
Planning Commission
   
33.20   Established
   
33.21   Composition; terms of office
   
33.22   Officers, meetings and the like
   
33.23   Vacancies
   
33.24   Powers and duties
Liquor Store Commission
   
33.35   Established
   
33.36   Officers and meetings
   
33.37   Powers and duties
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to M.S. §§ 412.501 through 412.531, as they may be amended from
time to time, there is hereby created a board to be known as the “City of
Hinckley Park and Recreation Board”, hereinafter referred to as the “Board”,
which shall have the duties and powers prescribed herein.
(Prior Code, § 33.01) (Ord. 590, passed 3-4-1998)
§ 33.02 COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be a
member of the City Council and one shall be a Hinckley-Finlayson School Board
member. One ex-officio member shall be the Clerk- Administrator. Initial
appointments shall be as follows:
 
Seat       Term Ending
A, B and C 12-31-1998
D and E    12-31-1999
F and G    12-31-2000
 
   (B)   (1)   All members of such Board shall have one vote and serve without
compensation unless the City Council authorizes compensation. The City Council
may authorize up to $500 of compensation for the Secretary.
      (2)   Members representing the School Board and local recreational
organizations are not required to reside within the city limits.
      (3)   The “at large” members shall be residents of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.02) (Ord. 590, passed 3-4-1998; Ord. 590A, passed 4-7-1998;
Ord. 631, passed 3-1-2005)
§ 33.03 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   All appointments to the Board shall be made by the Mayor with the approval
of the City Council. All Board members shall be appointed for terms of three
years. All Board members shall hold their offices until their successors have
been appointed and qualified. Any vacancies occurring in the membership of the
Board shall immediately be filled by the Mayor with approval of the Council,
but only for the unexpired term of the vacated member.
(Prior Code, § 33.03) (Ord. 590, passed 3-4-1998)
§ 33.04 OFFICERS.
   (A)   Generally. The officers of the Board shall be a Chairperson, a Vice
Chairperson and a Secretary. Officers shall be elected annually. All of said
officers shall be chosen from the membership of the Board by the Board.
   (B)   Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings.
   (C)   Vice Chairperson. The Vice Chairperson shall perform duties of the
Chairperson in case of his or her absence.
   (D)   Secretary. The Secretary shall keep a complete record of the minutes
of each meeting and of all proceedings of the Board. The Secretary shall
furnish the Clerk-Administrator with a copy of the minutes of each meeting and
of all proceedings of the Board within five working days of any meeting of the
Board.
   (E)   Additional powers and duties.
      (1)   The Board may prescribe such additional powers and duties for its
officers as may be consistent with the provisions of this subchapter and M.S.
§§ 412.501 through 412.531, as they may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any additional powers and duties shall be submitted to and approved
by the City Council.
   (F)   Vacancies. Vacancies in any of said offices shall be filled by the
Board.
(Prior Code, § 33.04) (Ord. 590, passed 3-4-1998)
§ 33.05 MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   The Board shall meet as necessary, but shall have as a minimum one annual
meeting. All meetings shall be recorded by the Secretary and open to the public
and subject to open meeting law requirements, being M.S. Ch. 13D, as it may be
amended from time to time. A simple majority of the Board (four) shall
constitute a quorum.
(Prior Code, § 33.05) (Ord. 590, passed 3-4-1998; Ord. 590A, passed 4-7-1998)
§ 33.06 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   The City Council, upon the recommendation of the Board, shall have the power
to remove any member of the Board for misconduct, neglect of or inattention to
his or her Board duties and/or failure to attend meetings.
(Prior Code, § 33.06) (Ord. 590, passed 3-4-1998)
§ 33.07 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Policies and procedures. The Board shall make and adopt such policies
and procedures as are necessary for the performance of its duties, for their
guidance and for the management of all municipal property and facilities set
aside for park and recreation purposes. Such policies and procedures shall be
submitted to and approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Employees. The Board may employ necessary personnel and fix their
compensation. (See M.S. § 412.521(2), as it may be amended from time to time.)
   (C)   Construction contracts. The Board may recommend to the City Council
the construction of roadways, paths, recreation areas, buildings, fountains,
docks, restrooms, refreshment booths, pavilions and other necessary structures
and improvements for park and recreation purposes.
   (D)   Purchase of supplies, equipment and services. The Board may authorize
the city’s Park and Recreation Department staff to purchase necessary
materials, supplies, equipment and services which are allowable in accordance
to its annual budget after same is approved by the City Council with the
approved city budget. An annual budget shall be submitted to the City Council
by September 1 each year.
   (E)   Maintenance. The Board shall maintain, beautify and care for the park
and recreation property and facilities.
   (F)   Other duties. The Board shall perform other duties as from time to
time may be prescribed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 33.07) (Ord. 590, passed 3-4-1998)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 33.20 ESTABLISHED.
   A Planning Commission is hereby established pursuant to M.S. §§ 462.351
through 462.364, as they may be amended from time to time. The Planning
Commission shall be the city planning agency authorized by M.S. § 462.354(1),
as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 33.20) (Ord. 505, passed 3-7-1967)
§ 33.21 COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Such Planning Commission shall consist of nine members to be appointed by
the City Council, who shall hold office for three years, except those of the
first Board, whose terms shall be staggered as appointed by the Council for
terms of one, two and three years. Members shall be city residents, owners of
property within the city or owners of a business in the city. All terms are to
expire on December 31. Hereafter, appointments shall be made for three-year
terms. One member of the City Council shall be appointed to the Planning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 33.21) (Ord. 505, passed 3-7-1967; Ord. 2-2012, passed 2-7-2012)
§ 33.22 OFFICERS, MEETINGS AND THE LIKE.
   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its appointed members
for a term of one year, and the Commission may create and fill such offices as
it may determine. The Clerk-Administrator shall act as Secretary for the
Planning Commission, but he or she shall not be a member thereof unless duly
appointed by the Council as a member-representative on said Commission. The
Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month if there is
business to transact; adopt rules for the transaction of business and keep a
record of its proceedings; on or before January 1 of each year make and submit
to the City Council a report of its work and proceedings during the preceding
year; and periodically make such reports to the City Council as it deems
proper.
(Prior Code, § 33.22) (Ord. 505, passed 3-7-1967)
§ 33.23 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies existing or arising on the Commission shall be filled by the City
Council for the remaining term of the position becoming vacant.
(Prior Code, § 33.23) (Ord. 505, passed 3-7-1967)
§ 33.24 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have authority to make recommendations to the
City Council for the development and improvement of the city, and to assume all
functions as specified in M.S. §§ 462.351 through 462.364, as they may be
amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 33.24) (Ord. 505, passed 3-7-1967)
LIQUOR STORE COMMISSION
§ 33.35 ESTABLISHED.
   A Liquor Store Commission is hereby established. The Commission shall
consist of five members, two of whom shall be members of the City Council, to
be appointed by the City Council. The terms shall be for four years, except two
of the members of the first Board shall be appointed for two- year terms and
three shall be appointed for four-year terms. All terms will expire on December
31. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by the City Council for the
remaining term of the position becoming vacant. Unless appointed as members,
the Mayor and Clerk-Administrator shall serve as ex- officio members without
the power to vote.
(Prior Code, § 33.35)
§ 33.36 OFFICERS AND MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its
members for a term of one year, and the Commission may create and fill other
offices as it may determine. It shall periodically make reports to the City
Council of its findings and recommendations.
(Prior Code, § 33.36)
§ 33.37 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Liquor Store Commission shall have authority to generally oversee the
operations of the Municipal Liquor Store and make recommendations to the City
Council for the operation of the liquor store, but shall have no management,
budget or operation authority and shall have no power to hire, review the
performance of, supervise, suspend or terminate any employee.
(Prior Code, § 33.37)
CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL
Section
   
34.01   Adoption of personnel policies
   
34.02   Employment background checks; applicants for city employment
§ 34.01 ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL POLICIES.
   The City Council may adopt and revise personnel policies by motion from time
to time.
(Prior Code, § 34.01)
§ 34.02 EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS; APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s Computerized
Criminal History information for specified non- criminal purposes of employment
background checks for the positions described in this section.
   (B)   Criminal history employment background investigations.
      (1)   The Minnesota BCA is authorized, as the exclusive entity within the
city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for
positions within the city.
      (2)   All regular part-time or full-time employees of the city and other
positions that work with children or vulnerable adults do not need to include
sworn police positions in this section as these are already authorized and
covered by M.S. § 626.87, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal
history data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority,
including the City Council, the City Clerk-Administrator or other city staff
involved in the hiring process.
      (4)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in
M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject
an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction
unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and
the conviction is for a felony and/or gross misdemeanor with a jail sentence.
If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city shall
notify the applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
         (d)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 34.15) (Ord. 4-2008, passed 11-5-2008)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Audit of city’s financial affairs
Lodging Tax
   
35.15   Definitions
   
35.16   Imposition of tax
   
35.17   Exceptions and exemptions
   
35.18   Collection by operator
   
35.19   Payment by operator to city; returns
   
35.20   Return examination; adjustments
   
35.21   Refunds
   
35.22   Advertising
   
35.23   Delinquent taxes and late or false returns; penalties
   
35.24   Administration of tax
   
35.25   Records examination
   
35.26   Proceeds disposition
 
   
35.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 AUDIT OF CITY’S FINANCIAL AFFAIRS.
   There shall be an annual audit of the city’s financial affairs by a
certified public accountant in accordance with the minimum auditing procedures
prescribed by the State Auditor.
(Prior Code, § 35.01) (Ord. 514, passed 9-2-1970)
LODGING TAX
§ 35.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The furnishing for consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel, bed
and breakfast or public campground, except where such lodging shall be of a
continuous period of 30 days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of
rooms owned by religious, educational or non-profit organizations for self-
sponsored activities shall not constitute LODGING for purposes of this program.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of the lodging facility, whether
in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee or any other capacity.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or any other
combination of individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision
of this subchapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term applied to a
corporation, association or partnership shall mean the officers or partners
thereof, as the case may be.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for the lodging
whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for
services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room
charge itself.
(Prior Code, § 35.10) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995; Ord. 572, passed 7-5-1995)
§ 35.16 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time, there is
hereby imposed a tax on the rent charged by an operator for providing lodging
to any person. The lodging tax program shall commence on 7-1-1995. A tax of 3%
of the rent charged shall be imposed on the effective date of this subchapter.
The tax collected by the operator shall be satisfied only by payment to the
city of the amount levied by this subchapter. In no case shall the tax imposed
by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator is
authorized and required by this program to collect from the lodger.
(Prior Code, § 35.11) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.17 EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exceptions. No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid by any
officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express
provisions of federal law or international law.
   (B)   Exemption.
      (1)   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose
occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax.
      (2)   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at
the time the rent is collected, and such a claim shall be made in writing and
under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the city.
      (3)   All such claims shall be forwarded to the city when the returns and
collections are submitted as required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 35.12) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.18 COLLECTION BY OPERATOR.
   (A)   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this program at the
time the rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust
by the operator for the city.
   (B)   The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for
the lodging, and those persons paying the tax shall receive a receipt of
payment from the operator.
(Prior Code, § 35.13) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.19 PAYMENT BY OPERATOR TO CITY; RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this program shall be paid monthly by the
operator to the city not later than 20 days after the end of the month in which
the taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a
return upon such forms and containing such information as the city may require.
The return shall contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return;
      (2)   The total amount of exceptions and exemptions;
      (3)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
      (4)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of his or her
agent duly authorized in writing;
      (5)   The period covered by the return; and
      (6)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging
tax.
   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any
reporting period the amount of taxes imposed by this program previously paid as
a result of any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectible
during such reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such
consideration which became uncollectible.
(Prior Code, § 35.14) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.20 RETURN EXAMINATION; ADJUSTMENTS.
   The city shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make any
investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making
the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed
on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is
found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the city
within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or
sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is
greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the
person who paid the tax to the city within ten days after determination of such
refund or credited against the amount due for the next month.
(Prior Code, § 35.15) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.21 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the city for a refund of taxes paid in excess of the
amount legally due for that period; provided that, no application for a refund
shall be considered unless filed within one year after such tax was paid, or
within one year from the filing of the return, whichever period is the longer.
The city shall examine the claim and make and file written findings thereon
denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice
thereof by registered mail to such person at the address stated upon the
return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the city shall credit the
amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this program from the
claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the city
to the claimant.
(Prior Code, § 35.16) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.22 ADVERTISING.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
(Prior Code, § 35.17) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.23 DELINQUENT TAXES AND LATE OR FALSE RETURNS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Delinquent taxes and returns.
      (1)   Returns. If any operator required by this program to file a return
shall fail to do so within the time prescribed or shall make, willfully or
otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon
written notice and demand, file such return or corrected return within five
days of receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax
due on the basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or
corrected return, the city shall make a return or corrected return for such
person from such knowledge and information as the city can obtain, and assess a
tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on
account of the tax for the taxable period covered by the return) shall be paid
within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment.
Any such return or assessment made by the city shall be prima facie correct and
valid, and such person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness
or invalidity in any action or proceeding with respect thereto.
      (2)   Taxes. If any portion of a tax imposed by this program, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid,
the city may institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the
amount due plus interest, penalties and the cost and disbursements of any
action.
      (3)   Extension of time. Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant
an operator one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make
payment of taxes as required by this chapter; provided that, interest during
such period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per
annum.
   (B)   Penalties.
      (1)   Taxes. If any tax imposed by this subchapter is not paid within the
time herein specified for payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be
added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.
      (2)   Returns.
         (a)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this subchapter, unless it is shown that such failure is not due
to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax, in addition to the 10%
specific penalty provided in division (B)(1) above, 10% of the amount remaining
unpaid if the failure is not for more than 30 days, with an additional 5% for
each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which failure continues, not
exceeding 25% in the aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10,
a minimum penalty of $10 shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax
shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and as a part of the
tax unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in
which case the amount so added shall be collected in the same manner as the
tax.
         (b)   If any person willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or payment
thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any
tax (less amounts paid on the basis of such false or fraudulent return) found
due for the period to which such return related. The penalty imposed by this
division (B)(2) shall be collected as part of the tax and shall be in addition
to any other penalties provided by this chapter.
      (3)   Application of payments received. All payments received shall be
credited first to penalties, next to interest, and then to the tax due.
(Prior Code, § 35.18) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.24 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The Clerk-Administrator shall administer and enforce the assessment and
collection of the taxes imposed by this subchapter. The Clerk-Administrator
shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents
required by this chapter and shall distribute the same throughout the city and
furnish them upon application; but failure to receive or secure them shall not
relieve any person from any obligation required under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 35.19) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.25 RECORDS EXAMINATION.
   (A)   The city may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax as provided in this program.
   (B)   Every such operator is directed and required to give the city the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as
are hereby authorized.
(Prior Code, § 35.20) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 35.26 PROCEEDS DISPOSITION.
   (A)   (1)   Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection
of taxes pursuant to this program shall be used in accordance with M.S. §
469.190, as the same may be amended from time to time, to fund a local
convention/tourism bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city
as a tourist/convention center.
      (2)   The city may retain a maximum of 5% for administrative costs.
   (B)   The city hereby designates the city’s CVB as the recipient of the tax
proceeds collected hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 35.21) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995; Ord. 584, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall wilfully fail to make a return required by §§
35.15 through
35.26 of this chapter or shall fail to pay such tax after written demand for
payment, or who shall fail to remit such taxes collected or any penalty or
interest imposed by §§
35.15 through
35.26 of this chapter after written demand for such payment, or who shall
refuse to permit the city to examine the books, records and papers under its
control, or who shall willfully make an incomplete, false or fraudulent return,
or who shall fail to collect the tax as required by §
35.18 of this chapter, or who shall violate the advertising restrictions set
forth in §
35.22 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 35.99) (Ord. 571, passed 6-6-1995)
CHAPTER 36: ELECTIONS
Section
   
36.01   Election date
§ 36.01 ELECTION DATE.
   The annual city election shall hereafter be held on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November in even-numbered years.
(Prior Code, § 36.01) (Ord. 503, passed 8-4-1964)
CHAPTER 37: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
37.01   Policy and purpose
   
37.02   Definitions
   
37.03   Establishment of emergency management organization
   
37.04   Powers and duties of Director
   
37.05   Local emergencies
   
37.06   Emergency regulations
   
37.07   Emergency management a government function
   
37.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics
 
   
37.99   Penalty
§ 37.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile
action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order
to ensure that preparations of the city will be adequate to deal with those
disasters and, generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the
public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the
people of the city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters;
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters;
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other
political subdivisions of the state and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended
from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state
shall establish a local organization for emergency management.
§ 37.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is
likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional
sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair
or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services,
police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as CIVIL DEFENSE
functions.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city
departments, authorized volunteers and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZA- TION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city- level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization
provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and local
jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.
§ 37.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management
organization, which shall be under the supervision and control of the city’s
Emergency Management Director, called the “Director”. The Director shall be
appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be removed by the
Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as established by
the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction
and control of the Council. The emergency management organization shall conform
to and be consistent with, where applicable, all state and federal
requirements, including the National Incident Management System framework found
at 44 C.F.R. part 201, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 37.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual
aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal
emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its
action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the state’s emergency plan.
   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources,
industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to
determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish
the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards and
sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the Council
for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty
of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to
perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may
be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate the
emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be
consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal
government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and
other political subdivisions within the state.
   (D)   In accordance with the state and city emergency plan, the Director
shall institute training programs, public information programs and conduct
practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure
prompt and effective operation of the city’s emergency plan when a disaster
occurs.
   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the
maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city departments
and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and
extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management organization
and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or agency in
cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning and
programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization of
the facilities of the department or agency.
   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and
agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.
   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall
coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within
the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs as
required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as
provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued
by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.
§ 37.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her
legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three
days, except by or with the consent of the Council. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the city’s Clerk-
Administrator.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter- jurisdictional
disaster plans and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency
unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions.
However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services
in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor
or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate regulations,
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the
conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair,
maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire and safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for
preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect
public safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall
be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so
limited, and shall be filed in the office of the city’s Clerk-Administrator. A
copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for
inspection at the City Clerk- Administrator’s office shall be conspicuously
posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city or at
other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the
resolution. By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If
not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after
its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates,
whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the
period of time and to the extent conflict exists.
   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S.
§ 12.37, as it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding any
statutory or charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its Council,
acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting
the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency
assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may exercise these powers in
the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time-
consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the
performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of
supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies and the appropriation and
expenditure of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of
resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and
rules, provisions relating to low bids and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby
declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this chapter shall not
affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she would
otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the worker’s compensation
law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
§ 37.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions or conduct other than official
acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 38: FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
38.01   Fee schedule
§ 38.01 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Administration fees.
Code Section Type of License/Fee Term Fee
Code Section Type of License/Fee                       Term      Fee
            Special assessment search fee                      $35
                                                                 8% of the
            Certification or assessment fee                    amount being
                                                                 certified or
                                                                 assessed
            Returned/worthless checks                 Per check $30
            Copy of city ordinance/zoning                      $.25 per page
             Photo copies:                                        
            Color                                              $.50 per page
             Black and white                                     $.25 per page
                                                                 $2 first
                                                                 page,
            Fax/sending or receiving                           $1 each
                                                                 additional
                                                                 page
            Notary signature                          Per       $2
                                                       signature
            Staff time – City Administrator/Clerk   Per hour  $62
            Staff time – Administrative Assistant   Per hour  $37
            Staff time – Planner                    Per hour  $55
            Staff time – Finance Director           Per hour  $55
            Staff time – Building Inspector         Per hour  $60
            Staff time – Public Works               Per hour  $45
            Staff time – Building Official          Per hour  $65
§
10.98(A)(4)  Administrative citation – 1st offense            $100
(d)1
§
10.98(A)(4)  Administrative citation – 2nd offense            $200
(d)2
§                                                               $400
10.98(A)(4)  Administrative citation – 3rd offense             
(d)3
§
10.98(A)(4)  Administrative citation – 4th offense            $800
(d)4
§
10.98(A)(4)  Administrative citation – 5th offense            $1,000
(d)5
§           Administrative citation – appeal filing
10.98(A)(4)  fee                                                $5
(d)6
 
   (B)   Public works fees.
Code Section Type of License/Fee Term Fee
Code    Type of     Term                                                      Fee
Section License/Fee
        Water
        Access      Residential – N/A, commercial/industrial - at owner’s
       Charge      expense                                                   $700 per EDU
        (WAC)
        hookup
        Water-area  Residential/commercial/                                   $1,300 per
       trunk       industrial – at owner’s expense                       acre
        charge
        Sewer
        Access      Residential/commercial/
       Charge      industrial – at owner’s expense                       $1,600 per EDU
        (SAC)
        hookup
        Sewer-area  Residential/commercial/                                   $1,500 per
       trunk       industrial – at owner’s expense                       acre
        charge
        Excavation/ Residential/commercial/                                   $450 minimum,
       street      industrial                                                $3.50 per sq.
        opening fee                                                           ft.
       Water Rate
        Cost per
       1,000       Per month                                                 $5.15
        gallons
       Water base  Per month, per apartment, or per 2 hotel rooms            $5.05
        charge
       Sewer Rate
        Cost per
       1,000       Per month                                                 $9.30
        gallons
       Sewer base  Per month, per apartment, or per 2 hotel rooms            $10.40
        charge
       Meter Charges
       Non-valved  Per month                                                 $4
        Valved
       (remote     Per month                                                 $10
        turn on and
        off)
        Residential                                                           $170
        deduct                                                                ($150 will be
       meter -     Per use                                                   returned when
        outdoor use                                                           meter is
                                                                              returned)
       Sewer base  Per month, per apartment, or per 2 hotel rooms            $10
        charge
§ 50.08Bulk Water Rate/Use of Hydrant
       Meter                                                                $150
        Deposit
        Hydrant/
       Bulk Meter                                                           $.75 per day
        Rental Fee
        Cost per
       1,000       1,000 minimum - taxable                                   $15
        gallons
       Meter Costs (for new or additional meters)                            For all meters
                                                                              and antennae
                                                                              Invoice price
        Spectrum 5/                                                           + 5%
       8 inch by   Per meter – no tax                                      administrative
        3/4 inch                                                              handling and
                                                                              set-up fee
Code Section Type of License/Fee Term Fee
Code Section Type of License/Fee   Term                   Fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 5/8 inch by  Per meter – taxable  administrative
             3/4 inch                                     handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 1 inch       Per meter – no tax   administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 1 inch       Per meter – taxable  administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 1½ inches   Per meter – no tax   administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 1½ inches   Per meter – taxable  administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 2 inches     Per meter – taxable  administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 3 inches     Per meter – taxable  administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 4 inches     Per meter – taxable  administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Spectrum 6 inches     Per meter – taxable  administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Enduro 6 inches       Per meter – taxable  administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            Enduro 8 inches       Per meter – taxable  administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            External antenna      Per antenna – no tax administrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
                                                          Invoice price + 5%
            External antenna      Per antenna – taxableadministrative
                                                          handling and set-up
                                                          fee
            Water reconnection    Each event             $75
             fee non-payment
            Water turn on/off fee Each event             $30
                                   If paid after the
             Water/sewer penalty   tenth of the month     10% of the total
            fees                  following              balance delinquent
                                   corresponding billing
                                   cycle.
                                   Past due balances of
            Shut off letter fee   $150 or higher on the  $15
                                   fifteenth of the month
            Mowing/clean up (city Per hour               $100 plus staff time,
             workers)                                     $300 minimum
            Mowing/clean up       Each event             Cost plus 5%
             (hired out)
            Sweeping fee          Per hour               $125
            Jetter                Per hour               $125 plus staff time
                                                          as needed
            Vac trailer           Per hour               $100 plus staff time
                                                          as needed
            Bucket truck          Per hour               $150 plus staff time
                                                          as needed
 
   (C)   Fire Department service fees.
 
Code    Type of License/Fee                         Term                                                                           Fee
Section
§      Fire Department response – service call   Per hour, 1 hour minimum; additional time will be broken down by 15 minute     $800
32.12                                               increments
§      Fire Department response – tool/equipment Use of tools/equipment will be billed on an “as used” basis; an example of
32.12   use                                         billable tools includes, but is not limited to, jaws of life, foam, heavy       
                                                    equipment (billed as pass-through to customer), etc.
§      DNR                                         As listed in contract                                                           
32.12
 
   (D)   Animal fees.
 
Code Section Type of License/Fee   Term               Fee
Animal Licensing - Dogs Only
            Spayed/neutered       Annually, each pet $5
            Unaltered             Annually, each pet $7.50
            Duplicate license tag Per tag            $2
 
   (E)   Rental fees. Government and 501(c)(3) rental rates will be at 50% of
the daily rates listed below. Any 501(c)(3) that has donated $5,000 or more to
the city for the maintenance and improvements to the properties listed below
shall be exempt from the rental fees the same calendar year in which the
donation was made. If the 501(c)(3) entity is not tax-exempt, sales tax will
apply to the rental rate.
Site Rent Sales Tax Deposit
                    (refundable if no damage)
Site                                 Rent   Sales Tax Deposit
                                                      (refundable if no damage)
Community Center rental:                             
Single day rental, Sunday-Friday     $75    $5.53     $300
Saturday rental                      $150   $11.06    $300
Community room rental                                
Monday-Friday: up to four hours      $17.50 No tax    N/A
Monday-Friday: over four hours       $35    No tax    N/A
Saturday, Sunday                     $35    No tax    N/A
West Side Park rental                                
Monday-Friday                        $25    $1.84     $50
Saturday, Sunday                     $50    $3.69     $50
*Overnight camping is allowed at
West Side Park pending approval from $15    $1.11     N/A
City Administrator
Band Shell rental:                                   
Monday-Friday                        $25    $1.84     $50
Saturday, Sunday                     $50    $3.69     $50
Legion Park/softball field rental:                   
Monday-Friday                        $15    $1.11     $50
Saturday, Sunday                     $30    $2.22     $50
Overnight camping is allowed at
Legion Park pending approval from    $15    $1.10     N/A
City Administrator
                                     
 
   (F)   Building permit fees.
      (1)   Permits, inspections, and fees. The issuance of permits and the
collection of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. §§ 326B.148 and 326B.151 and
as provided in this chapter. The minimum fee for any building permit is $23.
Total Valuation Fee
Total Valuation        Fee
$1 to $500             $23
$501 to $2,000         $23.50 for the first $500 plus $3.05 for each additional
                       $100 or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.
$2,001 to $25,000      $69.25 for the first $2,000 plus $14 for each additional
                       $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.
                       $391.25 for the first $25,000 plus $10.10 for each
$25,001 to $50,000     additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $50,000.
                       $643.75 for the first $50,000 plus $7 for each
$50,001 to $100,000    additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $100,000.
                       $993.75 for the first $100,000 plus $5.60 for each
$100,001 to $500,000   additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $500,000.
                       $3,233.75 for the first $500,000 plus $4.75 for each
$500,001 to $1,000,000 additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
                       $1,000,000.
$1,000,001 and up      $5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000 plus $3.65 for each
                       additional $1,000 or fraction thereof.
 
      (2)   Other permit fees.
Service Fee
Service                                                 Fee
One and two family dwellings (three stories or less and townhomes):
 
All permits subject to 50% of permit fee for plan        
review fee.
All permits subject to state surcharge fee of .0005 x    
value.
Other inspections and fees:
Inspections outside of normal business hours             
Reinspection fees                                       City planner staff time
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated  City planner staff time
Additional plan/site review required by changes,        City planner staff time
additions or revisions (minimum of half- hour)          City planner staff time
Calculation of the fee shall include travel time and be City planner staff time
calculated to the next half-hour after the first hour.
All other buildings except one and two family dwellings (three stories or less)
and townhomes:
All permits subject to 65% of permit fee for plan        
review fee.
All permits subject to state surcharge fee of .0005 x    
value.
Other inspections and fees:
Inspections outside of normal business hours             
Reinspection fees                                       City planner staff time
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated  City planner staff time
Additional plan/site review required by changes,        City planner staff time
additions or revisions (minimum of half- hour)          City planner staff time
Calculation of the fee shall include travel time and be City planner staff time
calculated to the next half-hour after the first hour.
 
      (3)   Other permit/license fees.
Code Section Service Fee
Code Section Service                                Fee
            Development stage plan                  
            Minor subdivision – up to 2 hours    $100
            Recording fees                         Cost
            Zoning map                             $2
            Zoning letter                          $30
            Residential owner-occupied maintenance $40
             permits
            Permit transfer/reissuance             Based on value of work
§           Right-of-way permit fee                $75
91.16
 
   (G)   Business regulation fees.
Code Section Type of License/Fee Term Fee
Code Section       Type of License/Fee  Term               Fee
                  Fireworks            Per display        $250
                   Fireworks sales fee:                    
                  Indoor sales         Per year           $150
                   Outdoor sales        Per year           $150
§                 On-sale wine license Per year           $100
111.23             (MWNONSB)
§                 On-sale liquor       Per year           $2,800
111.23             license (ONSS)
§                 Special club license Per year           $650
111.23
§                 Sunday on-sale       Per year           $200
111.23             license (SUNDAY)
§                 Liquor on-sale       Each               $500
111.23             investigation fee
§                 3.2 on-sale/off-sale Per year           $50
111.23             license (3.2CMBN)
§                 3.2 on-sale license  Per year           $100
111.23             (3.2ONSS)
§                 3.2 on-sale          Per day            $10
111.23             temporary license
§                 3.2 off-sale         Per day            $50
111.23             temporary license
§                 On-sale temporary    Per day            $50
111.23             liquor license
§                 On-sale temporary    Per day            $50
111.23             strong beer license
                  Cigarette/tobacco                      Issued by Pine
                   license                                 County
Resolution 37-2024 Cannabis                               Issued by Pine
                   registration                            County
§                 Pawnbroker license   Per year           $500
112.18
§                                      Per year           $5,000
114.07             Adult businesses     Investigation fee  $1,000
                                        (non-refundable)
 
   (H)   Land use fees.
Code Section Type Non-Refundable Base Fees
Code Section Type                       Non-Refundable Base Fees
Ch. 150      Preliminary plat           $450
Ch. 150      Final plat mapping fee,    Staff time & engineering fees
             recorded plat fee (pdf)
Ch. 150      Street, alley, or easement Admin. costs
             vacation
Ch. 150      Planned Unit Development   $500
Ch. 150      Signs                      $50
§           Grading permit             As listed in Appendix K (Grading)
150.01                                  of the 2001 supplements to the IBC
Ch. 150      Conditional use permit     $300
Ch. 150      Variance                   $300
Ch. 150      Rezoning                   $300
Ch. 150      Ordinance amendment        $300
Ch. 150      Appeals                    $300
Ch. 150      Interim use permit         $300
 
(Prior Code, § 38.01) (Ord. 615, passed 1-23-2003; Ord. 626, passed 3-18-2004;
Ord. 636, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 637, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 1-2007, passed 1-2-
2007; Ord. 1-2008, passed 1-2-2008; Ord. 1-09, passed 1-6-2009; Ord. 1-2010,
passed 1-5-2010; Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-10-2017; Ord. 1-2018, passed 3-13-2018;
Ord. 1-2019, passed 2-1-2019; Ord. 05-2019, passed 12-10-2019; Ord. 01-2021,
passed 12-8-2020; Ord. 04-2021, passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 02-2023, passed 5-10-
2023; Ord. 05-2023, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 08-2023, passed - -; Ord. 01-2024,
passed - -)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER REGULATIONS
      
51.   SEWER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   General operation
   
50.02   Use of water service
   
50.03   Use to circumvent chapter prohibited
   
50.04   Damage to water system
   
50.05   Connections beyond city boundaries
   
50.06   Connection to system required; use of private wells
   
50.07   Use of water for air conditioning; permits
   
50.08   Use of water from fire hydrants; temporary connections
   
50.09   Water deficiency, shut off and use restrictions
Water Regulations
   
50.20   Supply from one service
   
50.21   Tapping of mains restricted
   
50.22   Repairs
   
50.23   Abandoned or unused services
   
50.24   Disconnection permit
   
50.25   Service pipes
   
50.26   Excavation and construction requirements
   
50.27   Connection to other water supplies restricted
   
50.28   Water connections; applications and charges
   
50.29   Location of curb stop box
   
50.30   Water meters
Rates and Charges
   
50.45   Water unit
   
50.46   Rates, fees and charges generally
   
50.47   Water service billing; change of address
   
50.48   Water rates
   
50.49   Payment of charges; late payment; collection
Administration and Enforcement
   
50.60   Supervision by Building Inspector and Public Utilities Department;
licensing
   
50.61   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
50.62   Discontinuance of service
   
50.63   Authorized employees to turn water on and off
   
50.64   Liability for expense, loss or damage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 GENERAL OPERATION.
   The city does hereby make provision for the establishment of a municipal
water system (hereinafter called the “water system”) to be operated as a public
utility.
(Prior Code, § 50.01)
§ 50.02 USE OF WATER SERVICE.
   No person other than a city employee shall uncover or make or use any water
service installation connected to the city water system, except in the manner
provided by this chapter. No person shall make or use any such installation
contrary to the regulatory provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 USE TO CIRCUMVENT CHAPTER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit water from the water system to be used for any
purpose to circumvent this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04 DAMAGE TO WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall remove or damage any structure,
appurtenance or part of the water system or fill or partially fill any
excavation or move any gate valve used in the water system.
   (B)   No person shall make any connection of an electrical welder to the
city water main, appurtenance or service or use an electric welder for the
purpose of thawing frozen water mains, appurtenances or services, except under
city direction.
(Prior Code, § 50.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 CONNECTIONS BEYOND CITY BOUNDARIES.
   Where water mains of the city are in any street or alley adjacent to or
outside the corporate limits of the city, the City Council may issue permits to
the owners or occupants of properties adjacent or accessible to the water main
to make proper water service pipe connections with the water mains of the city
and to be supplied with water in conformity with the applicable provisions of
this chapter and subject to any contract for the supply of water between the
city and any other municipality.
(Prior Code, § 50.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.06 CONNECTION TO SYSTEM REQUIRED; USE OF PRIVATE WELLS.
   (A)   Except where municipal water is not available, it shall be unlawful to
construct, reconstruct or repair any private water system which is designed or
intended to provide water for human consumption. Private wells to provide water
for other than human consumption may be constructed, maintained and continued
in use after connection is made to the water system; provided, there is no
means of cross- connection between the private well and municipal water supply
at any time. Hose bibbs that will enable the cross-connection of the two
systems are prohibited on internal piping of the well system supply. Where both
private and city systems are in use, outside hose bibbs shall not be installed
on both systems.
   (B)   All new homes or buildings shall connect to the municipal water system
if water is available to the property. At the time as municipal water becomes
available to existing homes or buildings, a direct connection shall be made to
the public system within a period of time as determined by the City Council. If
the connection is not made pursuant to this chapter, a penalty shall be levied
in an amount set by City Council resolution.
   (C)   Where new homes or buildings do not have water available to the
property, the city shall determine whether and under what conditions the
municipal water system will be extended to serve the property.
   (D)   If the well is not to be used after the time a municipal water
connection is made:
      (1)   The well pump and tank shall be disconnected from all internal
piping;
      (2)   The casing shall be filled with sandy soil from the bottom to a
point eight feet from the top;
      (3)   The remaining eight feet shall be filled with concrete to the floor
level and the well casing cut off as close to the floor level as possible;
      (4)   Within 30 days after the municipal water connection is made, the
owner or occupant must advise the city’s Building Inspector that the well has
been sealed; or
      (5)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, all well abandonment shall be done
in accordance with the state’s Department of Health Well Code.
(Prior Code, § 50.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.07 USE OF WATER FOR AIR CONDITIONING; PERMITS.
   (A)   All air conditioning systems which are connected directly or
indirectly with the public water system must be equipped with water conserving
and water regulating devices as approved by the City Engineer or City Building
Inspector.
   (B)   Permits shall be required for the installation of all air conditioning
systems to the public water system.
(Prior Code, § 50.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.08 USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS; TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Use of fire hydrants. Except for extinguishment of fires, no person,
unless authorized by the Public Works Director or Public Utilities Department,
shall operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the water system
without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city as follows.
      (1)   A permit to use a fire hydrant shall be issued for each individual
job or contract and for a minimum of 30 days and for additional 30-day periods
as the city shall determine. The permit shall state the location of the hydrant
and shall be for the use of that hydrant and none other.
      (2)   The user shall make an advance cash deposit to guarantee payment
for water used and to cover breakage and damage to the hydrant and meter, which
shall be refunded upon expiration of the permit, less applicable charges for
use.
      (3)   The user shall relinquish the use of the hydrant to authorized city
employees in emergency situations.
      (4)   The user shall pay a rental charge as set by City Council
resolution for each day including Sundays and legal holidays, and a fee as set
by City Council resolution for each 1,000 gallons of water used.
   (B)   Temporary connection to fire hydrants. An owner of a private water
system may make a temporary above ground connection to a fire hydrant, subject
to the time periods, conditions, and payment specified in §
50.46 of this chapter. In addition, the method of connection to the private
system shall conform to all existing requirements of this chapter and city
ordinance and the type of meter used shall meet the approval of the Public
Utilities Department.
(Prior Code, § 50.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.09 WATER DEFICIENCY, SHUT OFF AND USE RESTRICTIONS.
   The city shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of
water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the
purpose of making repairs or connections or from any other cause whatsoever. In
case of fire, or alarm of fire, or in making repairs of construction of new
works, water may be shut off without notice at any time and kept off as long as
necessary. In addition, the City Council shall have the right to impose
reasonable restrictions on the use of the city water system in emergency
situations. For non-payment of charges, water service may be discontinued
according to the procedures established in §
50.62 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.09)
WATER REGULATIONS
§ 50.20 SUPPLY FROM ONE SERVICE.
   No more than one housing unit or building shall be supplied from one service
connection, except by permission of City Council. Each unit served shall have a
separate water meter.
(Prior Code, § 50.25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.21 TAPPING OF MAINS RESTRICTED.
   No person, except persons authorized by the City Council, shall tap any
distributing main or pipe of the water supply system or insert stopcocks or
ferrules therein.
(Prior Code, § 50.26) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.22 REPAIRS.
   (A)   Determination of need for repairs. Based on the information supplied
by the property owner or available to the city, the city will make a
determination whether a problem exists in that portion of the service which is
the city’s responsibility. If the problem appears to exist in the areas for
which the city has no responsibility, the private owners will be responsible
for correction of the problem.
   (B)   Thawing of water services. The city will attempt to thaw water
services on request of the resident. If the problem is found within that
portion of the service for which the private owner is responsible, the private
owner thereafter will be responsible for thawing the service and correction of
the problem.
   (C)   Excavation or repair of water service.
      (1)   The city will arrange for the investigative digging up and repair
of any water service where the problem apparently exists within that area for
which the city has responsibility.
      (2)   Unless it is clearly evident, however, that the problem is the
responsibility of the city, the excavation and repair will not be made until
the property owner requests the city in writing to excavate or repair the
service and agrees to pay the cost.
      (3)   The owner further agrees to waive public hearing and be special
assessed the cost of the excavation and repair if the problem is found to be
other than the city’s responsibility. The city will make the determination for
responsibility of the cost of investigation or repair.
      (4)   The matter of whether the dig up is done by city forces or
contracted would depend on the urgency or need of repair and the availability
of city forces to do the work. Recovery by the city for faulty construction
will depend upon the circumstances and the decision of the City Attorney on the
likelihood of recovery.
   (D)   Failure to repair. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or
owner to repair any leak occurring in his or her service pipe within 24 hours
after verbal or written notice thereof, the water may be turned off by the city
and shall not be turned on until the leak has been repaired and a fee pursuant
to §
50.46 of this chapter has been paid to the city.
(Prior Code, § 50.27) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.23 ABANDONED OR UNUSED SERVICES.
   (A)   If the premises served by water have been abandoned, or if the service
has not been used for one year, then the service shall be shut off at the curb
stop box by the city and the water meter will be removed.
   (B)   When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones, and it is
desired to increase or change the old water service, no connections with the
mains shall be made until all the old service has been removed and the main
taps plugged or yoked connections installed by the city at the owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 50.28) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.24 DISCONNECTION PERMIT.
   A permit must be obtained to disconnect from the existing water service
leads at the curb stop box. The fee for the permit shall be set pursuant to §
50.46 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.29) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.25 SERVICE PIPES.
   Every service pipe shall be laid so as to allow at least one foot of extra
length in order to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe must be
placed no less than seven feet below the ground and in a manner as to prevent
rupture by freezing. Service pipes must extend from the curb stop box to the
inside of the building, or if not taken into the building, then to the hydrant
or fixtures which it is intended to supply. Type K copper tubing shall be used
up to and including two-inch services. All underground joints are to be
mechanical, except joints under floors shall be silver soldered, unless
otherwise approved by the city’s Building Inspector. Joints of copper tubing
shall be kept, to a minimum, with not more than one joint used for service for
each 70 feet in length. Splicing may be approved with three-piece unions only.
All joints and connections shall be left uncovered until inspected by the
city’s Building Inspector and tested at normal water line pressure. Unions must
be three- piece type. All services over two inches shall be cast iron or any
material approved by the City Engineer. Connections with the mains for domestic
supply shall be at least three-quarter inch up to the curb stop box.
(Prior Code, § 50.30) (Ord. 6-2007, passed 5-1-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.26 EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No excavation shall be made until a permit for the connection has been
issued by the city.
   (B)   No water service pipe or water connection shall be installed in the
same trench or closer than ten feet horizontally to a sewer trench or drain
laid, or to be laid, either in the street or in private property; except that
the water pipe on private property may be in a common trench with a sewer drain
which is of a material that is in conformance with the current State Plumbing
Code, as adopted by the city, and the state’s Department of Health regulations.
   (C)   Where it is desired to lay the water service pipe and the building
sewer pipe in the same trench, or in separate trenches less than ten feet
apart, the water service pipe shall be above the sewer pipe unless approved by
the City Engineer. It shall be placed at least one foot above the sewer and on
a solid shelf excavated at one side of the trench. The sewer pipe shall be of a
material that is in conformance with the state’s Plumbing Code and the state’s
Department of Health regulations with tested water-tight joints. The water
service pipe shall be water-tight and corrosion resistant. Copper pipe and cast
iron water pipe with specially protected joints is acceptable for this
construction. Cast iron pipe shall conform to the American Water Works
Association specifications for the pipe. Bell joint clamps with rubber gaskets
are provisionally acceptable as extra protection for the joints on cast iron
water pipe. In all cases, precautions shall be taken to assure a firm
foundation for the pipes. The intervening space between the pipes shall be
backfilled with compacted earth.
   (D)   In case the installation is on a surfaced street, the following shall
apply. All backfill materials shall be mechanically compacted in 12-inch layers
to the density of the adjacent material in the roadway area and to the existing
street grades in accordance with the state’s Department of Transportation
standards. Complete surface restoration shall be made.
(Prior Code, § 50.31) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.27 CONNECTION TO OTHER WATER SUPPLIES RESTRICTED.
   No water pipe of the water system shall be connected with any pump, well,
tank or piping that is connected with any other source of water supply, except
to service municipal systems.
(Prior Code, § 50.32) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.28 WATER CONNECTIONS; APPLICATIONS AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Connection applications.
      (1)   All applications for service installations and for water service
shall be made to the city’s Clerk-Administrator. All applications for service
installations and water service shall be made by the owner or agent of the
property to be served and shall state the size and location of service
connection required. The applicant shall, at the time of making application,
pay to the city the amount of fees or deposit required for the installation of
the service connection as hereinafter provided. Applications for services
larger than one inch shall be accompanied by two sets of plans or sketches
indicating preferred location of service pipe and size of service based on
building demand.
      (2)   The size of the water service connections and meter shall be
subject to approval of the City Engineer.
      (3)   Water billing shall start at the time of installation of the water
meter, or in the event the meter is not installed, seven days after completion
of outside piping, and shall be calculated upon the minimum monthly rate,
prorated on a semi-monthly basis.
   (B)   Connection charges.
      (1)   A permit must be obtained to connect to the existing water service
leads at the curb stop box. The fee for the permit shall be set pursuant to §
50.46 of this chapter. The city shall install or have installed all service
connections from the water main to the curb stop box including the stop box.
Payment for service connections must be made before the work is started and
should be based upon one and one-half times the estimate of costs provided by
the City Engineer. Any excess deposit shall be returned to the applicant.
      (2)   Additional charges shall be paid at the time of making application
for tapping and making connections with the water main to where a curb stop box
and service lead is not previously installed. The charge shall include the
tapping of the water main, corporation cocks, the installation of a service
line, the installation of a curb stop box, cost of restoring disturbed areas
and all other costs related to the installation.
      (3)   There shall be a connection charge pursuant to §
50.46 of this chapter levied by the city to contribute to the payment of the
costs of the public water system facilities. The City Council shall set, by
resolution, the charges to be made for non-residential installations.
      (4)   When water services have been stopped because of a violation of
this chapter, the city shall collect a fee before service is recommenced.
      (5)   If a person desires to connect to the system and service a parcel
that has not been assessed for the cost of water main and lateral construction,
then before a permit is granted, the city shall collect an amount from the
applicant that is determined by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 50.33) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.29 LOCATION OF CURB STOP BOX.
   Curb stop boxes will be installed on the right-of- way line or easement
limits at a location as determined by the City Engineer to be best suitable to
the property and shall be left in a vertical position when backfilling is
completed. Curb stop boxes will be installed at an approximate depth of seven
feet below the finished ground elevation and the top of the curb stop box shall
be adjusted to be flush with the finished ground elevation. Curb stop boxes
must be firmly supported by a masonry block. No person shall erect any fence or
plant any tree or other landscaping that would obstruct the use of the curb
stop box or cause damage to the same.
(Prior Code, § 50.34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.30 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Generally. Except for extinguishment of fires, no person, unless
otherwise authorized by the City Council or Public Utilities Department, shall
use water from the water system or permit water to be drawn therefrom unless
the same be metered by passing through a meter supplied or approved by the
city. No person not authorized by the City Council or Public Utilities
Department shall connect, disconnect, take apart or in any manner change or
cause to be changed or interfere with any meter or the action thereof, or break
any meter or valve seal.
      (1)   A charge established pursuant to §
50.46 of this chapter shall be paid by customers to the city for water meters
including installations and check valves and payment for same shall be made at
the time of water service application. This payment shall be made only once,
subject to the following: where a consumer has need for a larger line in
addition to his or her domestic line, as in the case of a commercial consumer
who needs a one-inch line for normal use and a six-inch or larger line for a
fire sprinkler system, he or she will be permitted to run one line into the
premises and “Y” off into two lines at the building. When this is done, the
meter will be attached to the small or domestic line and a check valve as well
as one-inch detection meter shall be put on the large line.
      (2)   The city shall maintain and repair all meters when rendered
unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and shall replace them if
necessary. When replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter is rendered by
the act, neglect (including damage from freezing or hot water backup) or
carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises, any expense caused the
city thereby shall be charged against and collected from the water consumer.
      (3)   A consumer may, by written request, have his or her meter tested by
depositing the amount established pursuant to §
50.46 of this chapter. In case a test should show an error of over 5% of the
water consumed, a correctly registering meter will be installed, and the bill
will be adjusted accordingly and the testing deposit refunded. The adjustment
shall not extend back more than one billing period from the date of the written
request.
      (4)   All water meters and remote readers shall be and remain the
property of the city.
      (5)   Authorized city employees shall have free access at reasonable
hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with the
water system for reading of meters and inspections.
      (6)   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to notify the city
to request a final reading at the time of the customer’s billing change.
   (B)   Water meter setting. All water meters hereafter installed shall be in
accordance with the following rules.
      (1)   The service pipe from the water main to the meter, when the same
enters the building, shall be brought through the floor or bottom course of
concrete block or foundation where depth permits.
      (2)   The meter shall be located so that the bottom is from 12 inches to
24 inches above the finished floor line.
      (3)   All meter installation shall have a gate valve on the street side
of the meter. A gate valve shall also be installed on the house side of the
meter. All fittings and pipe shall be red brass or bronze. Gate valves shall be
brass 125-pound standard. Ball valves may be used in lieu of gate valves on the
house side of the meter. A meter yoke shall be required on water meters one
inch or less in size.
(Prior Code, § 50.35) Penalty, see §
10.99
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.45 WATER UNIT.
   A water unit (hereinafter called “unit”) shall be one residential equivalent
connection based on usage of 100,000 gallons per year or portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 50.50)
§ 50.46 RATES, FEES AND CHARGES GENERALLY.
   The City Council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of all water rates,
fees and charges for permits or service hereinafter referenced in this chapter.
The resolution will be published once in the official newspaper of the city.
This resolution may be amended from time to time if operating costs indicate a
need.
(Prior Code, § 50.51)
§ 50.47 WATER SERVICE BILLING; CHANGE OF ADDRESS.
   (A)   All accounts shall be carried in the name of the property owner who
personally, or by his or her authorized agent, applied for such service. A
property owner shall be liable for all utility services supplied to the
property by the City, whether or not he or she occupies the property. Any
unpaid charges shall be a lien upon the property in the form of a special
assessment.
   (B)   All bills and notices shall be mailed to the property owner. For
rental properties, a copy of the bill can be mailed to the address where
service is provided at the property owner’s request. Any change or error in
address shall be promptly reported to the city’s Clerk-Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 50.52) (Ord. 03-2023, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 50.48 WATER RATES.
   (A)   The rate due and payable by each user within the city for water taken
from the water system shall be established pursuant to §
50.46 of this chapter.
   (B)   In case the meter is found to have stopped, or to be operating in a
faulty manner, the amount of water used will be estimated in accordance with
the amount used previously in comparable periods of the year.
   (C)   Rates due and payable by each water user located beyond the
territorial boundaries of the city shall be determined by special contract.
   (D)   The minimum rates established pursuant to §
50.46 of this chapter shall begin to accrue after connection of the service
pipe with the curb stop box.
   (E)   A meter shall be installed on the water valve in the house and a
remote register outside regardless of whether inside piping is connected.
   (F)   In the event a water customer elects to discontinue the use of the
municipal water, the regular or minimum charge shall continue until the date as
service is disconnected at the curb box.
(Prior Code, § 50.53) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.49 PAYMENT OF CHARGES; LATE PAYMENT; COLLECTION.
   (A)   Any prepayment or overpayment of charges may be retained by the city
and applied on subsequent monthly charges.
   (B)   If a monthly service charge is not paid when due, then a penalty of
20% shall be added thereto.
   (C)   In the event a user fails to pay his or her water user fee within a
reasonable time following discontinuance of service (a time period not to
exceed 90 days), the fee shall be certified by the City Clerk- Administrator
and assessed against the property on which the charges have incurred, and
forwarded to the County Auditor for collection.
(Prior Code, § 50.54) (Ord. 02-2017, passed 2-14-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 50.60 SUPERVISION BY BUILDING INSPECTOR AND PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT;
LICENSING.
   (A)   All piping connections from the curb stop box to house supply piping
shall be made under the supervision of a licensed plumber subject to inspection
by the city’s Building Inspector. The piping connection made to the curb stop
box on the house side shall be inspected by the Public Utilities Department.
The water meter installation shall be inspected, tested and the meter sealed by
the Public Utilities Department.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of
altering, repairing, installing or constructing municipal water connections
within the city without first obtaining a license to carry on the occupation
from the city.
      (1)   The applicant shall file with the city’s Clerk-Administrator
policies of public liability and property damage insurance which shall remain
in force and effect during the entire term of the license and which shall
contain a provision that they shall not be cancelled without ten days written
notice to the city. Public liability insurance shall not be less than $100,000
for injuries including accidental death to any one person and subject to the
same limit for each person in an amount of not less than $300,000 on account of
any one accident and property damage insurance in the amount of not less than
$50,000 for each accident and not less than $100,000 aggregated. No work shall
be done under this license until the insurance policies have been filed and
approved by the city.
      (2)   The applicant shall file with the city’s Clerk-Administrator a
surety bond guaranteeing the conformance and compliance of work with this
chapter. The bond shall be in the amount of $2,000. The city shall hold the
bond for one year following the license period. Failure to comply with
provisions and requirements of this chapter shall result in forfeiture of the
bond.
      (3)   Applications for licenses shall be filed with the city’s Clerk-
Administrator and shall be reviewed and subject to approval of the city.
      (4)   Any installation, construction, alteration of a water connection by
a license in violation of any provision of this chapter or refusal on the part
of a licensee to correct the defective work shall be cause for revocation of or
refusal to renew a license. The license may be revoked or refused for renewal
by the city at any time for cause which shall be documented in writing.
   (C)   All licenses required in this section shall be renewable annually.
Applications for the license shall be made annually on a form furnished by the
city’s Clerk-Administrator. The City Council may by resolution establish a fee
for this license. Licenses shall be in effect from January 1 to December 31 of
the same year.
   (D)   Before any license issued under the provisions of this section may be
revoked or its renewal refused, the licensee shall be given a hearing by the
City Council to show cause why the license should not be revoked or refused.
Notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be in writing.
(Prior Code, § 50.70)
§ 50.61 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
The Building Official, Public Utilities Department employees and other duly
authorized employees of the city, upon proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspections,
observation and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.71)
§ 50.62 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Generally. Water service may be shut off at any connection whenever:
      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served or any person working
on any pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the water system has
violated, or threatens to violate, any of the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Any charge for water, service, meter or any other financial
obligations imposed on the present or former owner or occupant served is
unpaid; and
      (3)   Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant of the premises
serviced in connection with an application for service.
   (B)   Disconnection for late payment.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of non-payment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect that:
         (a)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
         (b)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
non-payment; and
         (c)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing; at which time, he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for non- payment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge as established by City Council resolution.
(Prior Code, § 50.72)
§ 50.63 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES TO TURN WATER ON AND OFF.
   No person, except an authorized city agent or employee, shall turn on or off
any water supply at the curb stop box.
(Prior Code, § 50.73) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.64 LIABILITY FOR EXPENSE, LOSS OR DAMAGE.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by
reason of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 50.74)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Control of sewers; administration of chapter
   
51.003   Building sewers; general requirements
   
51.004   Tampering with wastewater facilities
   
51.005   Cost of repairing or restoring sewers
General Regulations
   
51.020   Deposits of unsanitary matter prohibited
   
51.021   Discharge of wastewater or other polluted waters
   
51.022   Restrictions on wastewater disposal facilities
   
51.023   Installation of service connection to public sewer
   
51.024   Failure to connect to a public sewer
Private Wastewater Disposal
   
51.035   Compliance with county’s Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems Ordinance
Building Sewers and Connections
   
51.050   Restrictions on new connections
   
51.051   Building sewer permits
   
51.052   Costs and expenses
   
51.053   Separate building sewers required
   
51.054   Old building sewers; restrictions on use
   
51.055   Conformance to State Building and Plumbing Code requirements
   
51.056   Elevation below basement floor
   
51.057   Surface runoff or ground water connections prohibited
   
51.058   Excavations
   
51.059   Licenses
Use of Public Services
   
51.070   Discharges of unpolluted water
   
51.071   Discharges of waters or wastes
   
51.072   Limited discharges
   
51.073   Discharges hazardous to life or constitute public nuisances
   
51.074   Increasing use of process water
   
51.075   Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities
   
51.076   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
51.077   Industrial wastes; installations
   
51.078   Industrial wastes; requirements
   
51.079   Measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes
   
51.080   Protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
   
51.081   Permitting substance or matter to flow or pass into public sewers
   
51.082   Repairing service connection
   
51.083   Catch basin or waste traps required for motor vehicle washing or
servicing facilities
   
51.084   Special agreement and arrangement
User Rate Schedule for Charges
   
51.095   Charges generally
   
51.096   Purpose
   
51.097   Definitions
   
51.098   Establishment of a sewer service charge system
   
51.099   Determination of sewer service charges
   
51.100   Sewer service fund
   
51.101   Administration
   
51.102   Disconnection for late payment
   
51.103   Equivalent dwelling units
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
   
51.115   Authorized employees permitted to enter all properties
   
51.116   Authorized employees obtaining information for industrial processes
   
51.117   Authorized employees to observe safety rules
   
51.118   Authorized employees permitted to enter all property with easements
 
   
51.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   AUTHORITY. Hinckley, Minnesota, or its representative thereof.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three
feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also referred to as a HOUSE CONNECTION or SERVICE
CONNECTION.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of Hinckley, as presently
established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a future time.
The term CITY, when used herein, may also be used to refer to the City Council
and its authorized representative.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SDS
permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat the pollutants to a
degree which complies with effluent concentration limits imposed by the permit.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specially constructed for the purpose of
measuring flow and sampling of wastes.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from industrial
or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development,
recovery and processing of natural resources, as distinct from residential or
domestic strength wastes.
   INDUSTRY. Any non-governmental or non- residential user of a publicly owned
treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A, B, D, E and I.
   INFILTRATION. Water entering the sewage system (including building drains
and pipes) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections and manhole walls.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including
building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar
drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins,
surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the city’s wastewater disposal
system processes or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a
violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES or SDS permit. The term
includes sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with published
regulations providing guidelines under § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or
any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C.
§§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.), the Toxic
Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.), or more stringent state
criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the city.
   MAY. The term is permissive.
   MPCA. Means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREAT- MENT STANDARDS. The federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-
owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not
susceptible to treatment by the treatment facilities or would interfere with
the operation of the treatment facilities, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317(b)).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally
discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to §§ 402 and 405
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342 and 33 U.S.C. § 1345).
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface
water or ground water.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or during which the only pollutant added
is heat.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater that is primarily introduced by
residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than 287 mg/l and a
suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 287 mg/l.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
terms of grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of waste- water from industrial sources prior to
the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source discharges and connections.
      (2)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.
      (3)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a
public authority.
      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public
authority.
      (7)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters
which are not admitted intentionally.
      (8)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry
storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street wash
water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.
   SHALL. The term is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment
facility which has a discharge flow in excess of 25,000 gallons per average
work day; has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the treatment facility;
whose waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to § 307(a) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a)); or whose discharge has a significant effect,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent
quality or emissions generated by the treatment system.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flows during normal operation, and shall adversely affect the collection or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07 for a disposal system as defined by M.S. § 115.01(8).
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Utilities Super- intendent or a deputy, agent or
representative thereof.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUS- PENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non- filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause
adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1317(a)).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city’s wastewater disposal system.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that
may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or
structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as
standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including land
which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate
disposal of residues resulting from the treatment.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
   WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Prior Code, § 51.001)
§ 51.002 CONTROL OF SEWERS; ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.
   The Utilities Superintendent, or other official designated by the City
Council, shall have control and general supervision of all public sewers and
service connections in the city, and shall be responsible for administering the
provisions of this chapter to the end that a proper and efficient public sewer
is maintained.
(Prior Code, § 51.002)
§ 51.003 BUILDING SEWERS; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Building sewer construction shall meet the requirements of the Minnesota
State Building Code, including the plumbing code incorporated therein. The
applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the Building Inspector when
the building sewer and connection is ready for inspection. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the Building Inspector or the Building
Inspector’s representative. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected and approved.
(Prior Code, § 51.003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.004 TAMPERING WITH WASTEWATER FACILITIES.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 51.004) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.005 COST OF REPAIRING OR RESTORING SEWERS.
   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of
repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of
the discharge of prohibited wastes by the person, and may collect the
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in
any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.005)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 51.020 DEPOSITS OF UNSANITARY MATTER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the city’s jurisdiction, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
(Prior Code, § 51.015) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER OR OTHER POLLUTED WATERS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the city’s NPDES/SDS
permit.
(Prior Code, § 51.016) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.022 RESTRICTIONS ON WASTEWATER DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
(Prior Code, § 51.017) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.023 INSTALLATION OF SERVICE CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes from which wastewater is discharged,
and which is situated within the city and adjacent to any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a
public sanitary sewer of the city shall be required at the owner’s expense to
install a suitable service connection to the public sewer in accordance with
provisions of this code within 365 days of the date the public sewer is
operational; provided, the public sewer is within 200 feet of the structure
generating the wastewater. All future buildings constructed on property
adjacent to the public sewer shall be required to immediately connect to the
public sewer. If sewer connections are not made pursuant to this section, an
official ten-day notice shall be served instructing the affected property owner
to make the connection.
(Prior Code, § 51.018) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.024 FAILURE TO CONNECT TO A PUBLIC SEWER.
   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in compliance
with a notice given under §
51.023 of this chapter, the city must undertake to have the connection made and
shall assess the cost thereof against the benefitted property. The assessment,
when levied, shall bear interest at the rate determined by the City Council and
shall be certified to the County Auditor and shall be collected and remitted to
the city in the same manner as assessments for local improvements. The rights
of the city shall be in addition to any remedial or enforcement provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.019) Penalty, see §
51.999
PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
§ 51.035 COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY’S SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS
ORDINANCE.
   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of §
51.023 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewer complying with the provisions of the county’s Subsurface Sewage Treatment
Systems Ordinance.
(Ord. 02-2015, passed 3-10-2015)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 51.050 RESTRICTIONS ON NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any new connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless
sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities, including, but
not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD5 and suspended solids, as determined by
the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 51.055) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.051 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   (A)   Required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (B)   Applications. Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or
authorized agent and the party employed to do the work, and shall state the
location, name of owner, street number of the building to be connected and how
occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits
of the building or property for which the service connection permit has been
given.
   (C)   Classes. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one for
residential and commercial service and one for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or any other information considered
pertinent in the judgement of the city. The industry, as a condition of permit
authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity.
   (D)   Inspection and connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit
shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection and inspection shall be made
under the supervision of the Superintendent or authorized representative
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 51.056) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.052 COSTS AND EXPENSES.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 51.057) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.053 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWERS REQUIRED.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered one building sewer. The city does not and will not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any
connection.
(Prior Code, § 51.058) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.054 OLD BUILDING SEWERS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent or his or her
representative, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.059)
§ 51.055 CONFORMANCE TO STATE BUILDING AND PLUMBING CODE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of building
sewers and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the state’s Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in the
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (B)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the state’s Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9.
All connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight and verified by proper
testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior to
installation.
(Prior Code, § 51.060) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.056 ELEVATION BELOW BASEMENT FLOOR.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 51.061) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.057 SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUND WATER CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building
sewer or indirectly to the wastewater disposal system.
(Prior Code, § 51.062) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.058 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.063) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.059 LICENSES.
   (A)   Required. No person shall make a service connection with any public
sewer unless regularly licensed under this chapter to perform the work, and no
permit shall be granted to any person, except the regularly licensed person.
   (B)   Application. Any person desiring a license to make a service
connection with public sewers shall apply in writing to the City Council with
satisfactory evidence that the applicant or employer is trained or skilled in
the business and qualified to receive a license. All applications shall be
referred to the Superintendent for recommendations to the Council. If approved
by the Council, the license shall be issued by the city’s Clerk-Administrator
upon the filing of a bond as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   Issuance. No license shall be issued to any person until a $500 bond
to the city, approved by the Council, is filed with the city’s Clerk-
Administrator conditioned that the licensee will indemnify and save harmless
the city from all suits, accidents and damage that may arise by reason of any
opening in any street, alley or public ground made by the licensee or by those
in the licensee’s employment for any purpose whatever, and that the licensee
will replace and restore the street and alley over the opening to the condition
existing prior to installation, adequately guard with barricades and lights,
and will keep and maintain the same to the satisfaction of the Superintendent,
and shall conform in all respects to the rules and regulations of the Council
relative thereto, and pay all fines that may be imposed on the licensee by law.
   (D)   Fee. The license fee for making service connections is $10. All
licenses shall expire on December 31 of the license year unless the license is
suspended or revoked by the Council for cause.
   (E)   Suspension or revocation. The Council may suspend or revoke any
license issued under this subchapter for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Giving false information in connection with the application for a
license;
      (2)   Incompetence of the licensee; and
      (3)   Willful violation of any provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation pertaining to the making of service connections.
(Prior Code, § 51.064) Penalty, see §
51.999
USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES
§ 51.070 DISCHARGES OF UNPOLLUTED WATER.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or caused to be discharged any water such as
storm water, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage or non-contact cooling
water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
the sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet
on approval of the city and upon approval and the issuance of a discharge
permit by the MPCA.
(Prior Code, § 51.080) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.071 DISCHARGES OF WATERS OR WASTES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;
   (B)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater
than one-half-inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating
oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
   (C)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal system; and
   (D)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal
system. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a)).
(Prior Code, § 51.081) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.072 LIMITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   The following described substances, materials, water or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works, treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
and soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise endanger lives,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent may set
limitations lower than limitations established in the regulations below if, in
his or her opinion, the more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above
objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of wastes,
the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of
subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, the city’s
NPDES/SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent
factors.
   (B)   The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the Superintendent are as follows:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C), or
causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or
having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater
treatment works resulting in interference therein;
      (2)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65.6°C); and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral
origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;
      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a
“slug”, as defined in §
51.001 of this chapter;
      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined in §
51.001 of this chapter. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation
of food on the premises or when served by caterers;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions;
      (7)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage or ground
water;
      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended- solids such as, but not
limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved
solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate, in such
quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal system;
      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing the following substances to a
degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the
wastewater treatment works is detrimental to treatment process, adversely
impacts land application, adversely effects receiving waters, or is in
violation of standards pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)):
arsenic; cadmium; copper; cyanide; lead; mercury; nickel; silver; total
chromium; zinc; and phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the city’s
wastewater treatment system;
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates con- ditions at or near the
wastewater disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or
ordinance of any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body; and/or
      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of a
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
the materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific written agreement subject to the provisions of §
51.084 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.082)
§ 51.073 DISCHARGES HAZARDOUS TO LIFE OR CONSTITUTE PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §
51.072 of this chapter, or which, in the judgement of the Superintendent, may
have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities, processes
or equipment, receiving waters or soil, vegetation and ground water, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city
may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)) and
all amendments thereof;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating and
disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
   (B)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design, installation and maintenance of the facilities and equipment shall
be made at the owner’s expense and shall be subject to the review and approval
of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
(Prior Code, § 51.083)
§ 51.074 INCREASING USE OF PROCESS WATER.
   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in §§
51.071 and
51.072 of this chapter, or contained in the national categorical pretreatment
standards or any state requirements.
(Prior Code, § 51.084) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.075 PRETREATMENT OR FLOW- EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation at the expense of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 51.085)
§ 51.076 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in §
51.072(B)(2) of this chapter, any flammable wastes as specified in §
51.071(A) of this chapter, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that, the
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of the type to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a
record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials not
performed by the owner’s personnel must be performed by a currently licensed
waste disposal firm.
(Prior Code, § 51.086) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.077 INDUSTRIAL WASTES; INSTALLATIONS.
   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, or control
manhole, with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. The
structure shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by
the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by the owner to be safe
and accessible at all times.
(Prior Code, § 51.087) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.078 INDUSTRIAL WASTES; REQUIREMENTS.
   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide laboratory
measurements, tests or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate compliance
with this chapter and any special condition for discharge established by the
city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number,
type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that
compliance with federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner
shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at
such times and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear
the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city.
At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take
measurements and supplies for analysis by an independent laboratory.
(Prior Code, § 51.088) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.079 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES OF WATERS AND WASTES.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 51.089) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.080 PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a sanitary
sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where necessary,
facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Superintendent for review and approval prior to construction
of the facility. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures
shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the user’s
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. Users shall
notify the Superintendent immediately upon having a slug or accidental
discharge of substances of wastewater in violation of this chapter to enable
countermeasures to be taken by the Superintendent to minimize damage to the
wastewater treatment works. The notification will not relieve any user of any
liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment system or
treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof
under any state and federal law. Employers shall insure that all employees who
may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
(Prior Code, § 51.090) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.081 PERMITTING SUBSTANCE OR MATTER TO FLOW OR PASS INTO PUBLIC SEWERS.
   No person having charge of any building or other premises which drains into
the public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit
or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within 30 days after
receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall install a suitable and
sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists, shall clean
out, repair or alter the same, and perform the other work as the Superintendent
may deem necessary. Upon the owner’s refusal or neglect to install a catch
basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair or alter the same after the period
of 30 days, the Superintendent may cause the work to be completed at the
expense of the owner or representative thereof.
(Prior Code, § 51.091) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.082 REPAIRING SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (A)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the
purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause the work to be done as the
Superintendent may direct.
   (B)   Each day after 30 days that a person neglects or fails to so act shall
constitute a separate violation of this section, and the Superintendent may
then cause the work to be done, and recover from the owner or agent the expense
thereof by an action in the name of the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.092) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.083 CATCH BASIN OR WASTE TRAPS REQUIRED FOR MOTOR VEHICLE WASHING OR
SERVICING FACILITIES.
   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing facility
shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times a catch basin
or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil, dirt or any
mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 51.093) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.084 SPECIAL AGREEMENT AND ARRANGEMENT.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern; provided that, national categorical pretreatment standards
and the city’s NPDES/SDS permit limitations are not violated.
(Prior Code, § 51.094)
USER RATE SCHEDULE FOR CHARGES
§ 51.095 CHARGES GENERALLY.
   Each user of sewer service shall pay the charges applicable to the type of
service and in accordance with the provisions set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.110)
§ 51.096 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the subchapter is to provide for sewer service charges to
recover costs associated with operation, maintenance and replacement to ensure
effective functioning of the city’s wastewater treatment system, and local
capital costs incurred in the construction of the city’s wastewater treatment
system.
(Prior Code, § 51.111)
§ 51.097 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATION. Those fixed costs attributable to administration of the
wastewater treatment works such as billing and associated bookkeeping and
accounting costs.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Hinckley, as
presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time. When used herein, the term CITY may also refer to the City Council
or its authorized representative.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any place of business which discharges sanitary waste as
distinct from industrial wastewater.
   COMMERCIAL WASTEWATERS. Domestic wastewater emanating from a place of
business as distinct from industrial wastewater.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of wastewater treatment
facilities for the cost of repaying money bonded to construct the facilities.
   EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU). A unit of wastewater volume of 200 gallons
per day at a strength not greater than 287 mg/l of BOD5 and 287 mg/l of total
suspended solids.
   EXTRA STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater having a BOD5 or TSS greater than domestic
waste as defined in “normal domestic strength wastewater” and not otherwise
classified as an incompatible waste.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Users which are units, agencies or instrumentalities of
federal, state or local government discharging “normal domestic strength
wastewater”.
   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE. Waste that either singly or by interaction with other
wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to
humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS or INDUSTRIES.
      (1)   (a)   Entitles that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater
treatment works liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in
industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development of any natural
resources. These are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, latest edition, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemental under one of the following divisions:
            1.   Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
            2.   Division B, Mining;
            3.   Division D, Manufacturing;
            4.   Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Sewers; and
            5.   Division I, Services.
         (b)   For the purpose of this definition, domestic waste shall be
considered to have the following characteristics:
            1.   BOD5: less than 287 mg/l; and
            2.   Suspended solids: less than 287 mg/l.
      (2)   Any non-governmental user of a publicly-owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other wastes to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or
creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. The liquid processing wastes from an industrial
manufacturing process, trade or business including, but not limited to, all
Standard Industrial Classification Manual Divisions A, B, D, E and I
manufacturers as distinct from domestic wastewater.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Users other than commercial, governmental, industrial or
residential users, discharging primarily normal domestic strength wastewater
(for example, non-profit organizations).
   MAY. The term is permissive.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE- WATER. Wastewater that is primarily produced
by residential users, with BOD5 concentrations not greater than 287 mg/l and
suspended solids concentrations not greater than 287 mg/l.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required to provide for the dependable
and economical functioning of the treatment works, throughout the design or
useful life, whichever is longer of the treatment works, and at the level of
performance for which the treatment works were constructed. The term includes
replacement.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Expenditures for operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
   PUBLIC WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. A system of sanitary sewers owned,
main- tained, operated and controlled by the city.
   REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories or
appurtenances which are necessary during the design life or useful life,
whichever is longer, of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which the works were designed and constructed.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment facilities whose premises or
building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including
dwelling units such as detached and semi-detached housing, apartments and
mobile homes, and which discharges primarily normal domestic strength sanitary
wastes.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface
waters which are not admitted intentionally.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The aggregate of all charges, including charges for
operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service and other sewer related
charges that are billed periodically to users of the city’s wastewater
treatment facilities.
   SEWER SERVICE FUND. A fund into which income from sewer service charges is
deposited along with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt
incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment. Expenditure of
the SEWER SERVICE FUND will be for operation, maintenance and replacement costs
and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater
treatment.
   SHALL. The term is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection
system or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL. The Standard Industrial
Classifica-tion Manual published by the Office of Management and Budget, latest
edition.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface or is in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non- filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317(a)), which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism,
will cause adverse effects.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on a user of a treatment works for the user’s
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including
replacement.
   USERS. Those residential, commercial, governmental, institutional and
industrial establishments which are connected to the public sewer collection
system.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a commun- ity, also referred to as sewage.
From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that
may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater or
structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as
standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including land
which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate
disposal of residues resulting from the treatment.
(Prior Code, § 51.112)
§ 51.098 ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a sewer service charge system whereby all
revenue collected from users of the wastewater treatment facilities will be
used to affect all expenditures incurred for annual operation, maintenance and
replacement and for debt service on capital expenditure incurred in
constructing the wastewater treatment works.
   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation, maintenance
and replacement costs of the treatment works, based on the users proportionate
contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users.
   (C)   Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital costs
as determined by the City Council.
   (D)   Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment
facility shall be determined and fixed in a sewer service charge system
developed according to the provisions of this subchapter. The sewer service
charge system shall be adopted by resolution upon enactment of this subchapter,
shall be published in the local newspaper, and shall be effective upon
publication. Subsequent changes in sewer service rates and charges shall be
adopted by Council resolution and shall be published in the local newspaper.
   (E)   Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a separate
fund known as the Sewer Service Fund. Income from revenues collected will be
expended to off-set the cost of operation, maintenance and equipment
replacement for the facility and to retire the debt for capital expenditure.
   (F)   Sewer service charges and the sewer service fund will be administrated
in accordance with the provisions of §
51.101 of this chapter.
   (G)   A connection fee as fixed in the sewer service charge system shall be
charged to each user connecting a new service to the sanitary sewer system. The
connection fee shall be due and payable within 90 days of the date the
connection is completed.
(Prior Code, § 51.113) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.099 DETERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Users of the city wastewater treatment works shall be identified as
belonging to one of the following user classes: residential; commercial;
industrial; institutional; or governmental. The allocation of users to these
categories for the purpose of assessing user charges and debt service charges
shall be the responsibility of the city’s Clerk-Administrator. Allocation of
users to user classes shall be based on the substantive intent of the
definitions of these classes contained herein.
   (B)   The charges assessed residential users and those users of other
classes who discharge normal domestic strength wastewater shall be calculated
on the basis of wastewater volume. Those industrial users who discharge normal
domestic strength wastewater only can be classified as commercial users for the
purpose of rate determination.
   (C)   The sewer service charge shall consist of a user charge for operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, a debt service charge for recovery of local
capital costs and an administration fee for recovery of administrative related
costs.
   (D)   The charges assessed residential users and those users of other
classes discharging normal domestic strength wastewater shall be established
proportionately according to billable wastewater volume. Billable wastewater
volume shall be calculated as follows.
      (1)   Residential users. Billable wastewater volume for residential users
shall be calculated on the basis of metered water usage. The per quarter
billable wastewater volume shall be equal to quarterly metered water usage as
averaged between the first and last quarters of the calendar year. The city may
require residential users to install water meters for the purpose of
determining billable wastewater volume.
      (2)   Non-residential users. The billable wastewater volume of non-
residential users may be determined in the same manner as for residential
users; except that, if the city determines that there are significant seasonal
variations in the metered water usage of non-residential users resulting in a
proportionate increase or decrease in wastewater volume, then billable
wastewater volume shall be calculated on the basis of quarterly metered water
usage as recorded throughout the year, or calculated on the basis of wastewater
flow meters. The city may, at its discretion, require non-residential users to
install such additional water meters or wastewater flow meters as may be
necessary to determine billable wastewater volume.
      (3)   Non-metered users. For those users who discharge normal domestic
strength wastewater, as defined in this subchapter, and who do not have
existing water meters, wastewater volume will be calculated on the basis of
equivalent dwelling units (EDUs). An equivalent dwelling unit at a volume of
200 gallons per day will be assigned to connections according to §
51.103 of this chapter. Determination of the number of EDUs assigned to a
particular connection, in accordance with §
51.103 of this chapter, shall be the responsibility of the City Council or its
authorized representative. Users may appeal the number of EDUs assigned to a
particular connection by installing and maintaining, at their own expense,
water meters of a type approved by the city. The meters shall be equipped with
remote registering recorders and located at an accessible site on the owner’s
property.
   (E)   Determination of sewer service charges.
      (1)   Generally. The sewer service charge shall consist of an
administration fee for the recovery of administration costs. A user charge for
operation, maintenance and replacement and a debt service charge for the
recovery of local capital costs. These charges shall be determined as follows.
      (2)   Administration fee. The administration fee for each connection to
the wastewater treatment facility shall be determined as follows: calculation
of fixed quarterly fee for administration services:
         AF = AC / (TC × Q)
   Where:
      AF = Administration fee per connection
      AC = Annual administration budget
      TC = Total number of connections to the system
      Q = Number of quarters per year
      (3)   User charge. User charges for normal domestic strength users shall
be determined as follows:
         (a)   Calculation of unit cost for treatment of domestic strength
wastewater.
         UOMR = COMR-A / TBWV
   Where:
      UOMR = Unit cost for OM&R in $/Kgallon
      COMR-A = Total annual OM&R less administration costs
      TBWV = Total annual billable wastewater volume in Kgallon
         (b)   Calculation of user charge.
         UC = UOMR × BWV
   Where:
      UC = User charge
    UOMR = Unit cost for OM&R in $/Kgallon
    BWV = Billable wastewater volume of a particular user in Kgallon
      (4)   Debt service charge. Recovery of local capital costs of the
wastewater treatment facility shall be through a debt service charge calculated
in a manner consistent with the user charge as follows:
         (a)   Calculation of unit cost for debt service.
         UDS = CDS / TBWV
   Where:
    UDS = Unit cost for debt service in $/Kgallon
    CDS = Costs of annual debt service
    TBWV = Total annual billable wastewater volume in Kgallon
         (b)   Calculation of debt service charge.
         DC = UDS × BWV
   Where:
      DC = Debt service charge
    UDS = Unit cost for debt service in $/Kgallon
    BWV = Billable wastewater volume of a particular user in Kgallon
      (5)   Determination of sewer service charge. The sewer service charge for
a particular connection shall be determined as follows:
         SSC = UC + DC + AF
   Where:
      SSC = Sewer service charge
       UC = User charge
       DC = Debt service charge
       AF = Administration fee
   (F)   The sewer service charges established in this subchapter shall not
prevent the assessment of additional charges to users who discharge wastes with
concentrations greater than normal domestic strength or wastes of unusual
character, or contractual agreements with the users, as long as the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The user pays operation, maintenance and replacement costs in
proportion to the user’s proportionate contribution of wastewater flows and
loadings to the treatment plant, and no user is charged at a rate less than
that of normal domestic strength wastewater; and
      (2)   The measurements of the wastes are conducted according to the
latest edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater in a manner acceptable to the city as provided for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.114) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.100 SEWER SERVICE FUND.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a Sewer Service Fund as an income fund to
receive all revenues generated by the sewer service charge system, and all
other income dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement and
construction of the wastewater treatment works, including taxes, special
charges, fees and assessments intended to retire construction debt. The city
also establishes the following accounts as income and expenditure accounts
within the Sewer Service Fund:
      (1)   Operation and Maintenance Account;
      (2)   Equipment Replacement Account; and
      (3)   Debt Retirement Account.
   (B)   All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and all
other income pertinent to the treatment system, including taxes and special
assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by the city’s
Clerk-Administrator separate and apart from all other funds of the city. Funds
received by the sewer service fund shall be transferred to the Operation and
Maintenance Account, the Equipment Replacement Account and the Debt Retirement
Account in accordance with state and federal regulations and the provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient to
ensure adequate replacement throughout the design life or useful life,
whichever is longer, of the wastewater facility shall be held separate and
apart in the Equipment Replacement Account and dedicated to affecting
replacement costs. Interest income generated by the Equipment Replacement
Account shall remain in the Equipment Replacement Account.
   (D)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient for
operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in the Operation and
Maintenance Account.
(Prior Code, § 51.115)
§ 51.101 ADMINISTRATION.
   The sewer service charge system and Sewer Service Fund shall be
administrated according to the following provisions.
   (A)   The city’s Clerk-Administrator shall maintain a proper system of
accounts suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment
replacement and debt retirement costs of the treatment works, and shall furnish
the City Council with a report of the costs annually in December. The City
Council shall annually determine whether or not sufficient revenue is being
generated for the effective operation, maintenance, replacement and management
of the treatment works, and whether sufficient revenue is being generated for
debt retirement. The Council will also determine whether the user charges are
distributed proportionately to each user in accordance with §
51.098(B) of this chapter and § 204(b)(2)(A) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1284
(b)(2)(A), as amended. The city shall thereafter, but not later than the end of
the year, reassess and as necessary revise the sewer service charge system then
in use to ensure the proportionality of the user charges and to ensure the
sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity and performance to which the
facilities were constructed and to retire the construction debt.
   (B)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, each user will be
notified annually in conjunction with a regular billing of that portion of the
sewer service charge attributable to operation, maintenance and replacement.
   (C)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, the city’s Clerk-
Administrator shall be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to
document compliance with the sewer service charge system adopted.
   (D)   Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a monthly basis
succeeding the period for which the service was rendered. Sewer billing shall
follow the same water billing procedures established in §
50.49. Disconnection of services for late payment shall follow the procedures
established in §
51.102 of this chapter.
   (E)   All accounts shall be carried in the name of the property owner who
personally, or by his or her authorized agent, applied for such service. A
property owner shall be liable for all utility services supplied to the
property by the City, whether or not he or she occupies the property. Any
unpaid charges shall be a lien upon the property in the form of a special
assessment. All bills and notices shall be mailed to the property owner. For
rental properties, a copy of the bill can be mailed to the address where
service is provided at the property owner’s request.
   (F)   Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment works of
toxics or other incompatible wastes, including the cost of restoring wastewater
treatment services, clean up and restoration of the receiving waters and
environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the discharger of the wastes,
at no expense to the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.116) (Ord. 03-2023, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 51.102 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of non-payment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the
title, address, room number and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
      (2)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will
be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten
days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for non-
payment; and
      (3)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing, at which time he or she may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for non-payment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge as
established by City Council resolution.
(Prior Code, § 51.117)
§ 51.103 EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNITS.
   The following tables shall be used as a guide for determining the number of
EDU’s for various user classes.
 
Table I: Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDUs) for Various Residential Dwellings
Condominiums and apartment units                 0.8 unit
Mobile homes                                     0.8 unit
Single-family homes, townhouses and duplex units 1.0 unit
 
Table II: Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDUs) for Various Commercial, Public and
Institutional Facilities
Facility Description Parameter Units
Table II: Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDUs) for Various Commercial, Public and
Institutional Facilities
Facility Description           Parameter          Units
Automobile service             2 service bays     1.0
Banquet
   food catered             2,060 square feet  1.0
   catered/dishwashing      1,180 square feet  1.0
   food preparation without 825                1.0
dishwashing
   food preparation with    590                1.0
dishwashing
Barber shop                    Each               1.0
Boarding house                 5 beds             1.0
Bowling alley                  2 alleys           1.0
Car wash - self service        1 stall            3.0
Car wash - service station     1 stall            3.0
Car wash - special             Requires specification on equipment flow rate
                               and cycle time
Churches                       275 seats          1.0
Cocktail lounge                23 seats           1.0
Fast-service restaurant (min.  22 seats           1.0
d/w)
General office building        2,400 square feet  1.0
Hand ball and racquet courts   1 court            1.0
Hospitals                      1 bed              1.0
Laundromats                    4 washing machines 1.0
Motels and hotels              2 rooms            1.0
Nursing home                   3 beds             1.0
Restaurant, drive-in           9 parking spaces   1.0
   18 - 24 hour             6 seats            1.0
   12 - 18 hour             8 seats            1.0
   0 - 12 hour              13 seats           1.0
   with cocktail lounge     10 seats           1.0
Retail store                   3,000 square feet  1.0
Rooming house                  7 beds             1.0
Schools (elementary)           18 students        1.0
Schools (secondary)            14 students        1.0
Schools (Sunday schools)       55 students        1.0
Service station (gas only)     Each               1.0
Service station (with service  Each               2.0
center)
Service station (with service  Each               8.0
center and car wash)
Swimming pool                  900 square feet    1.0
Tennis courts                  1 court            2.0
Theater                        64 seats           1.0
Theater, drive-in              55 parking spaces  1.0
Warehouse                      15 employees       1.0
NOTES TO TABLE:
—The areas listed in the parameters include all interior areas utilized by the
public and the employees for the conduct of the facility.
—Any facility not included on the above list will receive a connection charge
determined on a case-by-case basis by the Administrator.
 
(Prior Code, § 51.118)
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 51.115 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO ENTER ALL PROPERTIES.
   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observations, measurement, sampling
and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city’s sewer system in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.130)
§ 51.116 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES OBTAINING INFORMATION FOR INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES.
   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing
on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. An
industry may withhold information considered confidential; however, the
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in
question might result in an advantage to competitors.
(Prior Code, § 51.131)
§ 51.117 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES TO OBSERVE SAFETY RULES.
   While performing necessary work on private properties, the Superintendent or
duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required in §
51.077 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.132)
§ 51.118 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO ENTER ALL PROPERTY WITH EASEMENTS.
   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within
the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 51.133)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter,
except §§
51.095 through
51.103 of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A) above shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day in which any such violation occurs
shall be deemed as a separate offense.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except
§§
51.095 through
51.103 of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of the violation.
   (B)   (1)   Each and every sewer service charge levied by and pursuant to §§
51.095 through
51.103 of this chapter is made a lien upon the lot or premises served, and all
such charges which are on October 1 of each year past due and delinquent shall
be certified to the County Auditor as taxes or assessments on the real estate.
Nothing in §§
51.095 through
51.103 of this chapter shall be held or construed as in any way stopping or
interfering with the right of the city to levy as taxes or assessments against
any premises affected any delinquent or past due sewer service charges.
      (2)   As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at its
discretion, file suit in a civil action to collect the amounts as are
delinquent and due against the occupant, owner or user of the real estate, and
shall collect as well all attorney’s fees incurred by the city in filing the
civil action. The attorney’s fees shall be fixed by order of the court.
      (3)   In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and chargeable
to recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the owner or user of
the real estate being serviced by the treatment works shall be liable for
interest upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 9% per annum.
(Prior Code, § 51.999)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
70.01   State highway traffic regulations adopted by reference
   
70.02   Unnecessary exhibition of speed
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Highway Traffic Regulations Act is hereby adopted by reference.
The regulatory provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to
time, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the use of highways,
streets and alleys within the city and are hereby incorporated in and made a
part of this section as completely as if set out in full herein.
   (B)   Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in division (A)
above is a violation of this section, and such violator shall be guilty of such
an offense and shall be punished by such penalty as is prescribed by such
statutes.
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 UNNECESSARY EXHIBITION OF SPEED.
   No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an unnecessary
exhibition of speed on any public or private way within the city limits. Prima
facie evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be unreasonable
squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the throwing of sand and
gravel by the tires of the vehicle, or both.
(Prior Code, § 70.02) (Ord. 536, passed 4-7-1981) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be
penalized as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of §
70.02 of this chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up
to $200.
(Prior Code, § 70.99) (Ord. 536, passed 4-7-1981)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   General rules
   
71.02   Prohibited parking
   
71.03   Other parking restrictions
   
71.04   Residential areas
   
71.05   Towing of vehicles
   
71.06   Parking; handicapped; prohibition
§ 71.01 GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   Parallel to curb. Vehicles must be parked or stopped parallel with the
edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, with the curb-side
wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, and not
closer than four feet to another vehicle parked at the curb.
   (B)   Where no curb. On streets and highways not having a curb, a vehicle
stopped or parked must be stopped or parked parallel with and to the right of
the paved or improved or main traveled part of the street or highway.
   (C)   Angle parking. On those streets that have been marked or signed for
angle parking, vehicles must be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by
the marks or signs.
   (D)   Boulevard defined. For the purposes of this code, the term BOULEVARD
means the area between the adjacent property line and the portion of a roadway
improved for public traffic.
(Ord. 05-2021, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 01-2022, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 71.02 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   Specified places. A vehicle may not be parked, whether attended or
unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in
any of the places specified in this division.
      (1)   On a sidewalk or boulevard.
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway or alley or within five
feet of the intersection of any public or private driveway or alley with any
street or highway.
      (3)   Within an intersection.
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant, mailbox or mail receptacle.
      (5)   On a crosswalk.
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach of any flashing school signal,
stop sign, traffic control signal, or school sign at the side of a roadway.
      (8)   Within a designated or marked bus stop.
      (9)   Within a 50-foot distance of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite to the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of the entrance when properly sign-posted.
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (12)   Upon a bridge or approach or other elevated structure upon a
street or highway or within a street or highway tunnel, except as otherwise
provided by this code.
      (13)   At a place where there are placed temporary signs prohibiting
parking.
      (14)   Within an area designated no parking and appropriately marked
pursuant to City Council resolution.
   (B)   Parking prohibited; methods. It is unlawful to park a vehicle:
      (1)   So as to block a fire escape or the exit from any building;
      (2)   Contrary to an order to proceed by a peace officer directing,
controlling or regulating traffic.
   (C)   Other acts prohibited. It is unlawful to move a vehicle not owned by
that person into a prohibited parking area or away from the curb to an unlawful
distance.
(Ord. 05-2021, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 01-2022, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 71.03 OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Cars for sale. It is unlawful to place a vehicle on a highway to
display the vehicle for sale or exchange. A vehicle is deemed to be displayed
in violation of this division when it is found standing upon a street or
highway, and bearing a sign indicating that it is for sale or exchange.
   (B)   Disabled vehicles.
      (1)   Passenger or recreational vehicles, trucks, or boats in an
inoperative state may not be parked in residential districts for a period
exceeding seven days. INOPERATIVE means incapable of movement under its own
power and in need of repairs.
      (2)   The provisions of this division relating to stopping, standing and
parking do not apply to the driver of a vehicle that is disabled for a
reasonable time while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a
street or highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to
avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (C)   No parking zones. It is unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle,
except as otherwise provided in this code or unless directed to do so by a
police officer, on a street or highway where the City Council has established a
no parking zone and the zone is marked by sign or yellow curb.
   (D)   Off street parking. It is unlawful to park a vehicle on a city street
in an industrial, commercial or multiple or single dwelling area where off-
street parking areas or truck standing spaces are provided. Vehicles must use a
designated area for parking, loading or unloading.
   (E)   City parks. It is unlawful to park a vehicle in a city park other than
in a designated parking area or campsite.
   (F)   Angle parking. Angle parking is prohibited on public streets or alleys
within the city, except where angle parking has been marked or signed for.
   (G)   Winter parking. 
      (a)   No person shall park any motor vehicle on any city street or
alleyway beginning at midnight until snow has been plowed from the street or
alleyway from November 1 through April 15.
      (b)   No person shall park any motor vehicle on a city street or alleyway
overnight from midnight to 6:00 a.m., from November 1 through April 15 in the
Central Business District (defined as Main Street, 1st Street NE, and 1st
Street SE between Lawler Avenue and County Highway 61).
   (H)   City parking lot. It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle overnight in
a city owned parking lot unless otherwise granted permission by City Hall. This
provision does not include Firehouse Liquors.
   (I)   Consecutive hours. No vehicle may remain in one location on any city
street for more than 72 consecutive hours.
   (J)   Double parking. It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle next to a
vehicle that is already parked on the side of the road.
(Ord. 05-2021, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 01-2022, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 04-2022,
passed 8-16-2022)
§ 71.04 RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   Definition. The term COMMERCIAL VEHICLE OR EQUIPMENT means and
includes trailers and commercial vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess
of 15,000 pounds, dump trucks, truck tractors, travel trailers, trailers, semi-
trailers and heavy equipment.
        (1)   RESIDENTIAL AREA means any area in the city located in an R-1, R-
2 or R-3 zoning district.
      (2)   GOVERNMENTAL VEHICLE means a vehicle owned or controlled by the
federal government, the state or a political subdivision of the state.
   (B)   General rule. It is unlawful for a person to park a commercial vehicle
or equipment on a public street or alley in a residential area of the city,
except for the purpose of loading and unloading. This division does not apply
to governmental vehicles engaged in government business.
   (C)   A vehicle parked in violation of this section may be impounded by a
duly authorized employee of the city, and will be returned to the owner only
after payment of the impoundment fees established by council resolution. The
impoundment of a commercial vehicle or equipment under this section does not
preclude the prosecution of the owner of the vehicle or equipment for violation
of this section.
(Ord. 05-2021, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 01-2022, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 71.05 TOWING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   A vehicle parked in violation of this section may be ordered removed
from a public street or alley by a peace officer or authorized city official. A
vehicle may be towed if:
      (1)   The vehicle is parked in violation of winter parking regulations;
      (2)   The vehicle is blocking a driveway, alley, mailbox, mail receptacle
or fire hydrant;
      (3)   The vehicle is parked in a bus lane, or at a bus stop, during hours
when parking is prohibited;
      (4)   The vehicle is parked within 30 feet of a stop sign and visually
blocking the stop sign;
      (5)   The vehicle is parked in a disability transfer zone or disability
parking space without a disability parking certificate or disability license
plates;
      (6)   The vehicle is parked in an area that has been posted for temporary
restricted parking at least 12 hours in advance;
      (7)   The vehicle is parked within the right-of-way of a controlled
access highway or within the traveled portion of a public street when travel is
allowed there;
      (8)   The vehicle is unlawfully parked in a zone that is restricted by
posted signs to use by fire, police, public safety or emergency vehicles;
      (9)   A law enforcement official has probable cause to believe that the
vehicle is stolen, or that the vehicle constitutes or contains evidence of a
crime and impoundment is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve the
evidence;
      (10)   The driver, operator or person in physical custody of the vehicle
is taken into custody and the vehicle is impounded for safekeeping;
      (11)   A law enforcement official has probable cause to believe that the
owner, operator or person in physical control of the vehicle has failed to
respond to five or more citations for parking or traffic offenses;
      (12)   The vehicle is unlawfully parked and prevents egress by a lawfully
parked vehicle;
      (13)   The vehicle is parked, on a school day during prohibited hours, in
a school zone on a public street where official signs prohibit parking; or
      (14)   If authorized by M.S. § 169.041.
   (B)   If a vehicle is to be towed for reasons other than winter parking
violation, a peace officer or parking enforcement officer must prepare, in
addition to the written citation, a written towing report describing the motor
vehicle and the reasons for towing. The towing report must be signed by the
officer and the tow driver. The owner or driver of the vehicle must be
notified, if present or readily available, to remove the vehicle, otherwise the
vehicle is to be towed away to a garage, service station or other place of
safekeeping as soon as possible to facilitate snow removal, street maintenance,
the orderly flow of traffic, firefighting or other lawful purpose. The owner
must pay the costs of such towing and storage. Except in an emergency, the
removal of a vehicle by or under the direction of the peace officer or other
authorized city official does not prevent the prosecution of a violation of
this section.
(Ord. 05-2021, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 01-2022, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 71.06 PARKING; HANDICAPPED; PROHIBITION.
   It is unlawful to park, obstruct, or occupy with a motor vehicle a parking
space, on public or private property, designated and posted as parking space
for handicapped persons pursuant to the state building code unless the vehicle
has prominently displayed upon it an insignia or certificate issued by the
Division of Motor Vehicles in the State Department of Public Safety pursuant to
M.S. § 169.345.
(Ord. 05-2021, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 01-2022, passed 1-11-2022)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles
   
72.01   Intent
   
72.02   Persons under 18
   
72.03   Hours of operation
   
72.04   Operation on private property
   
72.05   Noise
   
72.06   Negligent operation
Bicycles
   
72.20   Bicycles on sidewalks
Recreational Vehicles
   
72.30   Purpose
   
72.31   Definitions
   
72.32   Operation regulations
   
72.33   Hours of operation
 
   
72.99   Penalty
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.01 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to supplement M.S. §§ 84.81 through
84.88, as they may be amended from time to time, and M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles. Such
statues are incorporated herein by reference. This section is not intended to
allow what the state statues prohibit, nor to prohibit what the state statues
allow.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 72.02 PERSONS UNDER 18.
   (A)   (1)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or make
a direct crossing of a city street as the operator of a snowmobile.
      (2)   A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age,
may operate a snowmobile on streets as permitted under this chapter and make a
direct crossing of such streets only if he or she has in his or her immediate
possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to M.S. §
84.872, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile
to be operated contrary to the provision of this section.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No snowmobile shall be operated within the city limits on private property
less than one acre, public lands, waters and property under city jurisdiction
and on the streets and highways within the city between the hours of 10:30 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 OPERATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile on or over private property within the
city limits on parcels less than one acre, schools, park property, playgrounds
and recreation areas.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 NOISE.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile within the city unless the snowmobile
is equipped with a muffler in good working order which blends the exhaust noise
into the overall vehicle noise and is in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 NEGLIGENT OPERATION.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile at a rate of speed greater than
reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances or in a careless,
reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of
another or cause injury or damage thereto.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019) Penalty, see §
72.99
BICYCLES
§ 72.20 BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall be permitted to ride or park a bicycle on any sidewalk in
the central business area in the city.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019) Penalty, see §
72.99
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 72.30 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide reasonable regulations for the
use of recreational vehicles on public and private property in the city. This
subchapter is not intended to allow what the Minnesota state statutes expressly
prohibit nor to prohibit what the state statutes allow. It is intended to
prevent public nuisance.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 72.31 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ALL-TERM AN VEHICLE (ATV). A motorized flotation-tired vehicle of not less
than three but not more than six low-pressure tires. It includes Class 1
(engine displacement of less than 960 cubic centimeters and total diy weight of
less than 1,000 pounds) and Class 2 (engine displacement of less than 960 cubic
centimeters and total diy weight of 1,000 to 1,800 pounds) ATV's as per
Minnesota State Statute.
   BOULEVARD. Means that portion of the street or highway between the roadway
and private property.
   DESIGNATED TRAIL. A clearly marked route for recreational vehicles to
follow.
   GO-CART. A low, four-wheeled motorized device with an open or closed frame
designed and used for off-street operation only.
   MINI-BIKE. A small, two-wheeled motorized device designed for off-street
operation. Mini-bikes may include miniature motorcycles and do not qualify as a
moped, motorcycle or an ATV.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE (OHM). A vehicles traveling on two wheels with a seat
to be straddled by the operator with handlebars for steering control. OHMs may
include some mini-bikes. They are for off-street operation only.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on, and control the operation of a recreational
vehicle.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates, or is in actual physical control of a
recreational vehicle.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property that may be used by the public, subject to
reasonable regulation by a governmental body. Such property includes city
parks, city parking lots and public school parking lots and grounds.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire right of way of a roadway that is not
privately owned, including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders and
medians.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. An all-terrain vehicles, utility task vehicles,
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts, and other motorized
vehicles, that by their use fit this definition.
   ROADWAY. A portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel but not including the boulevard. For the purposes of
this article, roadways not dedicated for public use and not maintained by the
city are not included within this definition.
   SEMI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. Private property generally for use by the public but
not owned or maintained by a governmental body. Such property includes without
limitation: church property, shopping center property and other property
generally used by patrons of a commercial or private business establishment.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY. The entire width between boundary lines of any way or
place when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic (includes the right-of-way or
boulevard). For the purposes of this subchapter, streets or highways not
dedicated for public use and not maintained by the city are not included within
this definition.
   UTILITY TASK VEHICLE. A side-by-side, four-wheel drive that has four wheels,
is propelled by an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement
capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less, and has a total dry weight of
1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 72.32 OPERATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Recreational vehicles may not be operated in the following areas of
the city:
      (1)   Any area posted that recreational vehicles are not allowed;
      (2)   On or along railroad right-of-way;
      (3)   On lots less than one acre in size unless it is for maintenance or
plowing;
      (4)   On city sidewalks, bike or pedestrian trails;
      (5)   On semi-public, public or private property unless permission is
posted;
      (6)   Within the boulevard of a city roadway unless marked as a
designated trail;
   (B)   Recreational vehicles may be operated in the following areas of the
city:
      (1)   On your own property or the property of another with written
permission, only if the property is one acre or greater in area, subject to the
provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   On all city roadways as allowed by Minnesota State Statute and
county and state highways as allowed by county ordinance and Minnesota State
Statute as may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   On public or semi-public property only if posted with a clearly
visible notice indicating “ATVs allowed” or “utility task vehicles allowed” or
words substantially similar.
   (C)   Specific limitations for operation of recreational vehicles.
      (1)   A direct crossing of a street, roadway, county or state highway is
permitted if:
         (a)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the roadway at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing
or blocks the view of oncoming traffic for 300 feet;
         (b)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or entering upon the traveled portion of the street, road or highway;
         (c)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard;
         (d)   In the case of a divided highway, the crossing shall be made
only at an intersection of the highway with another street or road;
         (e)   The crossing is made during period of one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, the
front and rear lights of the vehicle must be on;
         (f)   A person born after July 1, 1987 possesses a MN DNR ATV safety
certificate.
      (2)   An ATV may only be operated with the number of passengers that it
was designed to carry;
      (3)   If ridden on a roadway, persons driving must be 18 years of age or
older.
   (D)   Every person operating an ATV or utility task vehicle on the roadway
has the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under
the provisions of M.S. Chs. 169 and 84, except those provisions that cannot be
reasonably applied.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 72.33 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No recreational vehicle shall be operated within the city limits on public
lands, waters and property under city jurisdiction and on the streets and
highways within the city between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
72.20 of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine of up to $200.
(Ord. 03-2019, passed 6-11-2019)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   TREES AND SHRUBS
      
94.   NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Non-domestic animals; farm animals
   
90.03   Impounding
   
90.04   Biting animals
   
90.05   Reclaiming
   
90.06   Unclaimed animals
   
90.07   Nuisances; seizure of animals
   
90.08   Animals presenting danger to health and safety
   
90.09   Diseased animals
   
90.10   Basic care
   
90.11   Breeding moratorium
   
90.12   Enforcing officer; interference
   
90.13   Pound
Dogs and Cats
   
90.25   Running at large prohibited
   
90.26   License required
   
90.27   Vaccination
   
90.28   Kennels
Dangerous Animals
   
90.40   Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs
 
Chickens
   
90.50   Definitions
   
90.51   General provisions
   
90.52   Administrative approval required
   
90.53   Running at large prohibited
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parks and Recreation, see
Ch. 92
   Zoning, see
Ch. 155
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including fowl and
poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
ANIMALS shall be classified as follows.
      (1)   DOMESTIC. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household
pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs, cats, caged
birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, non-
poisonous, non- venomous and non-constricting reptiles or amphibians and other
similar animals.
      (2)   NON-DOMESTIC. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally
wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly
considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of
people. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include:
         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including
lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats;
         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae)
including wolves, coyotes, dingoes and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated dogs;
         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet;
         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family, including any skunk
(whether or not de-scented), raccoon, squirrel or ferret, but excluding those
members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets;
         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators; and
         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above, but which
can be reasonably defined by the terms of this definition, including, but not
limited to, bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
      (3)   FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or
performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, such
animals shall include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine
family (cows, bulls), sheep, turkeys, fowl (ducks, geese), swine (including
Vietnamese potbellied pigs), goats, bees and other animals associated with a
farm, ranch or stable. Chickens are not classified as farm animals and may be
kept on residentially zoned properties in accordance with the provisions of §§
90.50 et seq. of this code.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and
control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise
restrained or confined.
   CAT. Both the male and female of the felidae species commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
   DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring an animal.
   RELEASE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Police Department for the release of
any animal that has been taken to the pound. A RELEASE PERMIT may be obtained
upon payment of a fee in accordance with that regular license requirement if
the animal is unlicensed, payment of a release fee and any maintenance costs
incurred in capturing and impounding the animal. The release fee shall be $25
the first time an animal is impounded, $50 the second time it is impounded and
$75 for the third and each subsequent time the same animal is impounded. For
the purpose of a RELEASE PERMIT, any change in the registered ownership of an
animal subsequent to its impoundment and release shall reset that animal’s
impoundment count to the beginning of the fee scale.
(Prior Code, § 90.01) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999;
Ord. 05-2022, passed 8-16-2022)
§ 90.02 NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS; FARM ANIMALS.
   (A)   Non-domestic animals. It shall be illegal for any person to own,
possess, harbor or offer for sale, any non-domestic animal within the city
limits. Any owner of such an animal at the time of adoption of this chapter
shall have 30 days in which to remove the animal from the city, after which
time the city may impound the animal as provided for in this section. An
exception shall be made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained
for and actually providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for
those animals brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian
clinic, scientific research laboratory or a licensed show or exhibition.
   (B)   Farm animals. Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural
district of the city, or on a residential lot of at least ten acres in size;
provided that, no animal shelter shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece
of property. An exception shall be made to this division (B) for those animals
brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic,
scientific research laboratory or a licensed show or exhibition.
(Prior Code, § 90.02) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 IMPOUNDING.
   Any unlicensed animal running at large is hereby declared a public nuisance.
Any police officer may impound any dog or other animal found unlicensed or any
animal found running at large, and shall give notice of the impounding to the
owner of such dog or other animal, if known. In case the owner is unknown, the
officer shall post notice at the city office that if the dog or other animal is
not claimed within ten regular business days of the posting of the notice, it
will be sold or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, it shall be unlawful to kill, destroy or otherwise cause injury to any
animal, including dogs and cats running at large.
(Prior Code, § 90.03) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 BITING ANIMALS.
   Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine
and which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has been punctured or the
services of a doctor are required, shall be confined in the city pound for a
period of not less than ten days, at the expense of the owner. The animal may
be released at the end of such time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies
and by the payment of all costs by the owner. However, if the owner of the
animal shall elect immediately upon receipt of notice of need for such
confinement by the officer to voluntarily and immediately confine the animal
for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the owner’s
choosing, not outside of the county, and provide immediate proof of such
confinement in such manner as may be required, the owner may do so. If,
however, the animal has been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and
the owner has proof of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed
veterinarian, the owner may confine the dog or other animal to the owner’s
property.
(Prior Code, § 90.04) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
§ 90.05 RECLAIMING.
   (A)   All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane treatment
and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least ten regular business
days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided by this
section.
   (B)   In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the animal from
the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise provided for in
this chapter:
      (1)   Payment of a $25 release fee and receipt of a release permit from
City Hall. The $25 release fee is in addition to the release permit fee noted
at §
90.01 of this chapter;
      (2)   Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or
any part of a day while the animal is in the pound; and
      (3)   If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee, and valid
certificate of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is required.
(Prior Code, § 90.05) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
§ 90.06 UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.
   At the expiration of ten regular business days from the time any animal is
impounded, if the animal has not been reclaimed in accordance with the
provisions of this section, the officer appointed to enforce this section may
let any person claim the animal by complying with all provisions in this
section, or the officer may sell the animal to the University of Minnesota, or
cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and shall
properly dispose of the remains thereof. Any moneys collected under this
section shall be payable to the city.
(Prior Code, § 90.06) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
§ 90.07 NUISANCES; SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined
as barking for an interval of at least three minutes with less than one minute
of interruption. Such barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
   (B)   Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit his
or her dog or other animal to damage any lawn, garden or other property,
whether or not the owner of the dog has knowledge of the damage. Any animal
covered by this section may be impounded as provided in this section or a
complaint may be issued by anyone aggrieved by an animal under this section,
against the owner of the animal for prosecution under this section.
   (C)   Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the
custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces
of the animal and disposing of such feces in a sanitary manner if the feces is
found on the property of others or on public property.
   (D)   Other nuisances. Any animal kept contrary to this section is subject
to impoundment as per §
90.03 of this chapter.
   (E)   Seizure of animals. Any police officer or animal control officer may
enter upon private property and seize any animal; provided that, the following
exist:
      (1)   There is an identified complaint other than the police officer or
animal control officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
      (2)   The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the
barking dog criteria set out in division (A) above; the criteria for cruelty
set out in §
90.10 of this chapter; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in §
90.01 of this chapter;
      (3)   The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one
previous complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or that
the animal was at large at this address on a prior date;
      (4)   The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of
the property and those attempts have either failed or have been ignored;
      (5)   The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private
residence;
      (6)   No other less intrusive means is available to stop either the
barking dog, the inhumane treatment of the animal or the at large animal; and
      (7)   Written notice of the seizure, if left in a conspicuous place and
if personal contact with the owner of the dog is not possible.
(Prior Code, § 90.07) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 ANIMALS PRESENTING DANGER TO HEALTH AND SAFETY.
   If, in a reasonable belief of any person or police officer, an animal
presents an immediate danger to the safety of any person and/or the animal is
threatening imminent harm and/or is in the process of attacking any person, the
officer may destroy the animal in a proper manner. This is a last resort.
Otherwise, the person or officer may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the
pound for confinement as per the terms of §
90.03 of this chapter. If the animal is destroyed by the officer, a charge of
$75 to dispose of the animal is payable by the owner of the animal. If the
animal is found not to be a danger to the health and safety of any person or
the city, it may be released to the owner or keeper in accordance with §
90.03 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.08) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
§ 90.09 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or
her premises, or on premises occupied by him or her, nor permit to run at large
in the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the health
and safety of the city, even though the animal is properly licensed under this
chapter.
   (B)   Confinement.
      (1)   Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and presenting a
threat to the health and safety of the public may be apprehended and confined
in the pound by a police officer or animal control officer.
      (2)   The police officer shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the
animal.
      (3)   If the animal is found to be diseased in such a manner so as to be
a danger to the health and safety of the city, the officer shall cause such
animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the remains.
      (4)   The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall
be liable for a fine of $75 to cover the costs of maintaining and disposing of
the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations.
   (C)   Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased
within the meaning of this section, the animal shall be released to the owner
or keeper free of charge.
(Prior Code, § 90.09) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 BASIC CARE.
   All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment,
housing in the winter and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any
person not treating his or her pet in such a humane manner will be subject to
the penalties provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.10) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 BREEDING MORATORIUM.
   (A)   Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building
or other enclosure in such manner that it cannot come in contact with another
dog or cat, except for planned breeding.
   (B)   Upon capture and failure to reclaim the animal, every dog or cat shall
be neutered or spayed prior to being transferred to a new owner.
(Prior Code, § 90.11) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 ENFORCING OFFICER; INTERFERENCE.
   (A)   (1)   The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control
officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   In the officer’s duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
he or she may from time to time, with the consent of the Council, designate
certain assistants.
   (B)   No person shall in any manner molest, hinder or interfere with any
person authorized by the Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and
convey them to the pound while engaged in such operation; nor shall any
unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or
attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in compliance
with this section, or in any other manner to interfere with or hinder such
officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.12) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 POUND.
   Every year, the Council shall designate an official pound to which animals
found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for safe treatment and, if
necessary, for destruction.
(Prior Code, § 90.13) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
DOGS AND CATS
§ 90.25 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat
of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A
person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a
responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a
responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash,
shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an
area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”
   (B)   License required.
      (1)   All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored, or maintained
by their owners in the city, shall be licensed and registered with the city.
Dog licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk- Administrator upon payment of
the license fee. The owner shall state, at the time application is made for the
license and upon forms provided, his or her name and address and the name,
breed, color, and sex of each dog owned or kept by him or her. No license shall
be granted for a dog that has not been vaccinated against distemper and rabies,
as evidenced by a certificate by a veterinarian qualified to practice in the
state in which the dog is vaccinated.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to this section
to pay to the City Clerk- Administrator the license fee.
      (3)   Upon payment of the license fee, the Clerk-Administrator shall
issue to the owner a license certificate and metallic tag for each dog
licensed. The tag shall have stamped on it the year for which it is issued and
the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall
be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be
affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a
dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the City Clerk-
Administrator. A charge shall be made for each duplicate tag. Dog tags shall
not be transferable from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made on any
dog license fee or tag because of death of a dog or the owner’s leaving the
city before the expiration of the license period.
      (4)   The licensing provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to
dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city, nor to dogs
brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show. If the
animal owned is a service animal which is capable of being properly identified
as from a recognized school for seeing eye, hearing ear, service or guide
animals, and the owner is a blind or deaf person, or a person with physical or
sensory disabilities, then no license shall be required.
      (5)   The funds received by the City Clerk- Administrator from all dog
licenses and metallic tags fees shall first be used to defray any costs
incidental to the enforcement of this chapter; including, but not restricted
to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and maintenance of the
dogs.
   (C)   Cats. Cats shall be included as controlled by this division insofar as
running-at-large, pickup, impounding, boarding, licensing and proof of anti-
rabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions of this section shall also
apply to cats unless otherwise provided.
   (D)   Vaccination.
      (1)   All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or transported within
the city shall be vaccinated at least once every three years by a licensed
veterinarian for:
         (a)   Rabies - with a live modified vaccine; and
         (b)   Distemper.
      (2)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the
date of vaccination, owner’s name and address, the animal's name (if
applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the
veterinarian’s signature. Upon demand made by the City Clerk-Administrator, the
Animal Control Officer or a police officer, the owner shall present for
examination the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the animal(s). In
cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal
(s) shall have seven days in which to present the certificate(s) to the City
Clerk-Administrator or officer. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.25) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored or maintained by
their owners in the city shall be licensed and registered with the city. Dog
licenses shall be issued by the Clerk-Administrator or Deputy Clerk-
Administrator upon payment of the license fee. The license shall be valid for
one year. The owner shall state, at the time an application is made for the
license and upon forms provided for such purpose, his or her name and address
and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned or kept by him or her. No
license shall be granted for a dog which has not been vaccinated against
distemper and rabies, as provided in this section. Vaccination shall be
performed only by a doctor qualified to practice veterinary medicine in the
state in which the dog is vaccinated. A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog to be
licensed in the city shall complete a certificate of vaccination. One copy
shall be issued to the dog owner for affixing to the license application.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to this section to
pay to the Clerk- Administrator or Deputy Clerk-Administrator the license fee
as imposed by the Council by resolution.
   (C)   Upon payment of the license fee, the Clerk- Administrator or Deputy
Clerk-Administrator shall issue to the owner a license certificate and metallic
tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall have stamped on it the year for which
it is issued and the number corresponding with the number on the certificate.
Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the
license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are
constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be
issued by the Clerk-Administrator or Deputy Clerk-Administrator. A charge of $2
shall be made for each duplicate tag. Dog tags shall not be transferable from
one dog to another, and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag
because of death of a dog or the owner’s leaving the city before the expiration
of the license period.
   (D)   The licensing provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs whose
owners are non-residents temporarily within the city, nor to dogs brought into
the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor shall this
provision apply to “seeing eye” dogs properly trained to assist blind persons
for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place.
   (E)   The funds received by the Clerk- Administrator or Deputy Clerk-
Administrator from all dog licenses and metallic tag fees shall first be used
to defray any costs incidental to the enforcement of this section; including,
but not restricted to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags and impounding and
maintenance of the dogs.
   (F)   Cats shall be included as controlled by this section insofar as
running at large, pickup, impounding, boarding, licensing and proof of anti-
rabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions of this section shall also
apply to cats unless otherwise provided.
(Prior Code, § 90.26) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
§ 90.27 VACCINATION.
   (A)   All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained or transported within the
city shall be vaccinated at least once every three years by a licensed
veterinarian for:
      (1)   Rabies, with a live modified vaccine; and
      (2)   Distemper.
   (B)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept, on which is stated the date
of vaccination, the owner’s name and address, the animal’s name (if
applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine and the
veterinarian’s signature. Upon demand made by the Clerk-Administrator or Deputy
Clerk- Administrator or a police officer, the owner shall present for
examination the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the animal(s). In
cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal
(s) shall have seven days in which to present the certificate(s) to the Clerk-
Administrator or Deputy Clerk-Administrator or police officer. Failure to do so
shall be deemed a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.27) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.28 KENNELS.
   (A)   Definition. The keeping of three or more dogs on the same premises,
whether owned by the same person or not and for whatever purpose kept, shall
constitute a kennel; except that, a fresh litter of pups may be kept for a
period of three months before such keeping shall be deemed to be a KENNEL.
   (B)   Kennels not allowed. Because the keeping of three or more dogs on the
same premises is subject to great abuse, causing discomfort to persons by way
of smell, noise, hazard and general aesthetic depreciation, the keeping of
three or more dogs on the premises is a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.28) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
Penalty, see §
90.99
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 90.40 DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Adoption by reference. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50 to 347.565, as they
may be amended from time to time (commonly referred to as the “Dangerous Dog
Regulations”), are adopted by reference.
   (B)   Definitions. Definitions in this section shall have the following
meanings:
      (1)   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has when unprovoked, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Has killed a domestic animal when unprovoked while off the
owner’s property;
         (c)   Has attacked one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
         (d)   Has been found to be potentially dangerous and after the owner
has notice of the same, the dog aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
      (2)   DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly
accepted as domesticated household pets.
      (3)   GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability
of death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a
permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member
or organ or other serious bodily harm.
      (4)   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, corporation, organization,
department, or association owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an
interest in, or having care, custody or control of a dog.
      (5)   MAINTENANCE COSTS. Any costs incurred as a result of seizing an
animal for impoundment, including, but not limited to, the capturing,
impounding, keeping, treating, examining, securing, confining, feeding,
destroying, boarding or maintaining seized animals, whether these services are
provided by the city or the pound.
      (6)   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has when unprovoked, inflicted a bite on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;
         (b)   Has when unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private
property, other than the owner’s property, in an apparent attitude of attack;
or
         (c)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      (7)   PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the dog from escaping
and to provide protection for the dog from the elements. A proper enclosure
does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other
structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or
structure in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the
only barriers which prevent the dog from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow
the egress of the dog in any manner without human assistance. A pen or kennel
shall meet the following minimum specifications:
         (a)   A minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet.
         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be
constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches, support post shall be one and one-fourth inch or larger steel pipe
buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided,
the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.
         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls
and openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches.
         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls and openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches. The gate shall be self-closing and self-locking. The gate shall be
locked at all times when the dog is in the pen or kennel.
      (8)   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury that involves a temporary
but substantial disfigurement, or that causes a temporary but substantial loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or that causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
      (9)   UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the dog is not purposely
excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
   (C)   Declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   A police officer, community service officer, animal control officer
or other authorized city employee may declare a dog to be dangerous or
potentially dangerous when the officer has probable cause to believe that a dog
is dangerous or potentially dangerous. The following factors will be considered
in determining a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog:
         (a)   Whether any injury or damage to a person by the dog was caused
while the dog was protecting or defending a person or the dog’s offspring
within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault.
         (b)   The size and strength of the dog, including jaw strength, and
the animal's propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals.
         (c)   Whether the dog has wounds, scarring, is observed in a fight, or
has other indications that the dog has been or will be used, trained or
encouraged to fight with another animal or whose owner is in possession of any
training apparatus, paraphernalia or drugs used to prepare such dogs to fight
with other animals.
      (2)   Beginning six months after a dog is declared dangerous or
potentially dangerous, an owner may request annually that the city review the
designation. The owner must provide evidence that the dog’s behavior has
changed due to the dog’s age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience
training or other factors. If enough evidence is provided, the city may rescind
the designation.
      (3)   Exceptions.
         (a)   The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs used by law
enforcement.
         (b)   Dogs may not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if
the threat, injury, or danger was sustained by a person who was:
            1.   Committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog;
            2.   Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or who
can be shown to have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog; or
            3.   Committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (D)   License required. The owner must annually license dangerous and
potentially dangerous dogs with the city and must license a newly declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous dog within 14 days after notice that a dog
has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous. Regardless of any appeal
that may be requested, the owner must comply with the requirements of M.S. §
347.52 (a) and (c), as they may be amended from time to time, regarding proper
enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or death of the dog,
until and unless a hearing officer or court of law reverses the declaration.
      (1)   Process for dangerous dogs. The city will issue a license to the
owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   Written proof that there is a surety bond by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in Minnesota in the sum of at least $300,000,
payable to any person injured by a dangerous dog, or receipt of a copy of a
policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in Minnesota in the amount of at least $300,000, insuring the owner
for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. Such surety bond or
insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the bond or policy will
be made unless the city is notified in writing by the surety company or the
insurance company at least ten days prior to such cancellation;
         (c)   The owner has paid the annual license fee for dangerous dogs.
         (d)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number
of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the microchip is not
implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the owner’s expense;
and
         (e)   The owner provides proof that the dog has been sterilized. If
the owner does not sterilize the dog within 30 days, the city may seize the dog
and sterilize it at the owner’s expense.
      (2)   Process for potentially dangerous dogs. The city will issue a
license to the owner of a potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents
sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   The owner has paid the annual license fee;
         (c)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
potentially dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the
microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the
owner’s expense.
      (3)   Inspection. A pre-license inspection of the premises to insure
compliance with the city code is required. If the city issues a license to the
owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the city shall be allowed at
any reasonable time to inspect the dog, the proper enclosure and all places
where the animal is kept.
      (4)   Warning symbol. The owner of a dangerous dog licensed under this
section must post a sign with the uniform dangerous dog warning symbol on the
property in order to inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the
property. The sign will be provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
      (5)   Tags. A dangerous dog licensed under this section must wear a
standardized, easily identifiable tag at all times that contains the uniform
dangerous dog symbol, identifying the dog as dangerous. The tag shall be
provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
      (6)   License fee. The city will charge the owner an annual license fee
for a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
   (E)   Properly restrained in proper enclosure or outside of proper
enclosure. While on the owner’s property, an owner of a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog must keep it in a proper enclosure. Inside a
residential home, there must be a secured area maintained where the dog will
stay when persons other than family members are present. If the dog is outside
the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial
chain or leash no longer than four feet and under the physical restraint of an
adult. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from
biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.
   (F)   Notification requirements to city.
      (1)   Relocation or death. The owner of a dog that has been declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous must notify the City Clerk-Administrator in
writing if the dog is to be relocated from its current address or if the dog
has died. The notification must be given in writing within 30 days of the
relocation or death. The notification must include the current owner’s name and
address, and the new owner’s name and the relocation address. If the relocation
address is outside of the city, the city may notify the local law enforcement
agency of the transfer of the dog into its jurisdiction.
      (2)   Renter’s obligations. A person who owns or possess a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog and who will rent property from another where the dog
will reside must disclose to the property owner prior to entering the lease
agreement and at the time of any lease renewal periods that the person owns or
possesses a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog that will reside at the
property. A dog owner, who is currently renting property, must notify the
property owner within 14 days of city notification if the owned dog is newly
declared as dangerous or potentially dangerous and the owner keeps the dog on
the property.
      (3)   Transfer of ownership into the city. No dog that has been
previously determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous by another
jurisdiction shall be kept, owned or harbored in the city unless the dog’s
owner complies with the requirements of this section prior to bringing the dog
into the city. Dogs in violation of this division are subject to impoundment
and destruction.
   (G)   Seizure. Animal control may immediately seize any dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog if:
      (1)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous, the dog is not validly licensed and no
appeal has been filed;
      (2)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the owner does not secure the proper liability insurance or surety coverage as
required or such required insurance is cancelled;
      (3)   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
      (4)   The dog is outside the proper enclosure and not under proper
restraint, as required by §
90.40(E);
      (5)   After 30 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the dog is not sterilized, as required by §
90.40(D)(1)(e);
      (6)   The dog’s microchip has been removed.
   (H)   Reclamation. A dog seized under §
90.40(G) may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog upon payment of maintenance
costs, and presenting proof to animal control that the requirements of this
section have been met. A dog not reclaimed under this division within seven
days may be disposed of and the owner will be liable to the city for
maintenance costs. A person claiming an interest in a seized dog may prevent
disposition of the dog by posting a security in an amount sufficient to provide
for the dog’s maintenance costs. The security must be posted with the city
within seven days of the seizure inclusive of the date seized.
   (I)   Subsequent offenses: seizure. If a person has been convicted of
violating a provision of this section, and the person is charged with a
subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the dog may be seized. If the
owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the court may
order that the dog be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner pay
the maintenance costs. If the owner is not convicted and the dog is not
reclaimed by the owner within seven days after the owner has been notified that
the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of in manner permitted by
law.
   (J)   Notice, hearings.
      (1)   Notice. After a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous or has been seized for destruction, the city shall give notice by
delivering or mailing it to the owner of the dog, or by posting a copy of it at
the place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on
the property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice shall include:
         (a)   A description of the seized dog; the authority for and purpose
of the declaration and seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which
the dog was declared; and the telephone number and contact person where the dog
is kept;
         (b)   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing
concerning the declaration and that failure to do so within 14 days of the date
of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a hearing;
         (c)   A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of
the notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of M.S. §
347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c), as they may be amended from time to time,
regarding proper enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or death
of the dog, until such time as the hearing officer issues an opinion;
         (d)   A statement that if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous
dog declaration, the owner will have 14 days from receipt of that decision to
comply with all other requirements of M.S. §§ 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52, as
they may be amended from time to time;
         (e)   A form to request a hearing; and
         (f)   A statement that if the dog has been seized, all maintenance
costs of the care, keeping, and disposition of the dog pending the outcome of
the hearing are the responsibility of the owner, unless a court or hearing
officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not reasonably justified by
law.
      (2)   Right to hearing.
         (a)   After a dog has been declared dangerous, potentially dangerous
or has been seized for destruction, the owner may appeal in writing to the city
within 14 days after notice of the declaration or seizure. Failure to do so
within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a
hearing. The owner must pay a $100 fee for an appeal hearing.
         (b)   The appeal hearing will be held within 14 days of the request.
The hearing officer must be an impartial employee of the city or an impartial
person retained by the city to conduct the hearing.
         (c)   If the declaration or destruction is upheld by the hearing
officer, actual expenses of the hearing up to a maximum of $1,000, as well as
all maintenance costs, will be the responsibility of the dog's owner. The
hearing officer shall issue a decision on the matter within ten days after the
hearing. The decision shall be delivered to the dog’s owner by hand delivery or
registered mail as soon as practical and a copy shall be provided to the city.
The decision of the hearing officer is final.
   (K)   Destruction of certain dogs. The Police Chief and/or hearing officer
are authorized to order the destruction or other disposition of any dog, after
proper notice is given pursuant to §
90.40(J) and upon a finding that:
      (1)   The dog has habitually destroyed property or habitually trespassed
in a damaging manner on property of persons other than the owner;
      (2)   The dog has been declared dangerous, the owner’s right to appeal
hereunder has been exhausted or expired, and the owner has failed to comply
with the provisions of this section;
      (3)   It is determined that the dog is infected with rabies;
      (4)   The dog inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on
public or private property without provocation;
      (5)   The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation;
      (6)   The dog bit multiple human victims on public or private property in
the same attack without provocation;
      (7)   The dog bit a human on public or private property without
provocation in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack; or
      (8)   The dog poses a danger to the public’s health, safety or welfare.
In determining whether the dog poses a danger to the public’s health, safety or
welfare, the following factors may be considered:
         (a)   The dog weighs more than 20 pounds;
         (b)   The strength of the dog, including jaw strength;
         (c)   The dog’s tolerance for pain;
         (d)   The dog’s tendency to refuse to terminate an attack;
         (e)   The dog’s propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals;
         (f)   The dog’s potential for unpredictable behavior;
         (g)   The dog’s aggressiveness;
         (h)   The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious
injury.
   (L)   Concealing of dogs. No person may harbor, hide or conceal a dog that
the city has the authority to seize or that has been ordered into custody for
destruction or other proper disposition.
   (M)   Dog ownership prohibited.
      (1)   Except as provided below, a person shall not own a dog if the
person has been:
         (a)   Convicted of a third or subsequent violation of §
90.40(D), (E) or (F) or similar ordinance in another jurisdiction, or M.S. §§
347.51, 347.515 or 347.52, as they may be amended from time to time;
         (b)   Convicted of 2nd degree manslaughter due to negligent or
intentional use of a dog under M.S. § 609.205 (4), as it may be amended from
time to time; or
         (c)   Convicted of gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under M.S. §
609.226, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any person who owns a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and is
found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section or had owned
a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog but never achieved compliance with
this section may be prohibited from ownership or custody of another dog for a
period of five years after the original declaration. Any dog found to be in
violation, may be impounded until due process is completed, pursuant to §
90.40(J).
      (3)   If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in §
90.40(M)(1) or (2), unless specifically approved with or without restrictions
by the city, no person in the household is permitted to own a dog.
   (N)   Dog ownership prohibition review. Beginning three years after a
conviction under §
90.40(M)(1) that prohibits a person from owning a dog, and annually thereafter,
the person may request in writing to the Police Chief that the city review the
prohibition. The city may consider such facts as the seriousness of the
violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any criminal convictions,
or other facts that the city deems appropriate. The city may rescind the
prohibition entirely or rescind it with limitations. The city also may
establish conditions a person must meet before the prohibition is rescinded,
including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog training or dog
handling courses. If the city rescinds a person’s prohibition and the person
subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the city or the
person is convicted of any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or dog
attacks, the city may permanently prohibit the person from owning a dog in this
state.
   (O)   Penalties.
      (1)   Unless stated otherwise, any person who violates a provision of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person who is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
any provision of §
90.40(D), (E), or (F) is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
90.40(M), whether an owner or household member, is guilty of a gross
misdemeanor.
CHICKENS
§ 90.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BROODING. The period of chicken growth when supplemental heat must be
provided due to the bird’s inability to generate enough body heat.
   CHICKEN. A domesticated bird that is kept as a pet or serves as a source of
eggs or meat.
   COOP. The structure used for the keeping or housing of chickens.
   EXERCISE YARD. A larger fenced area that provides space for exercise and
foraging for the birds when supervised.
   HEN. A female chicken.
   OFFICER. Any person designated by the City Council as an enforcement
officer.
   ROOSTER. A male chicken.
   RUN. A fully-enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the chickens
can roam unsupervised.
(Ord. 05-2022, passed 8-16-2022)
§ 90.51 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The keeping of chickens is allowed in all zoning districts, subject to
administrative approval and subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No more than six chickens shall be housed or kept on any one property
and only allowed on properties with single-family dwellings.
   (B)   Roosters are prohibited, and the keeping of any poultry besides
chickens is prohibited.
   (C)   Chickens shall not be housed in a residential dwelling unit or an
attached or detached garage, except for brooding purposes.
   (D)   A coop is required to house the chickens. The coop must be constructed
and maintained to meet the following minimum standards:
      (1)   The coop shall be located in the side or rear yard.
      (2)   The coop shall meet the setback requirements for utility/storage
structures for the respective zoning district.
      (3)   The coop shall provide a minimum of 12 square feet of interior
floor space.
      (4)   Construction shall be adequate to protect chickens from extreme
temperatures and prevent access by rodents.
      (5)   The coop must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
devoid of all rodents and vermin, and free from objectionable odors. Manure
shall not be allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an unsanitary condition
or causes odor detectible on another property.
      (6)   The coop shall be fully-enclosed.
   (E)   A run or exercise yard is required.
      (1)   Runs must be constructed and maintained to meet the following
minimum standards:
         (a)   The run shall be located in the side or rear yard and attached
to the coop.
         (b)   The run shall meet the setback requirements for utility/storage
structures for the respective zoning district.
         (c)   The size of the run shall be at least 16 square feet if access
to a fenced exercise yard is available. The size of the run shall be at 32
square feet if access to an exercise yard is not available. If the coop is
elevated two feet so the birds can access the space beneath, that area may be
counted as a portion of the minimum run footprint.
         (d)   The run shall be fully-enclosed.
      (2)   Exercise yards must be fully enclosed by a fence.
   (F)   Grains and feed must be stored in rodent and raccoon-proof containers
inside of a structure.
   (G)   Chicken fighting is prohibited.
   (H)   Outdoor butchering of chickens is prohibited.
   (I)   Dead chickens must be disposed of according to the Minnesota Board of
Animal Health rules which require chicken carcasses to be disposed of as soon
as possible after death, usually within 48 hours to 72 hours. Legal forms of
chicken carcass disposal include offsite burial, offsite incineration or
rendering, or offsite composting.
   (J)   The city’s officer may inspect the premises to ensure compliance with
city ordinances.
   (K)   Any person no longer keeping chickens must notify the city and remove
the coop and run within 30 days of the chickens being removed from the
property.
(Ord. 05-2022, passed 8-16-2022)
§ 90.52 ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No person shall own, keep, or have custody of live chickens without first
obtaining approval from the city.
   (A)   Application shall be made to the city along with a fee for Site Plan
Review according to the adopted fee schedule.
   (B)   A site plan shall be submitted with the application. The site plan
shall identify the location of all structures on the property, including the
coop, run, and exercise yard, and provide accurate property dimensions and
setbacks.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the officer shall be
responsible for conducting an administrative Site Plan Review and, if approved,
issuing a permit.
   (D)   An application submitted by a renter requires written consent from the
property owner in order to be considered a complete application.
   (E)   If at any time the officer determines violations of this chapter to
exist, the permit is subject to revocation.
(Ord. 05-2022, passed 8-16-2022)
§ 90.53 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the chicken(s) of any person who owns,
harbors, or keeps chickens to run at large.
   (B)   Any expenses incurred by the city in the enforcement of this section
shall be the responsibility of the chicken owner. Expenses may include, but are
not limited to, staff time, shelter, and feed.
   (C)   Any person who owns, harbors, or keeps chickens shall be afforded one
warning of running at large. The second occurrence of chicken(s) running at
large will result in indefinite permit revocation by the City Planner.
   (D)   A person who owns, harbors, or keeps chickens that run at large shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 05-2022, passed 8-16-2022)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Petty misdemeanor. Violations of §§
90.07,
90.10,
90.11 and/or
90.25 through
90.27 of this chapter are petty misdemeanors punishable by a fine up to $200.
The owner and/or keeper of the animal is the chargeable party.
   (B)   Misdemeanor. Violations of §§
90.02,
90.08,
90.09,
90.12,
90.28 and/or
90.40 of this chapter are misdemeanors punishable by a fine of up to $700 and/
or jail up to 90 days. The owner and/or keeper of the animal is the chargeable
party.
(Prior Code, § 90.99) (Ord. 595, passed 6-1-1999; Ord. 595, passed 7-6-1999)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Unloading on street or sidewalk
   
91.02   Street and sidewalk obstruction
   
91.03   Materials on street or sidewalk
   
91.04   Removal of ice and snow
Right-of-Way Management
   
91.10   Election to manage the public rights-of- way
   
91.11   Definitions
   
91.12   Permit requirement
   
91.13   Permit applications
   
91.14   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
91.15   Timeline for action on permit applications
   
91.16   Permit fees
   
91.17   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
91.18   Permit limitations
   
91.19   Installation requirements
   
91.20   Inspection
   
91.21   Work done without a permit
   
91.22   Supplementary notification
   
91.23   Revocation of permit
   
91.24   Mapping data
   
91.25   Location of facilities
   
91.26   Damage to other facilities
   
91.27   Right-of-way vacation
   
91.28   Indemnification and liability
   
91.29   Abandoned facilities
   
91.30   Appeal
   
91.31   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
Uniform Numbering System
   
91.50   Purpose
   
91.51   Definitions
   
91.52   Administration
   
91.53   Assignment of address numbers
   
91.54   Assignment of roadway names
   
91.55   Existing addresses and roadway names
   
91.56   Address display
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way, without first placing some sufficient protection
over the pavement.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way
within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting any
fence or building to remain thereon. Each day that any fence or building is
permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant or
person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any street
or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
articles or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use thereof.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the
sidewalk abutting his or her premises free and clear of snow and ice to the
extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove
therefrom all snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing weather
conditions, a reasonable time which will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after
the abatement of any storm during which the snow and ice may have accumulated.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) Penalty, see §
91.99
RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
§ 91.10 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to
this chapter to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.11 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions included in M.S. § 237.162, as it may be amended from time
to time, Minnesota Rules 7810.0100, subps. 1 through 23, and Minnesota Rules
7560.0100 subps. 1 through 12 are hereby adopted by reference and are
incorporated into this chapter as if set out in full.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.12 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way or install or place facilities in the
right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the
city.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate
that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and
open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
      (3)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless facility permit is
required to place a new wireless support structure (collocate) in the right-of-
way managed, with the exception that a permit is not required for the
installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles
in compliance with national safety codes.
      (4)   Small wireless special or conditional land use permit. A special or
conditional land use permit is required to install a new wireless support
structure in a right-of-way where the underlying district or area is zoned for
single-family residential use or is in a historic district established by
federal or state law or city ordinance.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1000, subp, 3
and notwithstanding division (B) of this section, the city shall establish and
impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by the City Council.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.13 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete only
upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:
      (1)   Each permittee’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
      (2)   The name, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of application;
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
permittee by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the permittee is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the:
            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the permittee, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees; and
            2.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-
way by the permittee, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground facilities, and collapse of
property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers’ compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
      (4)   A copy of the actual insurance policies;
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required
to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to time, as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and
      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate
from said Commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   A small wireless facility permit applicant may file a consolidated
small wireless permit application to collocate up to 15 small wireless
facilities provided that all the small wireless facilities in the application:
      (1)   Are located within a two-mile radius;
      (2)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
      (3)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      (2)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city;
      (3)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable; and
      (4)   Inspection fees, if applicable and if not included in the permit
fee.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.14 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Permit conditions generally. The city may impose reasonable conditions
upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder
to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary, to protect the
right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with
all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited
to M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One-Call Excavation Notice System),
as it may be amended from time to time, and Minnesota Rules Ch. 7560.
   (C)   Additional small wireless facility conditions. In addition to division
(B) of this section, the erection or installation of a wireless support
structure, or the collocation of a small wireless facility, shall be subject to
the following conditions:
      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the
particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications,
and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application.
      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way
shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city’s written authorization, and
further provided that an applicant may replace an existing wireless support
structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a structure of the same height
subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable
permit.
      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its
wireless support structure.
      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements
between such support structures and any existing wireless support structure or
other facilities in and around the right-of-way.
      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support
structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.
      (7)   The execution of a small wireless facility collocation agreement
that incorporates any additional terms and conditions mutually agreed upon by
the city and the applicant. A small wireless facility collocation agreement is
considered public data not on individuals and is accessible to the public.
Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or
affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant.
   (D)   Payment of rent.
      (1)   For collocations of small wireless facilities, the city can, either
in its permit or in a standard collocation agreement, require annual rental
payments for the small wireless collocations of up to:
         (a)   $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure;
         (b)   $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation; or
         (c)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
            1.   $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
            2.   $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or
            3.   The actual cost of electricity if the actual cost exceeds the
foregoing.
      (2)   For collocations or placements, other than of small wireless
facilities, the city can charge a mutually agreed upon rent reached between the
city and the applicant.
   (E)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited
to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minnesota Rules Ch.
7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground
utilities before excavating as determined by the city.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.15 TIMELINE FOR ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Denial in general. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when
necessary, to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   (B)   Procedure for denial on permits other than small wireless facilities
permits. The denial of a permit must be made in writing and must document the
basis for the denial. The city must notify the applicant or right-of-way user
in writing within three business days of the decision to deny a permit. If an
application is denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial
identified by the city and resubmit its application. If the application is
resubmitted within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional
application fee shall be imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted
application within 30 days after submission.
   (C)   Procedure for denial on small wireless facilities permits. The city
shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application within 90
days after filing of such application, unless the collocation is on a support
structure that already qualifies as an existing wireless tower or base station
under § 6409(a), codified at 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), which, in those instances,
the city shall approve or deny the small wireless facility permit within 60
days. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit
application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the
application within the review periods established in this section.
   (D)   Tolling of deadline on small wireless facility permit. The deadline
for action on a small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
      (1)   The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking
approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-
day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days and shall inform the affected applicant in writing of
such extension;
      (2)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information
and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within
30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or
information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of
any still-missing information; and
      (3)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing
to toll the review period.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.16 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish an obstruction permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.
   (C)   Small wireless facility permit fee.
      (1)   The city shall impose a one-time small wireless facility permit fee
at the time of approval of the collocation application in an amount sufficient
to recover:
         (a)   Management costs;
         (b)   Restoration costs or degradation fee, if applicable;
         (c)   Inspection fees, if applicable; and
         (d)   City engineering, make-ready and construction costs associated
with collocation of small wireless facilities.
      (2)   The city will not impose a small wireless facility permit fee for
any of the following activities:
         (a)   Routine maintenance of a small wireless facility;
         (b)   Replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility
that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or
structural loading than the small wireless facility being replaced; or
         (c)   Installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement
of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes.
   (D)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
   (E)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
91.23 of this subchapter are not refundable.
   (F)   Application to franchises. For right-of-way users subject to a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise, unless
otherwise agreed to in the franchise.
   (G)   Rules. All permit fees shall be established consistent with the
provisions of Minnesota Rules 7819.1000, when applicable.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.17 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city
may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If following
such restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee’s improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
all costs associated with having to correct the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rules 7819.3000.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and
shall comply with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee,
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
the permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under
the construction performance bond.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.18 PERMIT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area:
      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and
      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Obstruction from small wireless facility work. The city will not
require an additional small wireless facility permit fee or require a new
collocation agreement for routine maintenance of a small wireless facility, for
replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility that is
substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or
structural loading than the small wireless facility being replaced; or for
installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with national safety codes. The city may require
advance notification, however, of these activities if the work will obstruct
the public right-of-way.
   (C)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. For a small wireless facility permit, the term of the
permit is equal to the length of time that the small wireless facility is in
use, unless the permit is revoked under this section. No permittee may begin
its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue
working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the
permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it
needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before
working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary
application must be submitted before the permit end date.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.19 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules
7819.1100, when applicable, and other local requirements, when applicable, and
in so far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as
they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.20 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minnesota Rules 7819.1300.
   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site available to
city personnel and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of city.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the city may order the immediate
cessation of any work, which poses a serious threat to the life, health,
safety, or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The city may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does
not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the city that the
violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the
required time, the city may revoke the permit per §
91.30.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.21 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately
notify the city of any event regarding its facilities that it considers being
an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply for the necessary permits,
pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements
necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the actions it
took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the
city will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility owner
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the
normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this
code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the
right-of-way and comply with all the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.22 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city
of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.23 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittees control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition of the permit.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations might be cause for revocation of the permit.
   (C)   Procedural requirements. If the city decides to revoke the permit, the
revocation must be made in writing and must document the basis for the
revocation. The city must notify the right-of-way user in writing within three
business days of the decision to revoke a permit.
   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.24 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. If allowed by statute, each permittee shall
provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minnesota
Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100
   (B)   Service laterals. Permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules
7560.0150, subpart 2, shall require the permittee’s use of appropriate means of
establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the city reasonably
requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the city
evidence of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this
division (B) and with applicable Gopher State One-Call Law and Minnesota rules
governing service laterals install after December 31, 2005, shall be a
condition of any city approval necessary for:
      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project
including those under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (2)   City approval of performance under development agreements, or other
subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be amended from
time to time. The city shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of
providing such information. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information
on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit
issued for the work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its
subcontractors.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.25 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement. Placement, location and relocation of facilities must
comply with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time
to time, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority
otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the right-of-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
   (C)   Limitation of space. Subject to M.S. § 237.163, as it may be amended
from time to time, to protect health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have the power to
deny permits and the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate
all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided
primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public’s needs for the
particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year
with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in
the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.26 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the
local representative as early as is reasonably possible and placed as required.
The costs associated therewith will be billed to that facility owner and must
be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which
it or its facilities damages. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the
cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another caused during the
city’s response to an emergency occasioned by that owner’s facilities.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.27 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains facilities, the facility
owner’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules
7819.3200.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.28 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minnesota Rules 7819.1250.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.29 ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove
them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way
repair, excavation, or construction, unless the city waives this requirement.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.30 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied a permit; has had permit revoked;
or believes that the fees imposed are invalid may have the denial, revocation,
or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City
Council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or
fee imposition will be writing and supported by written findings establishing
the reasonableness of the decision.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
§ 91.31 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 02-2018, passed 4-10-2018)
UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM
§ 91.50 PURPOSE.
   The city desires to maintain existing roadway names and property numbers,
where practical, while providing a uniform and coherent system of naming and
numbering future roadways and extensions of existing roadways and property
subdivided in or annexed to the city. The addressing system also seeks to aid
in location of individual properties by emergency services and to create
uniformity within the city.
(Prior Code, § 91.60) (Ord. 642, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 91.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDRESS. The number assigned a primary structure on a parcel identifying its
location on a roadway.
   AVENUE. A roadway that extends in a general north and south direction.
   BEND. A southwest or northeast winding irregular roadway that does not lend
itself to any other direction.
   BOULEVARD. A roadway that extends in a general southeast or northwest
diagonal direction and connects at least two U.S. Government Survey sections.
The roadway must also be a collector.
   CIRCLE. A short roadway that extends in a general north or south direction
and returns to itself.
   COURT. A short roadway that terminates in an east or west cul-de-sac.
   DRIVE. A roadway that extends in a general southwest or northeast diagonal
direction and connects at least two U.S. Government Survey sections. The
roadway must also be a collector.
   LANE. A short roadway that terminates in a north or south dead end.
   LOOP. A short roadway that extends in a general east or west direction and
returns to itself.
   PLACE. A short roadway that terminates in a north or south cul-de-sac.
   PRIMARY STRUCTURE. A building in which the principal use of a lot or parcel
is conducted. This may include residential, commercial, industrial or other
uses.
   ROADWAY. A public thoroughfare, which affords principal means of access to
abutting property.
   STREET. A roadway that extends in a general east and west direction.
   TRAIL. A southeast or northwest winding irregular roadway that does not lend
itself to any other direction.
   WAY. A short roadway that terminates in a east or west dead end.
(Prior Code, § 91.61) (Ord. 642, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 91.52 ADMINISTRATION.
   City staff, as directed by the City Clerk- Administrator, shall be
responsible for maintaining and implementing the addressing system outlined in
this subchapter. Appeals to interpretations of the subchapter by city staff
shall be directed to the City Council, and the City Council’s decision shall be
final. The city shall retain the right to accept or reject roadway names based
on the conditions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.62) (Ord. 642, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 91.53 ASSIGNMENT OF ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   The city shall be divided in the east and west directions by Old Hwy. 61 and
in the north and south direction by Main Street. Street names shall be assigned
a directional designation, such as north, south, east, west, northwest,
southwest, northeast and southeast, based on the location of the roadway in
relation to the dividing roadways. Each platted block or equivalent thereof
shall be assigned 100 numbers which shall be progressive in both directions
from the dividing roadways. All properties on the south and east side of the
roadway shall be assigned even numbers. All properties on the north and west
side of a roadway shall be assigned odd numbers. Structures with more than one
tenant, regardless of the use (residential, commercial, industrial and the
like) shall be assigned one address number and use unit, suite or apartment
numbers or letters for each tenant. Addresses shall not be assigned to vacant
lots.
(Prior Code, § 91.63) (Ord. 642, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 91.54 ASSIGNMENT OF ROADWAY NAMES.
   Existing roadway names shall be used when existing roadways are extended or
when a new roadway extends in the same general direction and alignment of an
existing roadway. When a new roadway is proposed during a subdivision request,
the applicant shall provide roadway names for review by the city. A roadway
name shall not be duplicated with that of an existing roadway name within the
city or any surrounding township. Exceptions may be made when the roadway is in
general alignment with an existing roadway and can be considered a continuation
of the roadway by the city. Names with similar spellings, pronunciations or
meanings may be considered duplications, and not allowed.
(Prior Code, § 91.64) (Ord. 642, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 91.55 EXISTING ADDRESSES AND ROADWAY NAMES.
   Existing addresses may or may not meet the criteria of this subchapter. It
is the intent of the city to keep existing addresses and roadway names that do
not create confusion or conflicts with the newly addressed areas. It may be
necessary to change existing addresses in order to address newly subdivided or
annexed property. When an address must be changed to meet the intent of this
subchapter and provide for location and identification by emergency services,
city staff shall notify the property owner of the pending address change in
writing along with an explanation as to why the address must be changed. The
property owner will then have 30 days from the date of notification to change
the display address to the newly assigned address number. Failure to change the
address shall result in enforcement action outlined by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.65) (Ord. 642, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 91.56 ADDRESS DISPLAY.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessor or occupant of property containing
a principal structure to display the proper address number assigned by the city
by affixing such number in durable material to the front of the structure
facing the street from which the address is derived. The numbers shall not be
less than three and one-half inches in height, shall be of a contrasting color
to the background and shall either be lighted or made of a reflective material.
The numbers shall be placed so as to be easily visible from the street. The
address number shall be in place prior to occupancy of a structure and shall be
a requirement of receiving a “certificate of occupancy” from the Building
Official.
(Prior Code, § 91.66) (Ord. 642, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or business or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99 of the city code. Each day the violation is permitted to exist
constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Sections
91.50 through
91.56 of this chapter shall also be enforceable by an administrative fine as
outlined in §
10.98 of this code of ordinances. The administrative fine for a violation of §§
91.50 through
91.56 of this chapter shall be $25. For each subsequent seven-day period that
the violation remains after the initial seven-day period following issuance of
an administrative fine shall, the fine shall increase by $25 up to a maximum
fine amount of $100.
(Prior Code, § 91.99) (Ord. 642, passed 7-5-2006)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
92.01   West Side Park
   
92.02   Legion Park
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 WEST SIDE PARK.
   (A)   The term WESTSIDE PARK, as used in this section, is hereby defined to
be the area bounded by Dunn Avenue on the west, the Burlington Northern
switching tracks on the east, 3rd Street S.W. on the south and the Main Street
Foot Path between Highway 61 and Dunn Avenue on the north, and includes the
playground, picnic shelter, parking lot and softball fields.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter or otherwise
use the West Side Park area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. for
any purpose other than to pass through the area, except by permit granted by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 92.01) (Ord. 553, passed 12-6-1988) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 LEGION PARK.
   (A)   The term LEGION PARK, as used in this section, is hereby defined as
the area bounded by property identified by PID 40.5009.000 to the west, the
Burlington Northern railroad tracks on the east, 3rd Street NE on the south and
the Grindstone River on the north, and includes the playground, picnic shelter,
parking lot, restrooms and undeveloped areas.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter or otherwise
use the Legion Park area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. for any
purpose other than to pass through the area, except by permit granted by the
City Council.
(Ord. 05-2017, passed 4-11-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
92.01 of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $200.
(Prior Code, § 92.99) (Ord. 553, passed 12-6-1988)
CHAPTER 93: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
Shade Trees; Dutch Elm Disease
   
93.01   Purpose
   
93.02   Forester; duties
   
93.03   Prohibited interference with Forester
   
93.04   Program for shade tree disease control
   
93.05   Nuisances declared
   
93.06   Inspection and investigation by Forester
   
93.07   Abatement procedure
   
93.08   Abatement methods
   
93.09   Transportation of elm wood
   
93.10   Stockpiling of elm wood
   
93.11   Adoption of regulations by reference
   
93.12   Conflicting provisions
SHADE TREES; DUTCH ELM DISEASE
§ 93.01 PURPOSE.
   The City Council has determined that the health of elm trees within the
municipal limits is threatened by “Dutch Elm disease”, caused by the fungus
Ceratocystis ulmi. It is further determined that the loss of elm trees growing
upon public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of
property within the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and
convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the Council to
control and prevent the spread of this disease and this subchapter is enacted
for this purpose.
(Prior Code, § 93.01) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977)
§ 93.02 FORESTER; DUTIES.
   (A)   Position created. The position of Forester (Tree Inspector) is hereby
created within the city to carry out the provisions of M.S. § 18G.13, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Duties of Forester. It is the duty of the Forester to coordinate,
under the direction and control of the Council, all activities of the
municipality relating to the control and prevention of Dutch Elm disease. The
Forester shall recommend to the Council the details of the program for the
control of such disease and perform the duties incident to such a program
adopted by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 93.02) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977)
§ 93.03 PROHIBITED INTERFERENCE WITH FORESTER.
   It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Forester or his or her agents while they are engaged in the performance of
duties imposed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 93.03) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 PROGRAM FOR SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL.
   (A)   It is the intention of the Council to conduct a program of plant pest
control pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 18G.13, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   This program is directed specifically at the control of Dutch Elm
disease. The City Forester shall direct the shade tree disease control program
and be the contact between the Commissioner of Agriculture and the Council.
(Prior Code, § 93.04) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977)
§ 93.05 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   (A)   Nuisances. The following things are public nuisances, whenever they
may be found within the city:
      (1)   Any elm tree infected with Dutch Elm disease;
      (2)   Any diseased elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps
and firewood, or other material from which the bark has not been removed; and/
or
      (3)   Any elm tree and part thereof infested by elm bark beetles.
   (B)   Abatement. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public
nuisance, as defined in division (A) above, to remain on any premises owned or
controlled by him or her within the city. Such nuisances may be abated in the
manner prescribed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 93.05) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.06 INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION BY FORESTER.
   (A)   Generally. The Forester shall inspect all premises and places within
the city to determine whether any condition described in §
93.05 of this chapter exists thereon. This inspection shall be done in
accordance with the state’s Department of Agriculture recommendations or as
often as necessary. The Forester shall investigate all reports of the existence
of nuisances described in §
93.05 of this chapter.
   (B)   Entry on private premises. The Forester, or his or her duly authorized
agents, may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose
of carrying out any of the duties assigned him or her under this subchapter.
   (C)   Diagnosis. The Forester may, upon finding conditions indicating Dutch
Elm disease, send appropriate samples to the state’s Shade Tree Disease
Laboratory for diagnosis or follow diagnostic recommendations of the
Commissioner of Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 93.06) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977)
§ 93.07 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the Forester finds with reasonable certainty that any of the
conditions defined in §
93.05 of this chapter exists in any tree or wood in any public or private place
in the city, he or she shall proceed as follows.
      (1)   The Forester shall notify the property owner by mail that the
nuisance will be abated within a specified time, not more than ten days from
the date of mailing such notice.
      (2)   In cases of non-compliance by the property owner within the period
specified by the notice, the Forester shall immediately abate the nuisance by
using municipal labor or by contracting for such services, and shall report
such action to the Council. The Forester may bill the owner of private property
for costs incurred for abating such nuisance.
   (B)   The Forester shall keep a record of trees removed and the cost of all
abatements done under this section and shall report monthly to the Clerk-
Administrator all work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and
certifying the description of the land, lots and parcels involved and the
amounts chargeable to each.
   (C)   On or before September 1 of each year, the Clerk-Administrator shall
list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or
parcel to which they are attributable under this subchapter. The Council may
then charge all or any portion of such charges against the property involved as
a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor with
collection in the following year with that year’s current taxes.
(Prior Code, § 93.07) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977)
§ 93.08 ABATEMENT METHODS.
   In abating the nuisances defined in §
93.05 of this chapter, the Forester shall cause the removed tree or wood to be
effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent, as fully as possible, the
spread of the disease. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in
accordance with methods prescribed by the Commissioner of Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 93.08) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977)
§ 93.09 TRANSPORTATION OF ELM WOOD.
   It is unlawful for any person to transport within the city any bark-bearing
elm wood without having obtained a permit from the Forester. The Forester shall
grant such permits only in conformity with the state-approved removal and wood
disposal practices.
(Prior Code, § 93.09) (Ord. 526, passed 4-5-1977) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.10 STOCKPILING OF ELM WOOD.
   (A)   The stockpiling of bark-bearing elm wood within the city limits shall
be permitted during the period from September 15 through April 1 of any given
year.
   (B)   Any such wood not utilized by April 1 of any year must then be removed
and disposed of as provided by this subchapter and the regulations incorporated
thereby.
(Prior Code, § 93.10) (Ord. 530, passed 11-6-1979)
§ 93.11 ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.
   Minn. Rules parts 1505.0010 through 1505.0600, Shade Tree Disease Control
Program, together with amendments thereof to date, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this subchapter as if set out herein in full,
except as hereinafter provided. A copy of said agency rules herewith
incorporated is on file in the Clerk-Administrator’s office.
(Prior Code, § 93.11) (Ord. 530, passed 11-6-1979)
§ 93.12 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   Where the provisions of §§
93.10 and
93.11 of this chapter conflict or are inconsistent with any other ordinance or
code provision of the city, the provisions of §§
93.10 and
93.11 of this chapter shall supersede except in instances where one regulation
is more restrictive than another, in which case the more restrictive shall
apply and control.
(Prior Code, § 93.12) (Ord. 530, passed 11-6-1979)
CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES
Section
   
94.01   Public nuisance prohibition
   
94.02   Public nuisances affecting health
   
94.03   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
94.04   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
94.05   Noise violations
   
94.06   Nuisance parking and storage
   
94.07   Inoperable motor vehicles
   
94.08   Duties of city officers
   
94.09   Abatement procedure
   
94.10   Recovery of cost
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITION.
   (A)   A person must not act, or fail to act, in a manner that is or causes a
public nuisance.
   (B)   For purpose of this chapter, a person that does any of the following
is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance:
      (1)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public;
      (2)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage, any
public highway or right-of-way or waters used by the public; or
      (3)   Does any other act or omission declared by law or this chapter to
be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   The exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulation of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight,
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except otherwise
authorized and permitted by federal, state or local law;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor is manufactured or
disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort, for the purpose of drinking intoxicating or 3.2% malt
liquor, or where intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor is kept for sale or other
disposition in violation of law and all liquor and other property used for
maintaining that place; and
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating or
3.2% malt liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral
or illegal purpose.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice that is not removed from public sidewalks within 24
hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to
fall; this does not apply to sidewalks cleaned by the city;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees that are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (D)   Any person participating in any party or other gathering that causes
the unreasonable disturbing of the peace, quiet or repose of another person;
   (E)   All unnecessary and annoying vibrations;
   (F)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under conditions as are
permitted by this chapter or other applicable law;
   (G)   Radio aerials or television antennas erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (H)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk that causes large crowds or people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   (I)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and
maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (J)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to follow across any sidewalk;
   (K)   Any barbed wire fence located less than six feet above the ground and
within three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (L)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (M)   Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public
properties;
   (N)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other materials in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or other
safety hazards from such accumulation;
   (O)   Any well, hole or similar excavation that is left uncovered or in such
other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (P)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash or other materials;
   (Q)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substances that may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over such
substance;
   (R)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (S)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting
is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one footcandle when
abutting any commercial or industrial parcel; and
   (T)   All other conditions or things that are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of another.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 NOISE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited noises. The following are declared to be nuisances
affecting public health, safety, peace or welfare:
      (1)   Any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or
welfare of any person, or precludes their enjoyment of property, or affects
their property’s value (this general prohibition is not limited by any specific
restrictions provided in this chapter);
      (2)   All obnoxious noises, motor vehicle or otherwise, in violation of
Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby
incorporated into this ordinance by reference;
      (3)   The use of any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create
loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
      (4)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharge of the
exhaust of any statutory internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), snowmobile or any recreational device,
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
      (5)   Any loud or excessive noise in the loading, unloading or unpacking
of any vehicle; and
      (6)   The use or operation, or permitting the use or operation, of any
radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument music device, paging
system, machine or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a
distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of any person nearby.
   (B)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.
      (1)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn
mower, power hedge clipper, chainsaw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or
other similar domestic power equipment, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
on any weekend or holiday. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this
provision.
      (2)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse
in any residential district, except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any
weekend or holiday.
      (3)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric-, diesel- or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment, except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
      (4)   Radios, music devices, paging systems, and the like. The operation
of any device referred to in division (A)(6) above, between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line
of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of 50
feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (C)   Noise impact statements. The Council may require any person applying
for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure,
operation, process, installation, alteration or project that may be considered
a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a form
prescribed by the Council. The Council shall evaluate each such statement and
take its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving the license or
permit applied for or the zoning changes requested.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on
residentially zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles,
materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes
in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public
nuisance because it:
      (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;
      (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
      (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
      (4)   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial
advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;
      (5)   Decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ use and enjoyment of
their property and neighborhood; and
      (6)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood
patterns.
   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.
      (1)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
ice fishing houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-
permanent structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front
yard area of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front
property line.
      (2)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
pipe; lumber, forms, steel, machinery or similar materials, including all
materials used in conjunction with a business, outside on residential property,
unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the following requirements.
         (a)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be
parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except as otherwise
permitted or required by the city because of non-residential characteristics of
the property. The maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional guests
who do not reside on the property.
         (b)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front yard
areas must be on a paved or graveled parking surface or driveway area.
         (c)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on
residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that property.
Students who are away from school for periods of time, but still claim the
property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the property.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Any motor vehicle described in this section
shall constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the
community as such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and
breeding ground for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well-
being of children and citizens. Motor vehicles also contain various fluids
which, if released into the environment, can and do cause significant health
risks to the community.
   (B)   Inoperable motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store
or abandon any motor vehicle that is not in operating condition, partially
dismantled, used for repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement
parts for other vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any
kind, or which is not properly licensed for operation within the state,
pursuant to M.S. § 168B.011, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Screening. This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in
a building and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which
does not foster complaint from a resident of the city. Privacy fencing is
permissible.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.08 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   City officials may apply and enforce any provision of this chapter relating
to public nuisances within this jurisdiction. Any peace officer or other
designated city official shall have the power to inspect private premises and
take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of
public nuisances. Except in emergency situations of imminent danger to human
life and safety, no peace officer or designated city official will enter
private property for the purpose of inspecting or preventing public nuisances
without the permission of the owner, resident or other person in control of the
property, unless the officer or person designated has obtained a warrant or
order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing entry.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016)
§ 94.09 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Procedure. Whenever the peace officer or other designated official
designated that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the premises
in the city, the official shall notify in writing the owner of record or
occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated
or abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to abate
the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be abated. If the
notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified, the
official shall report that fact forthwith to the City Council. Thereafter, the
City Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to
be heard, determine that the condition identified in the notice of violation is
a nuisance and further order that if the nuisance is not abated within the time
prescribed by the City Council, the city may seek injunctive relief by serving
a copy of the City Council order and notice of motion for summary enforcement
or obtain an administrative search and seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
   (B)   Notice. Written notice of the violation; notice of the time, date,
place and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of the City
Council order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be
served by a peace officer or designated official on the owner of record or
occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail.
If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown or if the owner
of record or occupant refuses to accept notice, notice of the violation shall
be served by positing it on the premises.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where
delay in abatement required to complete the procedure and notice requirements
as set forth in divisions (A) and (B) above will permit a continuing nuisance
to unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City Council may
order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary
enforcement, the peace officer or other designated official shall determine
that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city
and that delay in abatement will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or
welfare. The officer or designated official shall notify in writing the
occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance, whether public
health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement
required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A) above and may
order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is
not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition that
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
   (E)   Unlawful parties or gatherings.
      (1)   When law enforcement determines that a gathering is creating such a
noise disturbance as prohibited under §
94.04(D) of this chapter, the officer may order all persons present, other than
the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to
disburse immediately.
      (2)   No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by law
enforcement.
      (3)   Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of the
disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is
stopped.
   (F)   Judicial remedy. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from
seeking a judicial remedy when no other adequate administrative remedy exists.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.10 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability.
      (1)   The owner of the premises on which a nuisance has been abated by
the city, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on property not owned by
that person, shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk-Administrator or other city
official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
      (2)   Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
office of the City Clerk-Administrator.
   (B)   Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as
it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or
safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk-
Administrator shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other such charges as
well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to
which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then spread the
charges against the property under that statute and any other pertinent
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with
current truces the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten,
as the City Council may determine in each case.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, plus the costs of prosecution
in either case.
(Ord. 01-2016, passed 4-8-2016)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
111.   LIQUOR REGULATIONS
      
112.   PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
      
113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
114.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Applicants for city licenses
Business Signs
   
110.15   Definitions
   
110.16   Permits and fees
   
110.17   Height and area requirements
   
110.18   Spacing requirements
   
110.19   Illumination requirements
   
110.20   Landscaping requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 APPLICANTS FOR CITY LICENSES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized
criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing
background checks.
   (B)   Criminal history license background investigations.
      (1)   The County Sheriff’s Department is authorized, as the exclusive
entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on
the applicants for the following licenses within the city: city licenses -
employees of liquor establishments.
      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the County Sheriff’s Department is
authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance
with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at
the Police Department under the care and custody of the Chief Law Enforcement
Official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized
criminal history data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing
authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator or other city
staff involved in the license approval process.
      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information.
      (4)   Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for a license
on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly
related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the
applicant’s request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in
writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
         (b)   The applicant’s complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license; and
         (d)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 4-2008, passed 11-5-2008)
BUSINESS SIGNS
§ 110.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROUND SIGNS. Business signs, advertising one or more businesses, erected on
the same property that one of the businesses is conducted, where the face of
the sign either rests on the ground or is supported by a structure wider than
the sign face.
   PYLON SIGNS. Business signs, advertising one or more businesses, erected on
the same property that one of the businesses is conducted, where the face of
the sign is elevated.
(Ord. 603, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 110.16 PERMITS AND FEES.
   A permit shall be required prior to erection of any sign governed under this
subchapter. The fee for a sign permit shall be $25. In addition, a building
permit shall be required prior to construction of the sign.
(Ord. 603, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 110.17 HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Within an area zoned GB (General Business) or I (Industrial) within
750 of the centerline of Interstate Highway 35, pylon signs are allowed with
the following maximum dimensions, measured from grade to the top of the sign:
      (1)   Height: 100 feet; and
      (2)   Area: 250 square feet per face.
   (B)   In all other GB (General Business) or I (Industrial), all CB (Central
Business), and all RB (Residential Business) fronting on Minnesota Highways 23
or 48, or Pine County Highway 61, pylon signs are allowed with the following
maximum dimensions, measured from grade to the top of the sign:
      (1)   Height: 35 feet; and
      (2)   Area: 200 square feet per face.
   (C)   In all other RB (Residential Business), ground signs are allowed with
the following maximum dimensions, measured from grade to the top of the sign:
      (1)   Height: eight feet; and
      (2)   Area: 200 square feet per face.
   (D)   Ground signs are allowed, with (he dimensions indicated in division
(C) above, in all non- residential zones.
(Ord. 603, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 110.18 SPACING REQUIREMENTS.
   In all areas of the city where business signs are allowed under this
subchapter, the spacing of the signs shall be such that, in the opinion of the
city’s Building Official and/or the City Planner, does not obscure or otherwise
physically interfere with an official traffic- control device or a railroad
safety signal or sign, or to obstruct or physically interfere with the driver’s
view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic.
(Ord. 603, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 110.19 ILLUMINATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Illumination for all signs under this subchapter shall be by backlighting
(internal lights). All non- conforming signs erected prior to the passage of
this subchapter shall comply with this section within one year of the effective
date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 603, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 110.20 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   A landscaping plan shall be provided at the time of application. Said
landscaping plan shall be reviewed by the City Planner prior to issuance of a
permit.
(Ord. 603, passed 9-5-2000)
CHAPTER 111: LIQUOR REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
111.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
111.03   Definitions
   
111.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
   
111.05   Consumption in public places
Licensing
   
111.20   Number of licenses which may be issued
   
111.21   Term and expiration of licenses
   
111.22   Kinds of liquor licenses
   
111.23   License fees; pro rata
   
111.24   Council discretion to grant or deny a license
   
111.25   Application for license
   
111.26   Description of premises
   
111.27   Applications for renewal
   
111.28   Transfer of license
   
111.29   Investigation
   
111.30   Hearing and issuance
   
111.31   Restrictions on issuance
   
111.32   Conditions of license
   
111.33   Hours and days of sale
   
111.34   Minors on premises
   
111.35   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
111.36   Suspension and revocation
Municipal Liquor Stores
   
111.50   Application of this subchapter
   
111.51   Existing municipal stores continued
   
111.52   Location
   
111.53   Operation
   
111.54   Proof of financial responsibility
   
111.55   Issuance of other licenses
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by
reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the
intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A, as
it may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference or
referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this chapter is
adopted.
§ 111.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 111.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter:
   LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or “3.2 percent malt,” includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2
percent malt liquor.
   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a “restaurant” as
defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state
as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet
the definition of either a “small establishment,” “medium establishment” or
“large establishment” as defined in M.S. § 157.16, subd. 3(d), as it may be
amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that
receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is
heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of
this chapter unless it meets the definitions of “small establishment”, “medium
establishment” or “large establishment.”
§ 111.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non- transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   (C) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by
law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or
3.2 percent malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil penalty under the
provisions of §
111.99(B).
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in a
public park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any
public place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this
chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where
the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
Penalty, see §
111.99
LICENSING
§ 111.20 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue.
However, the number of licenses which may be granted under this chapter is
limited to the number of licenses which were issued as of the effective date of
this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are authorized by law or
election. The Council in its sound discretion may provide by ordinance that a
larger number of licenses may be issued up to the number of licenses authorized
by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. If a larger number of
licenses in a particular category has been authorized by a referendum held
under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.413, subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time, but not all of them have been issued, the larger number of
licenses is no longer in effect until the Council by ordinance determines that
any or all of the licenses may be issued. The Council is not required to issue
the full number of licenses that it has available.
§ 111.21 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses,
except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless
another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same
date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and
display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the
accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
§ 111.22 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
   The Council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is
authorized to issue the following licenses and permits, up to the number
specified in §
111.20. The Council of a city which has a municipal liquor store is authorized
to issue only those licenses specified in §
111.55.
   (A)   3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to
golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments
used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the incidental
sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
   (B)   3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license.
   (C)   Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to
a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.
   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to
exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off-sale license which was
first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off- sale intoxicating
liquor license established by the Council under §
111.23 shall not exceed $240 or a greater amount which may be permitted by M.S.
§ 340A.408, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the
following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers,
theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, and
exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by the
Council under §
111.23 shall not exceed the amounts provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 2
(b), as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound
discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor
off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(b), as it may be amended from time
to time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(a), as it may be amended from time
to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating
liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event
being held on the premises.
   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization
to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as provided by M.S.
§ 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in §
111.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least
30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which
serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food. The maximum fee for
this license, which shall be established by the Council under the provisions of
§
111.23, shall not exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. §
340A.504, subd. 3(b), as it may be amended from time to time.
   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city
has a population less than 10,000.
   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with
a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit
corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for
longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12
days worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.
   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25
guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may
be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant in §
111.03; and to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in
M.S. § 340A.4011, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time and to
theaters that meet the criteria in M.S. § 340A.404 subd. 1(b). The fee for an
on-sale wine license established by the Council under the provisions of §
111.23 shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also
holds an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt
liquor with a content over 3.2 percent (strong beer) without an additional
license.
   (J)   One day consumption and display permits with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a
social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.
   (K)   Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which
may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and
display permit under the provisions of §
111.23 shall not exceed $300, or the maximum amount permitted by M.S. §
340A.414, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time. Consumption and
display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.
   (L)   Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business
establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which
payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The
license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class,
at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine
or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for
consumption on the licensed premises only.
   (M)   Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an
auction. A license issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale of only
vintage wine of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale
by any wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine
for not more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of
wine are sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms, including
license fee, imposed by §
111.23.
   (N)   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on- sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued
to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture and who meet
the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(d) and 7(b), as it may be
amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on-sale may not exceed
3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed under this section possesses a
license for off-sale under division (O) below, the brew pub’s total combined
retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year,
provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.
   (O)   Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor license, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee
under division (N) above or that produces fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt
liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria established as M.S. §
340A.301, subd. 6(d) and 7(b), as they may be amended from time to time. Off-
sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at
exclusive liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed
from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive
liquor stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in the
manner required by M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to
time. Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year. If a brewer
licensed under this section possesses a license under division (N) above, the
brewer’s total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels
per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.
   (P)   Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued,
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers who
manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale
of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the brewer.
   (Q)   Brewer taproom license, may be issued to the holder of a brewer’s
license under M.S. § 340A.301 subd. 6(c), (i) or (j), as they may amended from
time to time. A brewer’s taproom license authorizes on-sale of malt liquor
produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one
brewery location owned by the brewer. A brewer may have only one taproom
license and may not have an ownership interest in a brewer licensed under M.S.
§ 340A.301 subd. 6(d), as it may be amended from time to time. A brewer taproom
license may not be issued to a brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of
malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of
wine annually. Within ten days of issuing a brewer taproom license the City
Clerk will inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of the licensee’s name,
address, trade name and the effective date and expiration date of the license.
The City Clerk will inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of a license
transfer, cancellation, suspension, or revocation during the license period.
   (R)   A cocktail room license may be issued to the holder of a
microdistillery license under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), as it may be amended
from time to time. A microdistillery cocktail room license authorizes on-sale
of distilled liquor produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises
of or adjacent to one distillery location owned by the distiller. The holder of
a microdistillery cocktail room license may also hold a license to operate a
restaurant at the distillery. No more than one cocktail room license may be
issued to any distiller and a microdistillery cocktail room license may not be
issued to any person having an ownership interest in a distillery licensed
under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(a), as it may be amended from time to time. No
single entity may hold both a microdistillery cocktail room and taproom license
and a microdistillery cocktail room and taproom license may not be co- located.
Within ten days of the issuance of a microdistillery cocktail room license, the
city shall inform the commissioner of public safety of the licensee’s name and
address and trade name, and the effective date and expiration date of the
license. The city shall also inform the commissioner of public safety of a
microdistillery cocktail room license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or
revocation during the license period.
§ 111.23 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a
liquor license.
   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time the fee for any of the
liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the
cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to the enforcement
of the liquor laws and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased
without providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all
affected licensees at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is
filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only
if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (F)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in
their annual license fee by the amount specified in M.S. § 340A.408, as it may
be amended from time to time, if at the time of initial application or renewal
they:
      (1)   Agree to have a private vendor approved by the city train all
employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to
the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the
responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
      (2)   Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons
appearing to be 30 years old or less;
      (3)   Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award
employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to punish
employees in the event of a failed compliance check;
      (4)   Failure to abide by the provisions of this division may result in
suspension of the license until the conditions of the fee reduction are met and
may result in suspension and/or revocation of the license pursuant to §
111.36 of this chapter.
§ 111.24 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application
for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has
a right to a license under this chapter.
§ 111.25 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the applicant’s
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant
is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from
time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times
effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the
license.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.26 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may
not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
§ 111.27 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
   At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision
whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
§ 111.28 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval
of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.29 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial
application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in
the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so,
on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may
contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The
applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of $500 which
shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary
investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be returned to the
applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on- sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either
conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public
Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be
$500, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation
is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid for the
initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The
unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the
application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation
and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable
in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive
investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the
application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine
license.
§ 111.30 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license
shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved
by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ 111.31 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued
within the city to any one person.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (D)    No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under state law.
(Ord. 03-2022, passed 5-10-2022) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.32 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   (A)   Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving
liquor in an establishment which has an “on-sale” license shall receive
training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training
shall be provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof of training
shall be provided by the licensee.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally
with the employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee
during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and
of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
   (F)   Failure by an off-sale intoxicating liquor licensee who has received a
fee reduction pursuant to §
111.23(F) of this chapter to abide with the provisions of §
111.23(F).
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.33 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City Council
may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours than state
law allows.
   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on- sale
licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally
occur.
   (C)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container
containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any
table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 30
minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on
the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale
can legally occur.
   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.34 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor
are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be
employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing
services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose
building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent
malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment
except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor
is not sold.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.35 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of
business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it
may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and
no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.36 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating
to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as they may be amended from time to time. The Council
may act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office
of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation
which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules
promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time:
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2 percent malt liquor, or
violation of §
111.04, the license shall be revoked.
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under
division (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable
statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as
follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year period, at least
one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed.
         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year period, at least
three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year period, at least
seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which the license
will be suspended.
   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten days.
Any suspension under this division (C) shall continue until the Council
determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state law and this
chapter have again been met.
   (D)   The provisions of §
111.99 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in
lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter.
Penalty, see §
111.99
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES
§ 111.50 APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter, consisting of §§
111.50 through
111.55, applies only to a city that has in existence on the effective date of
this chapter a municipal liquor store.
§ 111.51 EXISTING MUNICIPAL STORES CONTINUED.
   If the city has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a
municipal liquor store for the sale of intoxicating liquor, the store is
continued. Except as provided in §
111.55, no intoxicating liquor may be sold at retail elsewhere in the city.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.52 LOCATION.
   The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the city
as the Council determines by motion. However, no premises upon which taxes,
assessments, or other public charges are delinquent shall be leased for
municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to establish
additional off-sale and on-sale stores at other locations as it may, from time
to time, by motion, determine.
§ 111.53 OPERATION.
   (A)   Manager. The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge
of a Liquor Store Manager selected by the Council and paid compensation as is
fixed by the Council. The Manager shall not be a person who would be prohibited
by law or any provision of this chapter from being eligible for an intoxicating
liquor license. The Manager shall furnish a surety bond to the city,
conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of the office, in a sum
as specified by the Council. The bond premium may be paid by the city or the
Manager, in the discretion of the Council. The Manager shall operate the
municipal liquor store under the Council’s direction and shall perform those
duties in connection with the store as may be established by the Council. The
Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the conduct of the store in
full compliance with this chapter and with the laws relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.
   (B)   Other employees. The Council may also appoint additional employees as
may be required and shall fix their compensation. All employees, including the
Manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the Council. No person
under the age of 18 shall be employed in the store. The Council may require the
employees to furnish surety bonds conditioned for the faithful discharge of
their duties in a sum as specified by the Council. The premium on the bond may
be paid by the city or the employees, as the Council determines.
   (C)   Municipal liquor store fund. All of the revenues received from the
operation of a municipal liquor store shall be deposited in a municipal liquor
store fund from which all ordinary operating expenses, including compensation
of the Manager and employees, shall be paid. Surpluses accumulating in the fund
may be transferred to the general fund of the city or to any other appropriate
fund of the city by resolution of the Council, and may be expended for any
municipal purpose. The handling of municipal liquor store receipts and
disbursements shall comply with the procedure prescribed by law and charter for
the receipts and disbursements of city funds generally.
   (D)   Financial statement. The Council shall provide within 90 days
following the end of the calendar year for publication a balance sheet using
generally accepted accounting procedures and a statement of operations of the
municipal liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and statement shall be
published in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 471.6985, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (E)   Hours of operation. The hours during which the sale of intoxicating
liquor may be sold shall be as provided in §
111.33. No person, other than the Manager or a store employee, may remain in
the municipal liquor store longer than one-half hour after the time when the
sale of intoxicating liquor must cease.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.54 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required by
licensees of retail intoxicating liquor establishments under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 111.55 ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.
   (A)   On-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. The Council may
issue in its sound discretion on-sale licenses to a club under M.S. § 340A.404,
subd. 1(4), as it may be amended from time to time. If the voters have
authorized their issuance at a special election called for that purpose, the
Council may issue on its sound discretion on-sale liquor licenses to hotels and
restaurants. The number of on-sale licenses issued under this section is
governed by M.S. § 340A.413, as it may be amended from time to time, as limited
by the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of these licenses is governed
by the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. State law does
not authorize the issuance of off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating
liquor by cities which operate a municipal liquor dispensary.
   (C)   On- and off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses. The Council may
issue 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses in its sound discretion as provided in
this chapter.
   (D)   Brewer Taproom License. The Council may issue brewer taproom licenses
in its sound discretion as provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Microdistillery Cocktail Room License. The Council may issue
microdistillery cocktail room licenses in its sound discretion as provided in
this chapter.
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A,
as it may be amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated under that
chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each
violation of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this
chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in order
for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative
Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as they may be amended from time to
time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold
a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any
person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule
of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any
suspension unless the licenses is revoked:
      (1)   For the first violation within any three- year period, $500.
      (2)   For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.
      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year
period, $2,000.
   (C)   The term “violation” as used in this section includes any and all
violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they
may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be determined
on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-year period.
Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which
revocation is imposed.
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Adoption of state laws by reference
Licenses
   
112.15   License required; exceptions
   
112.16   License ineligibility
   
112.17   License application
   
112.18   License fees and term
   
112.19   Bond
   
112.20   License issuance and transferability
   
112.21   License suspension and revocation
Conditions of License
   
112.35   Generally
   
112.36   Maintaining the peace
   
112.37   License display
   
112.38   Records to be kept
   
112.39   Record inspections
   
112.40   Receipts
   
112.41   Reports to Sheriff of certain items received
   
112.42   Stolen or lost property
   
112.43   Sale and redemption restrictions
   
112.44   Inspection of items by Sheriff
   
112.45   Inspection of items by claimant
   
112.46   Gambling
   
112.47   Oversized items
   
112.48   Sales restrictions
   
112.49   Weapons
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that pawnbrokers and precious metal dealers
potentially provide an opportunity for the commission and concealment of
crimes. Such businesses have the ability to receive and transfer stolen
property easily and quickly. The City Council also finds that consumer
protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving pawnbrokers and
precious metal dealers. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent pawnbroking
and precious metal businesses from being used as facilities for the commission
of crimes and to ensure that such businesses comply with basic consumer
protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 112.01) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ITEM CONTAINING PRECIOUS METAL. An item made in whole or in part of metal
and containing more than 1% by weight of silver, gold or platinum.
   MINOR. Any natural person under the age of 18 years.
   OVERSIZED ITEM. Large items such as cars, boats and other motorized vehicles
and motorized equipment.
   PAWNBROKER. A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property or other valuable thing; who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at
a stipulated price; or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal
property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
To the extent that a pawnbroker business includes buying personal property
previously used, rented or leased, the provisions of this section shall be
applicable. Any bank, savings and loan association or credit union shall not be
deemed a pawnbroker for purposes of this section.
   PERSON. One or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited
partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic or non- profit
corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the state; or any other
business organization.
   PRECIOUS METAL DEALER. Any person engaging in the business of buying coins
or secondhand items containing precious metal, including, but not limited to,
jewelry, watches, eating utensils, candlesticks and religious and decorative
objects.
   PRECIOUS METALS. Silver, gold or platinum.
   SECONDHAND ITEM. Tangible personal property, excluding motor vehicles, which
has been previously used, rented, owned or leased.
(Prior Code, § 112.02) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.03 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of the chapter of state statutes on pawnbroker regulations,
M.S. Ch. 325J, as it may be amended, are hereby adopted as the minimum
standards for this code. Provisions of this chapter which are more restrictive
are in addition to those minimum standards contained in the chapter of the
state statutes. The provisions of M.S. §§ 325F.73 through 325F.744, as they may
be amended, are hereby adopted as the minimum standards for licensing precious
metal dealers under this code.
(Prior Code, § 112.03)
LICENSES
§ 112.15 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall engage in the trade or business of
pawnbroker or precious metal dealer within the city unless such person is
currently licensed under this chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Precious metal dealers conducting the following transactions are
not required to obtain a license under this section:
         (a)   Transactions at occasional “garage” or “yard” sales, or estate
sales or farm auctions held at the decedent’s residence, except that precious
metal dealers must comply with the requirements of M.S. §§ 325F.734 through
325F.742, as they may be amended from time to time, for these transactions;
         (b)   Transactions regulated by M.S. Ch. 80A, as it may be amended
from time to time;
         (c)   Transactions regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission Act of 1974, being Pub. Law No. 93-463 and Pub. Law No. 94-16, being
7 U.S.C., Ch. 1, as they may be amended;
         (d)   Transactions involving the purchase of precious metal grindings,
filings, slag, sweeps, scraps or dust from an industrial manufacturer, dental
lab, dentist or agent thereof;
         (e)   Transactions involving the purchase of photographic film, such
as lithographic and x-ray film or silver residue or flake recovered in
lithographic and x-ray film processing;
         (f)   Transactions involving coins, bullion or ingots;
         (g)   Transactions in which the second- hand item containing precious
metal is exchanged for a new item containing precious metal and the value of
the new item exceeds the value of the secondhand item; except that, a person
who is a precious metal dealer by engaging in a transaction which is not
exempted by this section must comply with the requirements of M.S. §§ 325F.734
through 325F.742, as they may be amended from time to time;
         (h)   Transactions between precious metal dealers if both dealers are
licensed under M.S. § 325F.733, as it may be amended from time to time, or if
the seller’s business is located outside of the state and the item is shipped
from outside the state to a dealer licensed under M.S. § 325F.733, as it may be
amended from time to time; or
         (i)   Transactions in which the buyer of the secondhand item
containing precious metal is engaged primarily in the business of buying and
selling antiques, and the items are resold in an unaltered condition except for
repair, and the items are resold at retail, and the buyer paid less than $2,500
for secondhand items containing precious metals purchased within any period of
12 consecutive months.
   (2)   A person who holds a motor vehicle dealer license is exempt from the
terms of this chapter with respect to motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 112.15) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.16 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Ineligible persons. No license shall be issued to any person who:
      (1)   Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
      (2)   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      (3)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the licensed
occupation and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of pawnbroker or precious metal
dealer under M.S. § 364.03(3), as it may be amended from time to time, or a
person not of good moral character and repute;
      (4)   Holds a liquor license under Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances);
      (5)   In the judgment of the City Council is not the real party in
interest or beneficial owner of the business operated under the license;
      (6)   Has had a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer’s license revoked
anywhere within five years of the license application;
      (7)   In the case of an individual, is not a resident of the city; in the
case of a partnership, the managing partner is not a resident of the city; or
in the case of a corporation, the manager is not a resident of the city. The
required residency must be established by the time the license is issued and
maintained throughout the existence of the license and all renewals. The time
for establishing residency within the city may, for good cause, be extended by
the Council. For the purposes of this division (A)(7), RESIDENT OF THE CITY
shall mean within 25 miles of the city.
   (B)   Ineligible places.
      (1)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under city ordinance or code provision or state law.
      (2)   No license shall be issued for operation in a residential zoning
district.
      (3)   No license shall be issued for a place or business which holds a
liquor license.
      (4)   No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or other government
agency are delinquent and unpaid.
(Prior Code, § 112.16) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.17 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application form. In addition to any information which shall be
required by the county pursuant to M.S. § 471.924, as it may be amended from
time to time, every application for a license under this chapter shall be made
on a form supplied by the city, shall be verified, and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Representations as to the applicant’s character;
      (2)   The business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate;
      (3)   Whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business
and, if not, who is;
      (4)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other
than his or her true name and, if so, what was the name, or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used;
      (5)   Whether the applicant is married or single and, if married, the
true name, place and date of birth and street address of the applicant’s
spouse;
      (6)   The street address at which the applicant and the applicant’s
spouse have lived during the preceding ten years;
      (7)   The kind, name and location of every business or occupation the
applicant and the applicant’s spouse have been engaged in during the preceding
ten years;
      (8)   The names and addresses of the applicant’s and the applicant’s
spouse’s employers and partners, if any, for the preceding ten years;
      (9)   Whether the applicant or the applicant’s spouse has ever been
convicted of a violation of any state law or local code provision or ordinance,
other than a non-alcohol related traffic offense. If so, the applicant shall
furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions
were had;
      (10)   Whether the applicant or the applicant’s spouse has ever been
engaged as an employee in, or has ever engaged in operating, a pawnshop or
precious metal dealership or other business of a similar nature. If so, the
applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place and length of time;
      (11)   Whether the applicant has ever been in military service. If so,
the applicant shall, upon request, exhibit all discharges;
      (12)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of all
partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a single
applicant as above. A managing partner, or partners, shall be designated. The
interest of each partner in the business shall be submitted with the
application, and if the partnership is required to file a certificate as to
trade name under the provisions of M.S. Ch. 333, as it may be amended from time
to time, a copy of the certificate certified by the Clerk of District Court
shall be attached to the application;
      (13)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization, the
applicant shall submit the following:
         (a)   The name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation;
         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreements;
         (c)   The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge
of, or to be in charge of, the premises to be licensed, giving all information
about said person as is required in the case of a single applicant; and
         (d)   A list of all persons who, singly or together with their spouse,
own or control an interest in said corporation or association in excess of 5%
or who are officers of said corporation or association, together with their
addresses and all information as is required for a single applicant.
      (14)   A list of responsible persons, including the names of owners,
managers and assistant managers, who may be notified or contacted by state or
city employees in case of emergency. These persons shall be residents of the
county or bordering city area as defined by M.S. § 473.121(2), as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (15)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker or precious metal
dealer license from any other governmental unit and whether the applicant is
licensed under M.S. §§ 471.924 or 25F.731 through 325F.744, as they may be
amended from time to time;
      (16)   Whether the applicant has ever been denied a pawnbroker or
precious metal dealer license from any other governmental unit;
      (17)   The location of the business premises;
      (18)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due
and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid and, if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid; and
      (19)   Other information which the city deems appropriate.
   (B)   False statements and material omissions. No person shall make a false
statement or material omission in a license application or investigation. Any
false statement or material omission shall be grounds for denial, suspension or
revocation of a license.
   (C)   Renewals applications. The application for the renewal of any existing
license shall be made at least 90 days prior to the date of the expiration of
the license and shall be made on the form which the Council provides.
(Prior Code, § 112.17) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.18 LICENSE FEES AND TERM.
   (A)   Fees. Every applicant for a new license shall pay to the city the
investigation fee of $100. This fee shall be for the purpose of conducting a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant. If the
Council believes that the public interest so warrants, it may require a similar
investigation at the time of renewal of any license. If an investigation is
ordered by the City Council at the time of license renewal, the applicant shall
pay the fee specified above; except that, the fee shall be the smaller of the
stated dollar amount or the actual cost of the investigation. There shall be no
refund of the investigation fee for any person after the investigation has
begun.
   (B)   Term; pro rata fee. Each license shall expire on December 31 of the
year in which it is issued. Fees for licenses issued during the license year
shall be prorated according to the number of months remaining in the year. For
this purpose, an unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as a whole
month which shall have elapsed.
   (C)   Refunds. No refund of any fee shall be made, except as authorized by
ordinance or code provision.
(Prior Code, § 112.18) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.19 BOND.
   At the time of filing an application for a license, the applicant shall file
a bond in the amount of $5,000 with the Clerk-Administrator. The bond, with a
duly licensed surety company as surety thereon, must be approved as to form by
the City Attorney. Said bond must be conditioned that the licensee shall
observe the ordinances and code provisions of the city in relation to the
business of pawnbroker and precious metal dealer, and that the licensee will
account for and deliver to any person legally entitled thereto any articles
which may have come into the possession of the licensee as pawnbroker or
precious metal dealer, or in lieu thereof such licensee shall pay the person or
persons the reasonable value thereof.
(Prior Code, § 112.19) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.20 LICENSE ISSUANCE AND TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   No new license shall be issued until the County Sheriff’s Department
has conducted an investigation of the representations set forth in the
application, the applicant’s moral character and the applicant’s financial
status. All applicants must cooperate with this investigation.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council may issue a license before an investigation,
for an applicant who:
         (a)   Had a license within the previous five years for the
establishment which is specified in the application and which is continuing to
operate under a license;
         (b)   Wishes to resume operation of the business without sufficient
time, through no fault of his or her own, to meet the normal procedural
requirements;
         (c)   Had no criminal license convictions, or license suspensions or
revocations, during the prior licensed period; and
         (d)   Otherwise qualifies and meets the requirements for a license.
      (2)   In this situation, the City Council may immediately issue an
interim license to the applicant for a period no longer than 90 days. The
applicant must thereafter proceed through the specified requirements for an
investigation. The applicant shall have no greater right to continuation of the
license than he or she would have had to issuance of a new license following
the normal procedure without the interim license.
   (C)   After investigation and hearing, the Council shall, at its discretion,
grant or deny the application. Each application shall require a four-fifths
affirmative vote by the City Council for approval.
   (D)   (1)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the
premises described in the application.
      (2)   No license may be transferred to another person or place without
application to the Council in the same manner as an application for a new
license. Transfer of 25% or more of the stock of a corporation or of a
controlling interest thereof, whichever is less, shall be deemed a transfer of
the license of a corporate licensee. If the licensee is a corporation which is
wholly owned by another corporation, the same provisions about the transfer of
the stock or a controlling interest shall apply to that parent corporation, any
second parent corporation which wholly owns the parent corporation, and all
other similarly situated parent corporations up through the chain of ownership.
Transfer of this amount of stock without prior Council approval is a ground for
revocation or suspension of the license.
      (3)   In addition, each day the licensee operates under the license after
a transfer has taken place without obtaining Council approval shall be a
separate violation of this chapter.
   (E)   (1)   Any application for a new license may be considered by the City
Council at the same time an applicant is requesting any land use approvals
needed for the site, including site plan review, rezoning or an amendment to
the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
      (2)   Final approval of a license shall not be granted until the City
Council has given at least preliminary approval to any necessary land use
request.
      (3)   If an application is granted for a location where a building is
under construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be
delivered to the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for
the licensed premises.
   (F)   In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal representative of
a licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days
after the licensee’s death.
(Prior Code, § 112.20) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.21 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The Council may either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke any
license or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 for each violation upon a
finding that the licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee has failed to
comply with any applicable statute, regulation, code provision or ordinance
relating to this chapter. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until
the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§
14.57 through 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, with the
exception of the suspension provided for in division (A)(2) below.
      (2)   Any conviction by the licensee for theft, burglary, robbery,
receiving stolen property or any other crime or violation involving stolen
property shall result in the immediate suspension pending a hearing on
revocation of any license issued hereunder.
   (B)   Delinquent taxes.
      (1)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this
chapter for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments
or other financial claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent or
unpaid.
      (2)   If an action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 278, as it may be amended from time to time, questioning the amount or
validity of taxes, the Council may on application by the licensee waive strict
compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes,
or any portion thereof, which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year
after becoming due unless such one year period is extended through no fault of
the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 112.21) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
CONDITIONS OF LICENSE
§ 112.35 GENERALLY.
   Every license is subject to the conditions in the following sections, in all
other provisions of this chapter, and of any other applicable regulations,
ordinances, code provisions or state law.
(Prior Code, § 112.35) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.36 MAINTAINING THE PEACE.
   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of his or her place of
business and the conditions of order in it. The act of any employee of the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable for all penalties provided by this chapter equally with the
employee, except criminal penalties.
(Prior Code, § 112.36) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.37 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   Every license must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for
which it is used.
(Prior Code, § 112.37) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.38 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   At the time of receipt of an item of property, every licensee shall
immediately record, in English, in an indelible ink, in a book or journal or on
pawn slips:
   (A)   An accurate description of the item of property including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name or other identifying mark on such item;
   (B)   The date the item of property was received by the licensee;
   (C)   The name, address and date of birth and reasonably accurate physical
description of the person from whom the item of property was received;
   (D)   The amount of money loaned upon or pledged for the item; and
   (E)   The identification number from one of the following forms of
identification of the person from whom the item was received:
      (1)   A valid Minnesota photo driver’s license;
      (2)   A Minnesota photo identification card;
      (3)   A photo identification card issued by the state of residency of the
person from whom the item was received and one other valid form of
identification;
      (4)   A passport;
      (5)   A military photo identification; or
      (6)   A tribal photo I.D.
(Prior Code, § 112.38) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.39 RECORD INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The licensee shall make available the information required in §
112.38 of this chapter at all reasonable times for inspection by the County
Sheriff’s Department.
   (B)   The information required in §
112.38 of this chapter shall be retained by the pawnbroker or precious metal
dealer for at least four years.
(Prior Code, § 112.39) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.40 RECEIPTS.
   The licensee shall provide a receipt to the seller or pledger of any item of
property received, which shall be numbered to correspond to the entry in the
licensee’s records and shall include:
   (A)   The pre-printed name, address and phone number of the pawnbroker or
precious metal dealer business;
   (B)   The date on which the item was received by the pawnbroker or precious
metal dealer;
   (C)   A description of the item received and amount paid to the pledger or
seller in exchange for the item pawned or sold, and whether it was pawned or
sold;
   (D)   The last regular business day by which the item must be redeemed by
the pledger without risk that the item will be sold and the amount necessary to
redeem the pawned item on that date;
   (E)   The annual rate of interest charged on pawned items received; and
   (F)   The name and address of the seller or pledger.
(Prior Code, § 112.40) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.41 REPORTS TO SHERIFF OF CERTAIN ITEMS RECEIVED.
   (A)   For the types of items listed below, the licensee must submit to the
County Sheriff’s Department on a daily basis a list of the specific items
purchased or received that day.
   (B)   The list must be on forms approved by the city and the Sheriff’s
Department and must contain all of the information itemized in §
112.38 of this chapter:
      (1)   Any item with a serial number, identification number or “operation
identification” number;
      (2)   Cameras;
      (3)   Electronic, audio, video or radar detection equipment;
      (4)   Precious jewelry, gems and metals;
      (5)   Artist-signed or artist-attributed works of art;
      (6)   Firearms; and
      (7)   Any item not included in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(6) above
which the pawnbroker or precious metal dealer intends to sell for more than
$200, except for furniture and kitchen or laundry appliances.
(Prior Code, § 112.41) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.42 STOLEN OR LOST PROPERTY.
   A pawnbroker or precious metal dealer must report to the County Sheriff’s
Department any item pledged or received, or sought to be pledged or received,
if the pawnbroker or precious metal dealer has reason to believe that the
article was stolen or lost.
(Prior Code, § 112.42) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.43 SALE AND REDEMPTION RESTRICTIONS.
   Whenever the County Sheriff’s Department notifies the licensee not to sell
an item, the item shall not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until
authorized to be released by the County Sheriff’s Department.
(Prior Code, § 112.43) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.44 INSPECTION OF ITEMS BY SHERIFF.
   The pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall, at all times during the term
of the license, allow the County Sheriff’s Department to enter the premises
where the pawnbroker or precious metals dealer business is located and any
other premises where items purchased or received as part of the business are
stored, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and the merchandise therein
to locate items suspected or alleged to have been stolen or otherwise
improperly disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 112.44) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
§ 112.45 INSPECTION OF ITEMS BY CLAIMANT.
   All the items coming into possession of the licensee shall at all times be
open to inspection and right of examination of any person claiming to have been
the owner thereof or claiming to have any interest therein, when such person is
accompanied by a County Sheriff’s Department officer.
(Prior Code, § 112.45) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.46 GAMBLING.
   (A)   No licensee may keep, possess or operate or permit the keeping,
possession or operation on the licensed premises of dice, slot machines,
roulette wheels, punchboards, blackjack tables or pinball machines which return
coins or slugs, chips or tokens of any kind, which are redeemable in
merchandise or cash.
   (B)   No gambling equipment authorized under M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.61,
as they may be amended from time to time, may be kept or operated and no
raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises and/or in adjoining rooms.
   (C)   The purchase of lottery tickets may take place on the licensed
premises as authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to M.S. §§
349A.01 through 349A.15, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 112.46) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.47 OVERSIZED ITEMS.
   All items must be stored within the licensed premises building, except the
city may permit the licensee to designate one locked and secured warehouse
building within the city within which the licensee may store oversized items.
No item may be stored in the designated warehouse building that is not reported
in the journal pursuant to §
112.38 of this chapter. The licensee shall permit immediate inspection of the
warehouse at any time during business hours by the city and failure to do so is
a violation of this chapter. Oversized items may not be stored in parking lots
or other outside areas. All provisions in this subchapter regarding
recordkeeping and reporting shall apply to oversized items.
(Prior Code, § 112.47) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.48 SALES RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   All items accepted by a licensee at a licensed location in the city
shall be for pledge or sale through a licensed location in the city.
   (B)   No licensee under this chapter shall sell any items which are
transferred from a non-licensed facility or a licensed facility outside the
city.
(Prior Code, § 112.48) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.49 WEAPONS.
   (A)   A pawnbroker or precious metal dealer may not receive as a pledge or
otherwise, or accept for consignment or sale, any firearm, unless the
pawnbroker or precious metal dealer also maintains a federal firearms dealer’s
license.
   (B)   A pawnbroker or precious metal dealer may not receive as a pledge or
otherwise, or accept for consignment or sale, any assault weapon.
(Prior Code, § 112.49) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any sanctions that may be imposed against a licensee under
this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 112.99) (Ord. 583, passed 11-6-1996)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
113.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
113.04   License ineligibility
   
113.05   License suspension and revocation
   
113.06   License transferability
   
113.07   Registration
   
113.08   Prohibited activities
   
113.09   Exclusion by placard
   
113.10   Effectiveness
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to- house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to- street or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or
otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
HAWKER.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays, defined by state law,
shall not be counted as REGULAR BUSINESS DAYS.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to- house, door-to-door, business-
to-business, street-to- street or any other type of place-to-place movement,
for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the
same as the term CANVASSER.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter or empty store front for
the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell,
and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property
and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than
14 consecutive days.
§ 113.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person selling
or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise or
other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the
wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, as
shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any
officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict
door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be
required to register as solicitors under §
113.07 of this chapter. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door
canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious,
political and other ideas.
§ 113.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S. Ch.
329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a license for
the
activity.
   (B)   City license required. Pursuant to M.S. § 437.02, as it may be amended
from time to time, except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person
shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without
first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need not be licensed,
but are still required to register pursuant to §
113.07 of this chapter.
   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting business operations in the
city. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the City Clerk-Administrator. All
applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include
the following information:
      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name;
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers;
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features and the like);
      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence;
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence;
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent;
      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business (if any);
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant,
including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines;
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license;
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license;
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business
and, if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city, with a maximum 14 consecutive
days;
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses;
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;
      (15)   Proof of any required county license;
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided;
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council;
      (19)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form
of identification; and
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number (VIN) for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a physical description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established by the city.
   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the City Clerk-Administrator, within two regular business
days, must determine if the application is complete. An application is
determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the
City Clerk- Administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the
City Clerk-Administrator must inform the applicant of the required necessary
information that is missing. If the application is complete, the City Clerk-
Administrator must order any investigation, including background checks,
necessary to verify the information provided with the application. Within ten
regular business days of receiving a complete application, the City Clerk-
Administrator must issue the license unless there exist grounds for denying the
license under §
113.04 of this chapter, in which case the Clerk-Administrator must deny the
license application. If the City Clerk-Administrator denies the license
application, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the
reason for denial and of the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by
requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing
before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days
of the date of the request for a public hearing. The decision of the City
Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the state’s
Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.
   (F)   Duration.
      (1)   An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of issue.
      (2)   All other licenses granted to peddlers and transient merchants
under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the
license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street or other type of
place-to-place movement when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that
person’s State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech,
press, religion and the like; except that, this exemption may be lost if the
person’s exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license;
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application;
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include, but not be limited to,
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices and any
form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person;
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant; and
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Office of the state’s Attorney General, or other state attorney
general’s office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or
agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed against the
applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 113.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or
incorrect statements provided by the applicant on the application form;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity;
      (3)   Subsequent conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under §
113.04 of this chapter;
      (4)   Engaging in prohibited activity as provided under §
113.08 of this chapter; and/or
      (5)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C)
above, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no
request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk-Administrator within ten
regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed
with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service
shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.
If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall
be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular
business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) above.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.07 REGISTRATION.
   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter under §
113.03 of this chapter, shall be required to register with the city. Persons
engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term
DOOR-TO- DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as
vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas.
Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application,
but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration
form, the City Clerk-Administrator shall issue to the registrant a certificate
of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration
shall be non-transferable.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure;
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way;
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public;
   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person;
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person; and/or
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conducting business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48-point in size stating “No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants” or “Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants Prohibited” or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign
or placard under this section.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.10 EFFECTIVENESS.
   The provisions of §§
113.01,
113.02,
113.08 and
113.09 of this chapter shall automatically apply upon adoption of this chapter.
Sections
113.03,
113.04,
113.05,
113.06 and
113.07 of this chapter shall not be effective until the adoption of a City
Council resolution or ordinance authorizing the licensing of persons covered by
those sections.
CHAPTER 114: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Section
   
114.01   Findings and purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Location
   
114.04   Sign restrictions
   
114.05   Additional conditions for adult cabarets
   
114.06   Hours of operation
   
114.07   Licensing
§ 114.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Studies conducted by the Minnesota Attorney General, the American
Planning Association and cities such as St. Paul, Minnesota, Indianapolis,
Indiana, Alexandria, Minnesota, Rochester, Minnesota, Phoenix, Arizona, Los
Angeles, California, and Seattle, Washington, have studied the impacts that
adult establishments have in those communities. These studies have concluded
that adult establishments have adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhoods.
Those impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased
transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks.
   (B)   Based on these studies and findings, the City Council concludes the
following.
      (1)   Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types
set forth above.
      (2)   The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish
if adult establishments are governed by zoning requirements, licensing
requirements and health requirements.
      (3)   It is not the intent to prohibit adult establishments from having a
reasonable opportunity to locate in the city.
      (4)   The provisions of M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to
time, allows the city to adopt regulations to promote the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.
      (5)   The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be
promoted by the city adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
(Prior Code, § 114.01) (Ord. 593, passed 3-2-1999)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. A business engaged in any of the following activities
or which utilizes any of the following business procedures or practices:
      (1)   A business that is conducted exclusively for the patronage of
adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage, either
by operation of law or by the owners of such business;
      (2)   Any business that has at least 20% of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, attics or any portion of the
business not open to the public) devoted to items, merchandise or other
material that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (3)   Any adult use, as defined in this section.
   ADULT USE. An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described
below:
      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent
or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when such person is nude.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establish- ment or business used for the
barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audio tape, videotape or motion picture film if such business is not
open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public,
excluding any minor by reason of age, or if at least 20% of its floor area (not
including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, attics or any portion
of the business not open to the public) is devoted to items, merchandise or
other material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A business or establishment that provides dancing or
other live entertainment to patrons if the dancing and live entertainment is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction of matter that seeks to evoke, arouse or excite the patrons’ sexual
or erotic feelings or desire.
      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTAB- LISHMENT. A business or establishment
that excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an
employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished
and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (5)   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A business or establishment that
excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of engaging
in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
      (6)   ADULT HEALTH SPORT CLUB. A health/sport club which excludes minors
by reason of age, if such club is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage and where material is presented which is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (8)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR OR HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or health
club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services
of massage, if such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (9)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business or establishment with
a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if such
material is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (10)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. A business or establishment that provides
customers figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in
specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or
otherwise depicted by such customers.
      (11)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (12)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A motion picture theater with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material if such theater as
a prevailing practice excludes minors by reason of age or if such material is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
      (13)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business which has as a principal
activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which
are designed for sexual stimulation.
      (14)   ADULT SAUNA. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, and
which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (15)   ADULT STEAM ROOM BATH- HOUSE FACILITY. A building or portion of a
building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a
building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service provided by the
steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (16)   OTHER. Any other adult use determined to be in the same general
nature of the intent of this chapter by the city’s Zoning Administrator. An
appeal of the determination shall be heard by the Planning Commission and the
City Council using the process described in the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning
Ordinance.
   NUDE OR SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, anus or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct:
anilingus; buggery; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio;
necrophilia; pederasty; pedophilia; piquerism; sapphism; zooerastia;
      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence;
      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus
or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breast(s);
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
clad in under- garments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged
in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any such persons;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
(Ord. 593, passed 3-2-99)
§ 114.03 LOCATION.
   (A)   Adult, sexually-oriented business establishments are permitted only
within the General Business District or the Industrial District within the
city. In addition, the following regulations apply.
   (B)   No adult establishment may be located within 1,000 feet of a park,
school, church, library or a commercial day care center.
   (C)   No adult establishment may be located within 1,000 feet of another
adult establishment.
   (D)   No adult establishment may be located within 1,000 feet of a
residential zoning district.
   (E)   No adult establishment may be located within 250 feet of the right-of-
way of an entry street to the city. For purposes of this division (E), an ENTRY
STREET is defined as Interstate 35, Highway 48, Fire Monument Road, Old Highway
61 and County Road 134.
   (F)   The distances set forth in this section are to be measured from the
nearest outside edge of the building housing the adult establishment, or the
outside edge of the premises of the adult business if the adult business is
located in a building containing other businesses, to the nearest boundary of
the residential zoning district or the nearest boundary of the property
containing a park, school, church, library, commercial day care center or other
adult establishment.
   (G)   Interstate 35 does act as a natural barrier within the city;
therefore, measurements which cross the interstate are exempted from the
setbacks required in this chapter; provided that, screening and direct vision
of the establishment is obstructed either with natural vegetation, landscaping
or fencing from residential districts as determined by the Zoning Administrator
and City Clerk-Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 114.03) (Ord. 593, passed 3-2-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 SIGN RESTRICTIONS.
   In order to protect children from exposure to lurid signs and materials and
in order to preserve the value of the property surrounding adult-oriented
businesses, the following sign regulations shall apply to all sexually-oriented
businesses in the city notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter and
the city’s Zoning Ordinance.
   (A)   All signs shall be flat wall signs. No signs shall be freestanding,
located on the roof, or projecting from the establishment, or contain any
flashing lights, moving elements or electronically or mechanically changing
messages.
   (B)   The amount of allowable sign area shall be one square foot of sign
area per foot of lot frontage on a street, not to exceed 80 square feet.
   (C)   No merchandise, photos or pictures of the products or entertainment on
the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where they can be
viewed from the sidewalk or public right-of-way adjoining the building or
structure in which the sexually-oriented business is located.
   (D)   No signs shall be placed in any window. A one square foot sign may be
placed on the door to state hours of operation and admittance to adults only.
(Prior Code, § 114.04) (Ord. 593, passed 3-2-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.05 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS FOR ADULT CABARETS.
   The following additional conditions apply to adult cabarets.
   (A)   No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit or
allow any dancer or other live entertainer to perform totally nude.
   (B)   No dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron or any other person
shall be totally nude in an adult cabaret.
   (C)   The owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall provide the
following information to the city concerning any persons who dance or perform
live entertainment at the adult cabaret: the person’s name; home address; home
telephone number; date of birth; and any aliases.
   (D)   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under 18 years old.
   (E)   All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended
for that purpose and which is raised at least two feet from the level of the
floor.
   (F)   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall perform any dance or
live entertainment closer than ten feet to any patron or to the entrances and
exits of the establishment.
   (G)   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall fondle or caress any
patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or performer. Any patron
fondling himself, herself or others shall be prohibited and prosecuted as
public indecency and is guilty of a misdemeanor under state law.
   (H)   No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer, live
entertainer or performer.
   (I)   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall solicit any pay or
gratuity from any patron.
   (J)   No establishment shall have windows, entries or exits which permit the
activities inside the premises to be viewed by any person outside the
establishment.
(Prior Code, § 114.05) (Ord. 593, passed 3-2-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.06 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No adult establishment may be open to the public between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon.
(Prior Code, § 114.06) (Ord. 593, passed 3-2-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.07 LICENSING.
   (A)   License required. No person shall own or operate an adult
establishment without having first secured a license as provided for in this
section.
   (B)   Application. The application for an adult establishment license shall
be submitted on a form provided by the city and shall include:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence, phone
number and birth date of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the
name, residence, phone number and birth date of each general and limited
partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the names, residences, phone
numbers and birth dates of all those persons holding more than 5% of the issued
and outstanding stock of the corporation;
      (2)   The name, address, phone number and birth date of the operator and
manager of such operation, if different from the owners;
      (3)   The address and legal description of the premises where the adult
establishment is to be located;
      (4)   A statement detailing any gross misdemeanor or felony convictions
relating to sex offenses, obscenity or the operation of an adult establishment
or adult business by the applicant, operator or manager and whether or not the
applicant, operator or manager has ever applied for or held a license to
operate a similar type of business in other communities. In the case of a
corporation, a statement detailing any felony convictions by the owners of more
than 5% of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation, and whether or
not those owners have ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar
type of business in other communities;
      (5)   The activities and types of business to be conducted;
      (6)   The hours of operation;
      (7)   The provisions made to restrict access by minors; and
      (8)   A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations
and activities.
   (C)   License fee.
      (1)   The annual license fee to operate an adult-oriented business shall
be $5,000.
      (2)   Each application for a license shall be submitted to the City
Clerk-Administrator and payment made to the city. Each application for a
license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the required license fee.
Upon rejection of any application for a license, the city shall refund the
license fee.
      (3)   All licenses shall expire on the last day of December in each year.
Each license shall be issued for a period of one year; except that, if a
portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license
may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rated fee. In computing
such fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
      (4)   No part of the fee paid with any issued license shall be refunded;
except that, a pro rata portion of the fee shall be refunded in the following
instances upon application to the City Clerk- Administrator within 30 days from
the happening of the event; provided that, such event occurs more than 30 days
before the expiration of the license:
         (a)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe;
         (b)   The licensee’s illness;
         (c)   The licensee’s death; or
         (d)   A change in the legal status making it unlawful for licensed
business to continue.
      (5)   Each application shall contain a provision on the application in
bold print indicating that any withholding of information or the providing of
false or misleading information will be grounds for denial or revocation of a
license. Any changes in the information provided on the application or provided
during the investigation shall be brought to the attention of the City Clerk-
Administrator by the applicant or licensee. If the changes take place during
the investigation, the data shall be provided in writing to the City Clerk-
Administrator, who shall report the changes to the City Council. Failure to
report such changes by the applicant or the licensee may result in a denial or
revocation of a license.
   (D)   Investigative fee.
      (1)   The investigative fee for an adult establishment license is
established as a required payment of $1,000 to cover costs associated with
verifying the license application and to cover the expense of any investigation
needed to assure compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   If it appears the investigative costs will exceed $1,000, the City
Clerk-Administrator shall notify the applicant and give the applicant an
estimate of costs. The applicant shall either make additional deposits equal to
the difference between $1,000 and the total estimate, or shall withdraw the
application. If the additional deposit is not paid within 14 days of the
notice, the application shall be deemed withdrawn.
      (3)   The investigation fee shall not be refundable. This fee does not
apply to an applicant who is already an adult-oriented business license holder
in the city.
   (E)   Granting of license.
      (1)   The City Clerk-Administrator, or designee, shall complete his or
her investigation within 60 days after the receiving a complete application and
all license and investigative fees.
      (2)   If the application is for a renewal, the applicant shall be allowed
to continue business until the City Council has determined to renew or refuse
to renew a license.
      (3)   If, after such investigation, it appears that the applicant and the
place proposed for the business are eligible for a license under the criteria
set forth in this section, then the license shall be issued by the City Council
within 30 days after the investigation is completed. Otherwise, the license
shall be denied.
      (4)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be
transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the
premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another
premises without the approval of the City Council. If the licensee is a
partnership or a corporation, a change in the identity of any of the principals
of the partnership or corporation shall he deemed a transfer of the license.
All adult establishments existing at the time of the adoption of this section
shall be required to obtain an annual license.
      (5)   The license for the adult-oriented activities shall be displayed in
a conspicuous public place within the confines of the premises.
   (F)   Temporary licenses. There shall be no temporary or single event
licenses issued by the city under any circumstances. All applicants must apply
for the annual license following the process established herein.
   (G)   Persons ineligible for license. No license shall be granted to or held
by any person:
      (1)   Under 21 years of age;
      (2)   Who is overdue or whose spouse is overdue in his or her payment to
the city, county or state of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against
them or imposed upon them;
      (3)   Who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of a
gross misdemeanor or felony or of violating any law of the state or local
ordinance relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses or adult establishments;
      (4)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the
license is issued;
      (5)   Who is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the
city or any other Minnesota municipal corporation to operate an adult
establishment, or residing with a person whose license to operate an adult
establishment has been suspended or revoked within the preceding 12 months; or
      (6)   Who has not paid the license and investigative fees required by
this section.
   (H)   Places ineligible for license.
      (1)   No license shall be granted for adult establishments on any
premises where the applicant or any of its officers, agents or employees has
been convicted of a violation of this section, or where any license hereunder
has been revoked for cause, until one year has elapsed after such conviction or
revocation.
      (2)   No license shall be granted for any adult establishment which is
not in full compliance with the city code, the city’s Zoning Ordinance, the
Building Code, the Fire Code, health regulations and all provisions of state
and federal law.
      (3)   No license shall be granted to any establishment which holds a
current, valid municipal liquor license for on- or off-sale of intoxicating
beverages, unless clear and achievable steps are taken to insure that the
establishment will not be serving, for a cost or not, any alcoholic beverages
for the entire 24-hour period from 8:00 a.m. the day of the event until 8:00
a.m. of the day following the event.
   (I)   Conditions of license.
      (1)   Every license shall be granted subject to the following conditions
and all other provisions of this section, and of any applicable sections of the
city code, the city’s Zoning Ordinance, the Building Code; the Fire Code, the
city’s health regulations and all provisions of state and federal law.
      (2)   All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a
conspicuous place at all times.
      (3)   No minor, under 18 years of age, shall be permitted on the licensed
premises.
      (4)   Any designated inspection officer of the city shall have the right
to enter, inspect and search the premises of a licensee during business hours.
      (5)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or her
place of business and shall maintain conditions of order.
      (6)   No adult goods or material services shall be offered, sold,
transferred, conveyed, given, displayed or bartered to any minor.
   (J)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished not more than the maximum
penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.
      (2)   Any violation of this section shall be a basis for the suspension
or revocation of any license granted hereunder. In the event that the City
Council proposes to revoke or suspend the license, the licensee shall be
notified in writing of the basis for such proposed revocation or suspension.
The City Council shall hold a hearing for the purpose of determining whether to
revoke or suspend the license, which hearing shall be within 30 days of the
date of the notice.
      (3)   The City Council shall determine whether to suspend or revoke a
license within 30 days after the hearing or within 60 days of the date of the
notice, whichever is sooner, and shall notify the licensee of its decision
within that period.
   (K)   Right of appeal.
      (1)   In the event that the City Council determines to suspend, or revoke
a license, such suspension or revocation shall not be effective until 15
calendar days after notification to the licensee by the city of its decision.
If, within that 15 days, the licensee commences an action in state or federal
court challenging the City Council’s action, then the suspension or revocation
shall be stayed until the conclusion of such action.
      (2)   If the City Council determines not to renew a license, the licensee
may continue its business for 15 calendar days after notification by the city
of such non-renewal. If the licensee commences an action in state or federal
court within that 15 days for the purpose of determining whether the city acted
properly, the licensee may continue in business until the conclusion of the
action.
      (3)   If the City Council decides not to grant a license to an applicant,
the applicant may commence an action in state or federal court within 15 days
after notification by the city of the denial for the purpose of determining
whether the city acted properly. The applicant shall not commence doing
business unless the action is concluded in its favor.
      (4)   Any notification required to be sent by the city is deemed
completed when mailed by first class mail to the applicant or licensee at the
address listed in the application.
(Prior Code, § 114.07) (Ord. 593, passed 3-2-1999)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct; public indecency
   
130.02   Tree and shrubbery damage
   
130.03   Juvenile curfew
   
130.04   Cannabis and tobacco related products use within public property and
public places
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons upon any of the public
streets or within the corporate limits of the city to, in any manner
whatsoever, disturb the peace and good order of the city by shouting, yelling,
singing or screaming or by the use of loud, obscene, profane or vulgar language
or by fighting, quarreling, discharging firearms or in any other manner
whatsoever.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear or be upon the public
streets or in any public place in the city nude or in any indecent or lewd
dress, or to indecently expose his or her person or indulge in filthy, lewd,
indecent or insulting conduct, language or behavior.
   (C)   It shall be and is hereby made the duty of the County Sheriff to
forthwith arrest any person found violating any of the provisions of this
section and at once take such person before one of the city justices to be
dealt with according to law.
(Prior Code, § 130.02) (Ord. 1, passed 5-13-1895) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 TREE AND SHRUBBERY DAMAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in any way to damage, injure or
mutilate any shade trees, bush or shrub growing in the streets, parks, cemetery
or public grounds of the city or to hitch teams or horses or animals to any
shade tree or to the fence or other protection erected around any shade tree or
to permit any shade tree to be damaged by any horses, cattle or other animals
owned by or in the possession or control of the person.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the County Sheriff to arrest forthwith any
person found doing any damage to said shade trees, flowers or shrubbery or
violating any of the provisions of this section and take him or her before a
city justice for trial.
(Prior Code, § 130.03) (Ord. 8, passed 6-5-1899) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 JUVENILE CURFEW.
   (A)   Purposes and findings.
      (1)   The City Council finds and determines that there has been an
increase in juvenile violence and crime by juveniles in the city.
      (2)   Juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity
and experience to participate in unlawful activities, including gang-related
activity, and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime.
      (3)   Because of the foregoing, special and extenuating circumstances
presently exist within the city that require special regulation of juveniles
within the city in order to protect them and other persons during the nighttime
hours, to aid in crime prevention, to promote parental supervision and
authority over minors and to decrease juvenile crime rates.
      (4)   In accordance with prevailing community standards, this section
serves to regulate the conduct of minors in public places during nighttime
hours, to be effectively and consistently enforced for the protection of
juveniles from each other and from other persons, in public places during
nighttime hours, for the enforcement of parental control of, authority over and
responsibility for their children, for the protection of the general public
from nighttime mischief by juveniles, for the reduction in the incidents of
juvenile criminal activities, for the furtherance of family responsibility and
for the public good, safety and welfare.
      (5)   It is the intent of the City Council to review and evaluate the
need and effect of nighttime curfew for juveniles set forth in this section on
the incidents of juvenile criminal activity and protection of juveniles against
criminal activity.
   (B)   Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted
under M.S. §§ 145A.05 and 412.231, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      AUTHORIZED ADULT. Any person who is at least 18 years of age and
authorized by a parent or guardian to have custody and control of a juvenile.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster or automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      JUVENILE. A person under the age of 18 years. The term does not include
persons under 18 who are married or have been legally emancipated.
      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as natural parent,
adoptive parent or step-parent; as a legal guardian; or as a person to whom
legal custody has been given by order of the court.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
roadways, parks, public recreation, entertainment or civic facility, schools
and the common areas of hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (D)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It is unlawful for juveniles under the age of 13 years to be
present in any public place within the city:
         (a)   Any time between 9:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and
         (b)   Any time between 10:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5:00
a.m. the following day.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for juveniles who are at least 13, but less
than 15 years of age to be present in any public place within the city:
         (a)   Any time between 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and
         (b)   Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5:00
a.m. on the following day.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for juveniles who are at least 15, but less
than 18, years of age to be in any public place within the city:
         (a)   Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, except that between
Memorial Day and Labor Day of each calendar year for a juvenile age 17, the
hours shall be 12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. for the days noted; and
         (b)   Any time between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any Friday or
Saturday.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for a parent or authorized adult of a juvenile
to knowingly, or through negligent supervision, to habitually permit such
juvenile to be in any public place within the city during the hours prohibited
by divisions (D)(1), (D)(2) and (D)(3) above, under circumstances not
constituting an exception to this section as set forth herein. The term
KNOWINGLY includes knowledge which a parent or authorized adult shall
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile under
such person’s care.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any
place of amusement or refreshment which is open to the public to knowingly and
habitually permit any juvenile to be in such place during the, hours prohibited
by divisions (D)(1), (D)(2) and (D)(3) above, under circumstances not
constituting an exception to this section as set forth herein. The term PERSON
OPERATING shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation operating, managing or conducting any such establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of
the curfew:
         (a)   At any time, if a juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent
or an authorized adult;
         (b)   At any time, if a juvenile is involved in, or attempting to
remedy, alleviate or respond to an emergency;
         (c)   If the juvenile is engaged in a lawful employment activity, or
is going to or returning home from his or her place of employment;
         (d)   If the juvenile is attending an official school, religious or
other social or recreational activity supervised by adults or sponsored by a
city or the county, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the juvenile;
         (e)   If the juvenile is going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults or sponsored by a city or the county, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile;
         (f)   If the juvenile is on an errand as directed by his or her
parent, without any detour or stop;
         (g)   If the juvenile is engaged in interstate travel;
         (h)   If the juvenile is on the public right-of-way, boulevard or
sidewalk abutting the juvenile’s residence or abutting the neighboring
property, structure or residence;
         (i)   If the juvenile is exercising First Amendment rights protected
by the United States Constitution (or those similar rights protected by Art. I
of the Minnesota Constitution), such as free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or
         (j)   If the juvenile is homeless or uses a public or semi-public
place as his or her usual place of abode.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under division (D)(5)
above that:
         (a)   The owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly
notify the Police Department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave; and
         (b)   The owner, operator or employee reasonably and in good faith
relied on a juvenile’s representations of proof of age. Proof of age may be
established pursuant to M.S. § 340A.503, subd. 6, as it may be amended from
time to time, or other verifiable means, including, but not limited to, school
identification cards and birth certificates.
   (F)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in
a public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that no exception set forth in division (E) above is applicable.
   (G)   Continuing review and evaluation. The City Attorney and City Clerk-
Administrator shall prepare and submit a report annually to the City Council
evaluating violations of this section and the criminal activity by and against
juveniles within the city during the preceding year. The first report shall be
submitted six months after the effective date of this section, being 9-12-1996.
(Prior Code, § 130.05) (Ord. 581, passed 9-3-1996) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 CANNABIS AND TOBACCO RELATED PRODUCTS USE WITHIN PUBLIC PROPERTY AND
PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CANNABIS FLOWER, CANNABIS PRODUCTS, LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLES, AND HEMP
DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS. As defined in M.S. § 342.01 (enacted under Minnesota
Laws 2023).
      PUBLIC PLACE. Property that is generally open to or accessible by the
public, except on those premises licensed by the State of Minnesota to permit
on-site consumption, including public park space and athletic facilities.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property, real and personal, that is owned, managed, or
controlled by the city, including, but not limited to: city buildings and all
the land thereon, parking lots, parks, pathways and trails, and any city
personal property, such as motor vehicles, city equipment, and the like.
      TOBACCO RELATED PRODUCTS. Any product containing, made or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, or any component, part, or
accessory of a tobacco product, including but not limited to tobacco found in
cigars and cigarettes, tobacco intended to be used in pipes or cigarettes,
chewing tobacco, moist or dry snuff, dissolvable tobacco products and
electronic cigarettes and any other product containing, made or derived from
tobacco that is intended to be consumed with or without being combusted but
does not include any tobacco product that has been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product,
tobacco dependent product or for other medical purposes and is marketed and
sold only for those purposes.
   (B)   Prohibition on cannabis use. No person shall use cannabis flower,
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products within public property or in a public place.
   (C)   Prohibition of use of tobacco related products. No person shall use
tobacco related products within or on public property as defined herein.
   (D)   Penalty. A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 06-2023, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be
penalized as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 130.99)
   (B)   (1)   Violation of §
130.03(D)(1), (D)(2) and (D)(3) of this chapter will be prosecuted pursuant to
M.S. Ch. 260B, as it may be amended from time to time, and will be subject to
the penalties therein.
      (2)   Violation of §
130.03(D)(4) or (D)(5) of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as
provided in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 130.05)
(Ord. 581, passed 9-3-1996)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   MANUFACTURED HOMES
      
152.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
153.   SIGNS
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Minnesota State Building Code adopted
   
150.02   Regulations for placing or constructing structures on non- conforming
lots
Fences
   
150.15   Purpose
   
150.16   Definitions
   
150.17   Permitted fence materials
   
150.18   Residential zoning districts
   
150.19   Commercial, business and industrial zoning districts
   
150.20   Swimming pools
   
150.21   Temporary fences
   
150.22   Exceptions to height
   
150.23   Property lines and easement areas
   
150.24   Maintenance
   
150.25   Permit requirements and fee
   
150.26   Variances
   
150.27   Clear-view triangle
Securing Vacant Buildings
   
150.40   Definitions
   
150.41   Securing vacant buildings
   
150.42   Responding to notice
   
150.43   Emergency securing of vacant buildings
   
150.44   Collection of costs
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code, as
adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to
326B.194, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established,
adopted and published from time to time by the state’s Commissioner of
Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division is hereby
adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless
specifically adopted in this section. The Minnesota State Building Code is
hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out herein.
   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement.
      (1)   The application, administration and enforcement of the code shall
be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be
amended from time to time, when so established by this section.
      (2)   The code enforcement agency of the city is called the Joint Powers
Board.
      (3)   This code shall be enforced by the state- certified Building
Official designated by the city to administer the code (M.S. § 326B.133, as it
may be amended from time to time).
   (C)   Permits and fees.
      (1)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city in Res. 7-03. In addition,
a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by
this code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (D)   Violations and penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor.
   (E)   Building Code optional chapters. The Minnesota State Building Code,
established pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194, as they may be amended
from time to time, allows the city to adopt by reference and enforce certain
optional chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building
Code. The following optional provisions identified in the most current edition
of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the
building code of the city: Appendix Chapter K (Grading) of the 2001 Supplements
to the International Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 150.01) (Ord. 594, passed 3-2-1999; Ord. 619, passed 7-1-2003)
§ 150.02 REGULATIONS FOR PLACING OR CONSTRUCTING STRUCTURES ON NON- CONFORMING
LOTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement and/
or construction of structures on non-conforming lots so as to maintain the
architectural integrity of the city and its neighborhoods, as well as to ensure
that public safety personnel can easily locate building entrances in emergency
situations.
   (B)   Definition. For purposes of this section, NON-CONFORMING means that
the lot does not meet either the total square footage or the required lot width
per Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Procedure. The following procedure shall be followed when placing and/
or constructing a structure on a non-conforming lot.
      (1)   The city’s Building Official will notify the City Planner or, in
the absence of the City Planner, the City Clerk-Administrator, that there is a
building permit application on a non-conforming lot.
      (2)   The City Planner will review the site plan for conformance with the
city’s setback requirements.
      (3)   All building plans must maintain the architectural integrity of the
neighborhood by mandating that the part of the structure facing the street must
have an entrance door and at least one window. On corner lots, the entrance
door and window(s) must face the street from which the parcel’s address is
derived.
      (4)   The city’s Building Official will not issue a building permit
unless the plan meets the aforementioned provisions.
   (D)   Relief. Relief from the structural requirements of this section may be
met by applying for a non-conforming structure permit. The fee for processing
the permit shall be equal to the fee set by the City Council for a variance
under §
155.068 of this code of ordinances. Notice will be sent to all property owners
within 350 feet of the outside dimensions of the lot. The hearing will be
before the City Council, with four-fifths of all Council members, whether
present, absent or abstaining, required for approval. Relief from the setback
requirements of this section may be granted according to the procedure outlined
in §
155.068 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 150.02) (Ord. 605, passed 12-7-2000; Ord. 633, passed 9-6-2005)
Penalty, see §
150.99
FENCES
§ 150.15 PURPOSE.
   It is in the best interest of all city residents to ensure attractive and
safe neighborhoods. Fence regulations help preserve the aesthetic quality of
the city’s neighborhoods while protecting the health, safety and welfare of all
residents.
(Prior Code, § 156.01) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007)
§ 150.16 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The following definitions shall be used in interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter. If a term is not defined herein, the definition
stated in the city’s subdivision or zoning regulations (Ch.
154 and
155 of this code of ordinances) shall be used.
   (B)   If the term is not defined in the subdivision or zoning regulations,
the common meaning of the term, as stated in a generally accepted dictionary,
shall be used.
   (C)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUILDING CODE. The current building code adopted and enforced by the
city.
      CLEAR-VIEW TRIANGLE (CVT). The area 30 feet from the intersection of a
roadway, as measured along the curb line, or edge of pavement or drive lane for
uncurbed areas, on both intersecting roadways. These points shall be connected
by a straight line to complete the CLEAR-VIEW TRIANGLE area. See §
150.27 of this chapter for an example.
      FENCE. A structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary, usually
made of posts, boards, chain link or rails, with a height of at least 18
inches.
      FINISHED SIDE. The side of a fence that covers the posts and support
structures.
      FRONT YARD. The setback area required by the zoning ordinance for the
zoning district in which the property is located, or the area between the
property line and the principal structure on a parcel, whichever is less. A
corner property has FRONT YARD areas along both street frontages.
      HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the adjacent grade to the highest
portion of a fence.
      REAR YARD. The area of a parcel from the required front yard area or
front of a structure to the back property boundary.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW). Land dedicated to the public for public use as
streets, utility areas, sidewalks, alleys or pedestrian ways.
      SIDE YARD. The area between structures on a parcel and the side property
lines as required by
Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 156.02) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007)
§ 150.17 PERMITTED FENCE MATERIALS.
   (A)   (1)   All fences shall be constructed in a workman-like manner, and of
generally accepted fencing materials such as wood, chain link, brick, stone and
wrought iron.
      (2)   Other material that is generally acceptable for fencing shall be
considered as well.
   (B)   No fence shall constitute a blighting influence, nuisance or hazard.
   (C)   Barbed wire shall not be permitted in a residential zoning district,
and shall be a minimum of six feet high on security fencing in commercial and
industrial areas.
   (D)   Chain link fences must be constructed so as to have the barbed end at
the bottom of the fence.
(Prior Code, § 156.03) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007)
§ 150.18 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Residential uses in residential zoning districts shall be permitted
fencing as follows.
      (1)   Front yard. Fencing shall not exceed four feet in height or
interfere with any CVT area, as described in this chapter.
      (2)   Side yard. Fencing shall not exceed six feet in height in any side
yard area.
      (3)   Rear yard. Fencing shall not exceed six feet in height in any rear
yard areas.
   (B)   No fence that obstructs view of an intersection or creates a visual
safety hazard shall be permitted.
      (1)   A CVT shall be required at all intersections.
      (2)   No fencing shall be permitted in the CVT area.
(Prior Code, § 156.04) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.19 COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   All fencing shall meet the requirements of the Building Code.
   (B)   No fence that obstructs view of an intersection or creates a visual
safety hazard shall be permitted.
      (1)   A CVT shall be required at all intersections.
      (2)   No fencing shall be permitted in the CVT area.
(Prior Code, § 156.05) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.20 SWIMMING POOLS.
   All swimming pool fencing shall comply with state statutory and Building
Code requirements.
(Prior Code, § 156.06) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.21 TEMPORARY FENCES.
   Temporary fences, including the use of wood or plastic snow fences to limit
the drifting of snow between November 1 and April 1, to protect construction
and excavation sites, and to protect plants and/or landscaping during
construction projects, shall be permitted without a permit; provided, the fence
is not more than five feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.07) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.22 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT.
   The maximum heights permitted by this chapter may be exceeded upon issuance
of a conditional use permit (pursuant to §
155.065 of this code of ordinances); provided that:
   (A)   The increase in height will not obstruct vision at street
intersections, driveways, sidewalks and other traffic areas;
   (B)   A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the application for review
and approval by the city;
   (C)   The fence shall be set back from the property line an adequate
distance to provide for the required landscaping, and to maintain an attractive
relationship to the fence’s external appearance; and
   (D)   The fence shall not have a negative impact on adjacent properties or
create a blighting influence on the neighborhood in which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 156.08) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007)
§ 150.23 PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENT AREAS.
   (A)   Property lines.
      (1)   Property owners are responsible for locating property boundaries.
      (2)   A fence may be allowed on a property boundary if written permission
is received from the abutting property owner, and submitted to the city with
the fence permit application.
      (3)   The applicant is responsible for fence maintenance of a fence on a
property boundary.
      (4)   If written permission is not obtained from the neighboring property
owner, the fence shall be placed a minimum of one foot from the property
boundary.
      (5)   If a neighboring property owner disputes the proposed fence
location due to unknown property boundaries, a certificate of survey from a
state-registered land surveyor shall be required prior to issuance of a fence
permit.
      (6)   City staff may attempt to assist a property owner in locating known
property boundaries, but this does not constitute a survey if the boundary is
disputed by an abutting property owner.
   (B)   Easement areas.
      (1)   Fencing proposed for easement areas shall be reviewed on a case-by-
case basis to determine its impact on the easement areas.
      (2)   Even if the fence is approved for an easement area by the city, it
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove and replace the
fence should access or maintenance of the easement area be necessary.
      (3)   A fence proposed for an easement area may be denied if it will
obstruct drainage or negatively affect the easement area.
(Prior Code, § 156.09) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.24 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All fences shall be maintained in an upright, vertical condition and
shall not create a blighting influence on the surrounding neighborhood or area.
   (B)   Maintenance must be done on a regular basis to prevent the fence from
being in a state of disrepair.
   (C)   Failure to maintain or repair a fence, once notified by the city that
maintenance or repairs are necessary, shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.10) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.25 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND FEE.
   (A)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   A permit is required when constructing a new fence or extending an
existing fence.
      (2)   A permit is also required when reconstructing more than half of the
linear length of an entire fence.
      (3)   A site plan or plot drawing shall be required before issuance of a
fence permit.
         (a)   The plan or drawing shall show the location of the fence,
property line and structures on the property.
         (b)   The fence height and material shall also be noted on the site
plan, drawing and/or application form.
   (B)   Fee.
      (1)   A fence permit application fee set by City Council from time to
time shall also be required with the fence permit application.
      (2)   This fee shall help cover costs of review of the fence permit
application and is not refundable, even if the fence permit is not approved.
(Prior Code, § 156.11) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007)
§ 150.26 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Conditions of variances. Where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in any way in carrying out the strict letter of the
provisions of this chapter, a variance may be granted; provided that, all the
following conditions are true.
      (1)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific parcel of land involved cause a particular hardship
to the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter
of this chapter were to be carried out.
      (2)   The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are
unique to the parcel of land for which the variance is sought, and are not
generally applicable to other property within the same zoning classification.
      (3)   The alleged difficulty or hardship must be caused by this chapter
and not by any person presently having an interest in the parcel of land.
      (4)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in the neighborhood in which
the parcel of land is located.
      (5)   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent properties, will not increase the congestion of the public
streets, will not endanger the public safety, or will not diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
   (B)   Variance procedures.
      (1)   A person desiring to secure a variance from any provisions of this
chapter shall fill out and submit to the Zoning Administrator or City Clerk-
Administrator a variance form, together with the required filing fee as set by
the City Council.
      (2)   The fee for the variance application shall be the same as the fee
set by the City Council for a variance from the Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   Notice of the variance proceedings shall be mailed to adjacent
property owners within 350 feet of the property seeking the variance at least
ten days prior to the variance being heard.
(Prior Code, § 156.12) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007)
§ 150.27 CLEAR-VIEW TRIANGLE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/048667006d6d249033388ed58a78e4536858a0f0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1113.jpg]
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 156, App. A) (Ord. 10-2007, passed 10-2-2007)
SECURING VACANT BUILDINGS
§ 150.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SECURE. Includes, but is not limited to, installing locks, repairing windows
and doors, boarding windows and doors, posting “no-trespassing” signs,
installing exterior lighting or motion-detecting lights, fencing the property,
and installing a monitored alarm or other security system consistent with M.S.
§ 463.251, as it may be amended from time to time.
   UNOCCUPIED BUILDING. A building which is not being used for a legal
occupancy.
   UNSECURED BUILDING. A building or a portion of a building that is open to
entry by unauthorized persons without the use of tools.
   VACANT BUILDING. A building or a portion of a building that meets one or
more of the following conditions:
      (1)   Unoccupied and foreclosed upon as identified by the county;
      (2)   Unoccupied and windows or entrances to the premises are boarded up
or closed off, or multiple window panes are broken and unrepaired;
      (3)   Unoccupied and doors to the premises are smashed through, broken
off, unhinged, or continuously unlocked;
      (4)   Unoccupied and gas, electric, or water service to the premises has
been terminated;
      (5)   Unoccupied and rubbish, trash, or debris has accumulated on the
mortgaged premises;
      (6)   Unoccupied and the police or sheriff’s office has received at least
two reports of trespassers on the premises, or of vandalism or other illegal
acts being committed on the premises; or
      (7)   Unoccupied and the premises are deteriorating and are either below
or are in imminent danger of falling below minimum community standards for
public safety and sanitation.
(Ord. 09-2017, passed 8-8-2017)
§ 150.41 SECURING VACANT BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In general, if any building becomes vacant or unoccupied and is deemed
hazardous due to the fact that the building is open to trespass and has not
been secured, and the building could be made safe by securing the building, the
City Council may order the building secured and shall cause notice of the order
to be served consistent with M.S. § 463.251, subd. 2, as it may be amended from
time to time. The notice must be served upon the owner of record of the
premises or the owner’s agent, the taxpayer identified in the property tax
records for the parcel, the holder of the mortgage or sheriff’s certificate,
and any neighborhood association for the neighborhood in which the building is
located that has requested notice. The notice is served by delivery or mail.
The notice must be in writing and must include, at a minimum, a statement that:
      (1)   Informs the owner and the holder of any mortgage or sheriff’s
certificate of the requirements found in M.S. § 463.251, subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time, that the owner or holder of the certificate has six
days to comply with the order or provide the Council with a reasonable plan and
schedule to comply with the order and that costs may be assessed against the
property if the person does not secure the building;
      (2)   Informs the owner and the holder of any mortgage or sheriff’s
certificate that, within six days of the ordering being served, the person may
request a hearing before the governing body challenging the governing body’s
determination that the property is vacant or unoccupied and hazardous; and
      (3)   Notifies the holder of any sheriff’s certificate of the holder’s
duty under M.S. § 582.031, subd. (b), as it may be amended from time to time,
to enter the premises to protect the premises from waste and trespass if the
order is not challenged or set aside and there is prima facie evidence of
abandonment of the property as described in M.S. § 582.032, subd. 7, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Service by mail is completed upon mailing a copy of the order to the
owner by first class mail at the last known address.
(Ord. 09-2017, passed 8-8-2017)
§ 150.42 RESPONDING TO NOTICE.
   The owner of the building or the holder of the sheriff’s certificate of sale
has six days after the order is served to do one of the following: comply with
the order; provide the Council with a reasonable plan and schedule to comply
with the order; or request a hearing before the City Council to challenge the
Council’s determination that the property is vacant or unoccupied and
hazardous. If the owner or holder of the sheriff’s certificate fails to take
one of these actions within the allotted time, the City Council must have the
building properly secured.
(Ord. 09-2017, passed 8-8-2017)
§ 150.43 EMERGENCY SECURING OF VACANT BUILDINGS.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 463.251, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time,
when the City Building Official, Police Chief, or Fire Chief determines that an
emergency exists with respect to the health or safety of persons in the
community and immediate boarding and securing of a building is required, and
where immediate danger will exist to children, transients, or others members of
the community without the immediate boarding or securing of the building, the
Building Official, Police Chief, or Fire Chief may waive all notice
requirements herein and immediately board or otherwise secure the building,
provided that:
   (A)   The conditions showing the existence of an emergency are documented in
writing by the Building Official, Police Chief, Fire Chief, or their designees;
and
   (B)   Notice is mailed immediately by the department invoking this section
to the owner of record of the premises, the taxpayer identified in the property
tax records for the parcel, the holder of the mortgage or sheriff’s
certificate, and any neighborhood association for the neighborhood in which the
building is located that has requested notice.
(Ord. 09-2017, passed 8-8-2017)
§ 150.44 COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   All costs incurred by the city for securing a vacant building under this
subchapter may be charged against the real property as a special assessment
pursuant to M.S. §§ 463.251, 463.21 and 463.151, as they may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 09-2017, passed 8-8-2017)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
150.02 of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days in jail and
up to a $700 fine. Violation of §
150.02 of this chapter may also result in civil monetary sanctions and/or
injunctive relief, including removal of the non- conforming structure.
(Prior Code, § 150.99)
   (C)   (1)   Any person or business or corporation who violates any provision
of §§
150.15 through
150.27 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day the violation is permitted to exist
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   This chapter shall also be enforceable by an administrative penalty
as outlined in §
10.98 of this code of ordinances.
         (a)   The administrative penalty for a violation of §§
150.15 through
150.27 of this chapter shall be $25.
         (b)   For each subsequent seven-day period that the violation remains
after the initial seven- day period following issuance of an administrative
fine, the fine shall increase by $25, up to a maximum fine amount of $100.
(Prior Code, § 156.99)
(Ord. 605, passed 12-7-2000; Ord. 633, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 10-2007, passed
10-2-2007)
CHAPTER 151: MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Interpretation
   
151.03   Permit required
   
151.04   General standards
   
151.05   Exits and egress windows
   
151.06   Flame spread protection
   
151.07   Smoke detectors
   
151.08   Solid fuel burning stoves and fireplaces
   
151.09   Electrical wiring
   
151.10   Replacement furnaces and water heaters
   
151.11   Support and anchoring system
   
151.12   Gas line testing
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   The intent of this chapter is to promote health, safety, order and general
welfare by enforcing standards for manufactured homes, requiring permits to be
obtained and minimum standards to be followed, and providing for penalties for
violation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.02 INTERPRETATION.
   The words used in this subchapter shall be interpreted according to their
plain meaning. By way of example, from time to time the words “manufactured
home”, “mobile home”, “unit” and “home” are used somewhat interchangeably in
this subchapter, but by their context they all mean the same thing.
(Prior Code, § 151.02) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A building permit is required before a manufactured home, or an addition to
or an accessory structure exceeding 120 square feet, may be installed or
constructed.
(Prior Code, § 151.03) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.04 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   HUD units. Manufactured homes built after 6-1-1976, being brought into
the city must bear a label from the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD).
   (B)   State code homes. Manufactured homes built between 7-1-1972, and 6-1-
1976, being brought into the city must bear a construction seal issued by the
state’s Building Code Division or from a state that has a reciprocity agreement
with the state. Additional upgrading may be required to comply with the
following parts of this subchapter.
   (C)   Pre-code homes. Manufactured homes built prior to 7-1-1972, being
brought into the city shall comply with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.04) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.05 EXITS AND EGRESS WINDOWS.
   (A)   All manufactured homes shall have at least one egress window in each
bedroom that meets the minimum specifications of the HUD standards contained in
24 C.F.R. §§ 42.3280.106 and 42.3280.404 for manufactured homes. These
standards require that the window be at least 22 inches in the horizontal or
vertical least dimension and at least five square feet in area, the bottom of
the window opening be not more than 36 inches above the floor, and the locks
and latches which need to be operated to permit exiting not be located more
than 54 inches above the finished floor. The five square feet must be a clear
open area.
   (B)   Units that have required egress windows that do not meet the HUD
specifications shall comply with the Minnesota Uniform Building Code. All
escape or rescue windows shall have a minimum clear openable area of 5.7 square
feet with minimum clear height of 24 inches and minimum clear width of 20
inches and finished sill height of not more than 44 inches above the floor.
   (C)   The home is required to have two exterior exit doors located remote
from each other as required in the HUD standards contained in 24 C.F.R. §
42.3280.105. These standards require single section manufactured homes have the
doors not less than 12 feet center to center from each other and multi-section
manufactured home doors not less than 20 feet center to center from each other
measured in straight line direction regardless of the length of the path of
travel between the doors. One of the required exit doors must be accessible
from the doorway of each bedroom without traveling more than 35 feet. Exterior
swing doors shall have a minimum 28-inch by 74-inch clear opening and sliding
glass doors shall have a 28-inch by 72-inch clear opening. Each exterior door
other than screen/storm doors shall have a key-operated lock that has a
deadlocking latch or a key-operated dead bolt with a passage latch. Locks shall
not require the use of a key or special tool for operation from the inside of
the home.
(Prior Code, § 151.05) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.06 FLAME SPREAD PROTECTION.
   (A)   Walls, ceilings and cover panels enclosing a furnace or water heater
shall be created with a minimum of 5/16 gypsum board. Splices shall be tight,
mudded and taped, or backed with nominal two- inch thick wood. Combustible
doors providing interior access to a furnace or water heater space shall also
be covered with gypsum board. Required ventilation may remain but the louvers
may not be combustible.
   (B)   Exposed interior furnished surfaces adjacent to and including vertical
surfaces between range top and overhead cabinets and/or ceiling shall have a
flame spread rating not exceeding 50 as required by the HUD standards contained
in 24 C.F.R. § 42.3280.203. Back splashes not exceeding six inches in height
are exempted. Vertical clearance above cook tops and ranges shall be not less
than 24 inches as required by the HUD standards contained in 24 C.F.R. §
42.3280.709.
(Prior Code, § 151.06) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.07 SMOKE DETECTORS.
   (A)   A smoke detector shall be installed on any wall or ceiling in the
hallway or space communicating with each bedroom area between the living area
and the first bedroom as required by the HUD standards contained in 24 C.F.R. §
42.3280.208. Homes with bedroom areas separated by any combination of common-
use areas such as kitchen, dining room, living room or family room (but not a
bathroom or utility room) shall be required to have one detector for each
bedroom area.
   (B)   (1)   Smoke detectors shall not have switches in the circuit to the
detector between the over-current protection device protecting the branch
circuit and the detector.
      (2)   The detector shall be attached to an electrical outlet box and
connected by a permanent wiring method into a general electrical circuit.
      (3)   The detector shall not be placed on a branch circuit or any circuit
protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter.
(Prior Code, § 151.07) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.08 SOLID FUEL BURNING STOVES AND FIREPLACES.
   (A)   Solid fuel burning, factory-built fireplaces and fireplace stoves may
be used in manufactured (mobile) homes; provided that, they are listed for use
in manufactured homes and installed as per their listing/manufacturer’s
instructions and minimum requirements of the HUD standards contained in 24
C.F.R. § 42.3280.710.
   (B)   A solid fuel burning fireplace or fireplace stove shall be equipped
with integral doors designed to close the fire chamber opening and shall
include complete means for venting through the roof, a combustion air inlet, a
hearth extension and means to securely attach the unit to the manufactured home
structure.
      (1)   Chimney. A listed factory-built chimney designed to be attached
directly to the fireplace/ fireplace stove and equipped with, in accordance
with the listing, a termination device and spark arrester, shall be required.
The chimney shall extend at least three feet above the part of the roof through
which it passes and at least two feet above the highest elevation of any part
of the manufactured home within ten feet of the chimney.
      (2)   Air intake assembly. An air intake assembly shall be installed in
accordance with the terms of the listing/manufacturer’s instructions. A
combustion air inlet shall conduct the air directly into the fire chamber and
shall be designed to prevent material from the hearth dropping onto the area
beneath the manufactured home.
      (3)   Hearth extension. The hearth extension shall be of non-combustible
material a minimum of three-eighths-inch thick and shall extend a minimum of 16
inches in front and eight inches beyond each side of the fireplace/fireplace-
stove opening. The hearth shall also extend over the entire surface beneath a
fireplace stove and beneath an elevated or overhanging fireplace.
(Prior Code, § 151.08) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.09 ELECTRICAL WIRING.
   All electrical systems shall be tested for continuity to assure that
metallic parts are properly bonded, tested for operation to demonstrate that
all equipment is connected and in working order, and given a polarity check to
determine that connections are proper. The electrical system shall be properly
protected for the required amperage load. If the unit is of aluminum
conductors, all receptacles and switches rated 20 amperes or less cannot be
directly connected to the aluminum conductor. The unit must be either rewired
or have approved adapters installed. All alterations must be inspected and
approved by a State Electrical Inspector. Exterior receptacles other than heat
tape receptacles shall be of the ground fault circuit interrupter (GFI) type.
Conductors of dissimilar metals (copper/aluminum/or copper-clad aluminum) must
be connected in accordance with National Electrical Code (NEC) § 110.14.
(Prior Code, § 151.09) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.10 REPLACEMENT FURNACES AND WATER HEATERS.
   (A)   If the manufactured (mobile) home has had or is to receive a
replacement furnace or water heater, it shall be listed for use in a
manufactured (mobile) home and meet minimum requirements of the HUD standards
contained in 24 C.F.R. § 42.3280.710. Vents, roof jacks and chimneys necessary
for the installation shall be listed for use with the furnace or water heater.
   (B)   The furnace and water heater shall be secured in place to avoid
displacement. Every furnace and water heater shall be accessible for servicing
and/or replacement.
   (C)   Furnaces and water heaters shall be installed to provide complete
separation of the combustion system from the interior atmosphere of the
manufactured home as required by the HUD standards contained in 24 C.F.R. §
42.3280.709.
   (D)   The floor in the water heater area shall be free from damage from
moisture and the like to assure that the floor will support the weight of the
water heater and water contained within.
(Prior Code, § 151.10) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.11 SUPPORT AND ANCHORING SYSTEM.
   (A)   HUD units are to be installed and anchored according to the
manufacturer’s directions.
   (B)   State code and pre-code homes shall be blocked and anchored according
to the state’s Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 151.11) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 151.12 GAS LINE TESTING.
   (A)   A final pressure test shall be taken of the gas piping and valve
system. A pressure test of at least six inches of mercury measured with a
manometer or slope gauge shall be conducted. The pressure test shall be
conducted in the presence of the Building Official or by or in the presence of
the gas company representative furnishing gas to the unit.
   (B)   If the test should fail at an appliance and cannot be corrected during
this test period, the appliance shall be disconnected, the line capped and
retested. The failed appliance shall be tagged and the owner and gas-supplying
company notified.
(Prior Code, § 151.12) (Ord. 576, passed 4-2-1996)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Statutory authorization
   
152.002   Findings of fact
   
152.003   Purpose
   
152.004   Lands to which chapter applies
   
152.005   Establishment of official zoning map
   
152.006   Regulatory flood protection elevation
   
152.007   Interpretation
   
152.008   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.009   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
152.010   Definitions
   
152.011   Annexations
   
152.012   Nonconforming uses
   
152.013   Amendments
Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
152.025   General Floodplain District (GFD)
   
152.026   Permitted uses in General Floodplain District
   
152.027   Floodway/flood fringe determinations in General Floodplain District
   
152.028   Compliance
Standards for Flood Fringe
   
152.040   Permitted uses
Subdivisions
   
152.055   Review criteria
   
152.056   Floodway/flood fringe determinations
   
152.057   Removal of special flood hazard area designation
Utilities, Railroads, Roads and Bridges
   
152.070   Public utilities
   
152.071   Public transportation facilities
   
152.072   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems
Manufactured Homes, Manufactured Home Parks
and Recreational Vehicles
   
152.085   New manufactured home parks
   
152.086   Placement manufactured home parks
   
152.087   Recreational vehicles
Administration
   
152.100   Zoning Administrator
   
152.101   Permit requirements
   
152.102   Board of Adjustment
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Chs. 103F and 462, as
they may be amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City Council does ordain the following chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Flood hazard areas. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This chapter is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
   (C)   National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This chapter is adopted
to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program codified as 44 C.F.R. Parts 59 through 78, as amended, so as to
maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.003 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize those losses described in §
152.002(A) by provisions contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.004 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city
shown on the official zoning map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the General Floodplain District.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.005 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The official zoning map together with all materials attached thereto is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study, Pine County,
Minnesota and incorporated areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map panels therein
numbered 27115C0564C, 27115C0568C, 27115C0570C and 27115C0775C, all dated April
3, 2012 and prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The official
zoning map shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.006 REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.007 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
   (B)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the official
zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the
decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the
necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the
site at the time the community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on
the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area
within the 100-year floodplain if earlier, and other available technical data.
Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustment and to
submit technical evidence.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.008 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.009 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain district or
land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless specifically
defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as
to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. FLOOD
FRINGE is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood
Insurance Study, Pine County, Minnesota and incorporated areas.
   FLOODPLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOOD PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a reach.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest projection, is designed to be
self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this
chapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be synonymous with the term travel
trailer/travel vehicle.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term “base flood”
used in a flood insurance study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in §
152.087(A) of this chapter and other similar items.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an
historic structure. For the purpose of this chapter, historic structure shall
be as defined in 44 C.F.R. Part 59.1.
   VARIANCE. A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this chapter to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only
as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship,
practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a
community’s respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.011 ANNEXATIONS.
   The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference in §
152.005 of this chapter may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the
corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this chapter. If
any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city after the date of
adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of annexation into
the city.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.012 NONCONFORMING USES.
   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions. Historic structures, as defined in §
152.010 of this chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of divisions (A)
through (E) of this section.
   (A)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way
that increases its nonconformity.
   (B)   Any structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use in the floodway or flood fringe which would result in
increasing the flood damage potential of that structure or use shall be
protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any
of the flood proofing techniques (such as, FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing
classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further
restricted in divisions (C) and (F) of this section. A structural addition to a
nonconforming structure must be located outside of the floodway and must be
elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance
with §
152.040(A) of this chapter.
   (C)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of
the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include
all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure, then the structure
must meet be located outside of the floodway and must meet the standards of §
152.040 of this chapter for new structures.
   (D)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
   (E)   If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in §
152.010 of this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing
new uses or new structures in §§
152.025 through
152.028 and
152.040 of this chapter will apply depending upon whether the use or structure
is in the floodway or flood fringe portion of the General Floodplain District.
A substantially damaged nonconforming structure shall not be repaired/
reconstructed if said nonconforming structure is located in the floodway.
   (F)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in §
152.010 of this chapter, from any combination of a structural addition to the
outside dimensions of the existing structure or a rehabilitation,
reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an
existing nonconforming structure, then the structural addition and the existing
nonconforming structure must meet the requirements of §
152.040 of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the
structure is in the floodway or flood fringe portion of the General Floodplain
District. A nonconforming structure shall not be substantially improved if said
structure is located in the floodway.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.013 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The floodplain designation on the official zoning map shall not be
removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in
error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the
regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the
floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources if he or she determines that, through other
measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the official
zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map must meet the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) technical conditions and criteria
and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of
Natural Resources must be given ten-days written notice of all hearings to
consider an amendment to this chapter and said notice shall include a draft of
the ordinance amendment or technical study under consideration.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 152.025 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFD).
   The General Floodplain District shall include those areas designated as Zone
A on the flood insurance rate map adopted in §
152.005 of this chapter. The General Floodplain District shall be considered an
overlay zoning district to all existing land use districts in this community.
The uses permitted §
152.026 of this chapter shall only be allowable if not prohibited by any
existing underlying zoning district regulations of the community. The
requirements of this chapter shall apply in addition to other legally
established regulations of the community and where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.026 PERMITTED USES IN GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   The following uses shall be permitted uses in both the floodway and
flood fringe portions of the General Floodplain District provided they do not
involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or
equipment:
      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting;
      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and airport
landing strips;
      (3)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails; and
      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
   (B)   All uses that would involve structures, fill, obstructions,
excavations or storage of materials or equipment shall only be permissible in
the flood fringe portion of the General Floodplain District and shall be
subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria pursuant to §
152.027 of this chapter, and be subject to the performance standards of §
152.040 this chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.027 FLOODWAY/FLOOD FRINGE DETERMINATIONS IN GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval for a
use within the General Floodplain District, the applicant shall be required to
furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and whether the proposed use is within the floodway or flood fringe:
      (1)   A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-
sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high water
information;
      (2)   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground,
pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location, and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and
the location and elevations of streets;
      (3)   Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and
downstream, and soil types; and
      (4)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line
of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
   (B)   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the floodway
or flood fringe and to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation. If
a 100-year flood elevation is provided in the Flood Insurance Study adopted in
§
152.005 of this chapter, then this elevation must be used in calculating the
regulatory flood protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota
Regulations Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 C.F.R. Part 65 shall be followed
in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is strongly
encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology with the
respective Department of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist prior to
commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall:
      (1)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood;
      (2)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas; and
      (3)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage
increase than one-half foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional
stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in
computing floodway boundaries.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the governing body. The
governing body must formally accept the technical evaluation and the
recommended floodway and/or flood fringe boundary or deny the permit
application. The governing body, prior to official action, may submit the
application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning
Commission for review and comment. Once the floodway and flood fringe
boundaries have been determined, the governing body shall refer the matter back
to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit application consistent
with the applicable provisions of §§
152.025 through
152.028 and
152.040 of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.028 COMPLIANCE.
   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within the
floodway and flood fringe portions of the General Floodplain District, all uses
not listed as a permitted use in §
152.026 of this chapter shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided
here that:
   (A)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter and specifically §§
152.085 through
152.087 of this chapter.
   (B)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance
and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and
nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general
provisions of this chapter and specifically §
152.012.
   (C)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must be
certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in
the general provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012) Penalty, see §
152.999
STANDARDS FOR FLOOD FRINGE
§ 152.040 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses involving structures, fill, obstructions, excavations, or
storage of materials or equipment shall be subject to the following standards:
   (A)   All structures, including accessory structures, additions to existing
structures and manufactured homes, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest
floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower than
one-foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill shall
extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the
structure erected thereon.
   (B)   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of
1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only when
said fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with
division (A) of this section.
   (C)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to
the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (D)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an
elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of
Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
   (E)   Commercial uses - accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks,
and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in
feet) times the velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four
upon occurrence of the regional flood.
   (F)   Manufacturing and industrial uses - measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
division (E) of this section. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in floodplain areas.
   (G)   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation - FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
   (H)   Foodplain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been
specified on the official zoning map.
   (I)   Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in §
152.087 of this chapter.
   (J)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
SUBDIVISIONS
§ 152.055 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots
within the General Floodplain District shall be able to contain a building site
outside of the floodway at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply
with the provisions of this chapter and have road access both to the
subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below
the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the
floodplain, the floodway and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be
clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.056 FLOODWAY/FLOOD FRINGE DETERMINATIONS.
   In the General Floodplain District, applicants shall provide the information
required in §
152.027  of this chapter to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the
floodway and flood fringe boundaries and the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the subdivision site.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.057 REMOVAL OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA DESIGNATION.
   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES
§ 152.070 PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.071 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES.
   Railroad tracks, roads and bridges to be located within the General
Floodplain District shall be permissible if placed in accordance with Minnesota
Regulations Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200. Elevation to the regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these
transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety
or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area.
Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation
where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.072 ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.
   Where public utilities are not provided, on-site water supply systems must
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems; and new or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject
to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment
system designed in accordance with the state’s current statewide standards for
on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with
this subchapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
MANUFACTURED HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 152.085 NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by §§
152.055 through
152.057 of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.086 PLACEMENT OF MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   (A)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in
floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only
if elevated in compliance with §
152.040 of this chapter. If vehicular road access for preexisting manufactured
home parks is not provided in accordance with §
152.040(D) of this chapter, then replacement manufactured homes will not be
allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the governing body.
   (B)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.087 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in
division (A) of this section shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
and as specifically spelled out in divisions (C) and (D) of this section..
   (A)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this chapter
if they are placed in any of the areas listed in division (B) of this section
and further they meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Have current licenses required for highway use;
      (2)   Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking
system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the
recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it;
and
      (3)   The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in
any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
   (B)   Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles:
      (1)   Individual lots or parcels of record;
      (2)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds; and
      (3)   Existing condominium type associations.
   (C)   Recreational vehicles exempted in division (A) of this section lose
this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a
structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an
accessory structure, such as a garage or storage building. The recreational
vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a
new structure and shall be subject to the elevation requirements and the use of
land restrictions specified in §§
152.025 through
152.028 and
152.040 of this chapter. There shall be no development or improvement on the
parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of
the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur.
   (D)   New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of
any existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be
subject to the following:
      (1)   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the
General Floodplain District provided said recreational vehicle and its contents
are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and proper
elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with §
152.040(D) of this chapter. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the
requirements of this subchapter shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or
regional flood.
      (2)   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the
criteria of subsection (1) above may, as an alternative, be allowed if in
accordance with the following provisions. The applicant must submit an
emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the
100- year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other
qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist
to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of divisions
(A)(1) and (2) of this section will be met. All attendant sewage and water
facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or
constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding
in accordance with §
152.072 of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.100 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the governing body
shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the
procedures stated in §
152.999 of the chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
§ 152.101 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance
and repair), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof;
prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land prior to
the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system; prior to the change
or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that
has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment within the floodplain.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
   (C)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator
shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal
permits.
   (D)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered or nonconforming
use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
   (E)   Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans,
permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits or
certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and punishable as
provided by §
152.999 of this chapter.
   (F)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification
by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Flood proofing measures shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
   (G)   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
floodplain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
flood proofed.
   (H)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner
of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a
permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to M.S. Ch. 103G, as it
may be amended from time to time, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be
submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
   (I)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease the
100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes
by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.102 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of
business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such Boards by state
law.
   (B)   Administrative review. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as will
not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as
hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for
planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of
such variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the
specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this
chapter, any other zoning regulations in the community, and in the respective
enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance. No variance
shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that
district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than
those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon a showing of
good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
   (D)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal from a
decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a variance, the
Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board of Adjustment
shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the
application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
   (E)   Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall arrive at a decision on such
appeal or variance within 60 days. In passing upon an appeal, the Board of
Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the
findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance, the
Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards which
are in conformity with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable
under §
152.999 of this chapter. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be
forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of
such action.
   (F)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Adjustment may be
made, and as specified in this community’s official controls and also by
Minnesota Statutes.
   (G)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that the issuance of a variance to
construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage and such construction below the 100-year or regional flood
level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and
report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions
may include but are not limited to:
      (1)   In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it, including but not limited to, prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
      (2)   When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to
the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources’ and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with
the community’s plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature and
extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or
use is under construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order
the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either:
         (a)   Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be
made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into
compliance with the official controls; or
         (b)   Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30
days.
      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall
be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse
of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-2012, passed 3-6-2012)
CHAPTER 153: SIGNS
Section
   
153.01   Findings, purpose and effect
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Prohibited signs
   
153.04   Regulations
   
153.05   Exemptions
   
153.06   Permitted signs
   
153.07   Off-premises signs and billboards
   
153.08   Variances
   
153.09   Non-commercial speech
   
153.10   Substitution clause
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND EFFECT.
   (A)   Findings. The City Council hereby finds as follows.
      (1)   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and
quality of the environment.
      (2)   Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may
convey a variety of messages.
      (3)   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and detriments
to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   The city’s zoning regulations have, since as early as 1966,
included the regulation of signs, in an effort to provide adequate means of
expression and to promote the economic viability of the business community,
while protecting the city and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a
type,
size, location and character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of
the community, and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community.
The regulation of the physical characteristics of signs within the city has had
a positive impact on traffic safety and the appearance of the community.
   (B)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to regulate the
message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of this chapter
to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign, or any
sign that cannot be viewed from outside a building.
      (2)   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
         (a)   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and
other physical characteristics of signs within the city, in order to promote
the public health, safety and welfare;
         (b)   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the
city by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community;
         (c)   Improve the visual appearance of the city, while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the city’s goals of public safety and aesthetics; and
         (d)   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign
regulations set for herein under the zoning authority of the city.
   (C)   Effect. A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in the
city if it is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. The
effect of this chapter, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
      (1)   Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a more
limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in
this chapter;
      (2)   Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs, incidental to the principal
use of a site, in all zones when in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter;
      (3)   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other
physical characteristics negatively affect the environment, and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the
environment and the public health, safety and welfare; and
      (4)   Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 153.01) (Ord. 568, passed 12-7-1993; Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004;
Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in this chapter or as specified in
the Building Code. Where the terms are not defined, they shall have their
ordinarily accepted meanings within the context in which they are used.
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language,
Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing the ordinarily
accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   BUILDING CODE. The Uniform Building Code promulgated by the International
Conference of Building Officials and adopted by the city.
   BUILDING ELEVATION. A geometrical drawing that depicts one vertical plane
representing the side, front, or rear of a structure.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the Building Code.
   BUSINESS COMPLEX/STRIP MALL. A group of businesses within the same building
or a group of buildings on the same parcel of property, utilizing common space
for parking and/or access.
   COMBINATION SIGN. A sign incorporating any combination of the features of
pole, projecting and roof signs.
   COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity,
service or entertainment.
   CURB LINE. The line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or
roadway. In the absence of a curb, the CURB LINE shall be established by the
jurisdiction’s engineer. See LEGAL SETBACK LINE.
   DISPLAY SURFACE. The area made available by the sign structure for the
purpose of displaying the advertising message.
   ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including
signs illuminated by an exterior light source.
   GROUND SIGN. A billboard or similar type of sign that is supported by one or
more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground, other than a combination
sign, pylon sign or pole sign, as defined by this section.
   LEGAL SETBACK LINE. A line established by ordinance, beyond which a building
may not be built. A LEGAL SETBACK LINE may be a property line.
   MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the
building and projecting over public property.
   NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech, including, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational
topics.
   NON-STRUCTURAL TRIM. The molding, battens, caps, nailing strips, latticing,
cutouts or letters and walkways that are attached to the sign structure.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN/BILLBOARD. A commercial speech sign that directs the
attention of the public to a business not on the same property where such sign
is located.
   PORTABLE DISPLAY SURFACE. A display surface temporarily fixed to a
standardized advertising structure that is regularly moved from structure to
structure at periodic intervals.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a wall sign, that projects from and is
supported by a wall of a building or structure.
   PROJECTION. The distance by which a sign extends over public property or
beyond the building line.
   PYLON SIGN. A sign wholly supported by a sign structure in the ground.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building or
structure.
   SIGN. Any medium, including its structure and component parts, used or
intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising
purpose.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a
sign as defined in this section. A SIGN STRUCTURE may be a single pole or
pylon, and may or may not be an integral part of the building.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, pendant, valance or advertising display
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light
materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited
period of time only.
   UBC STANDARDS. Those standards published in Volume 3 of the Uniform Building
Code, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
   UNDER CANOPY SIGN. A sign less than one square foot in area, hanging from a
canopy or awning attached directly to a permitted primary or accessory
structure.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or
structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane
of the wall.
(Prior Code, § 153.02) (Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-
2007; Ord. 2-2019, passed 5-14-2019)
§ 153.03 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   No sign shall be allowed that is a hazard to the public health,
safety, convenience or welfare; that prevents ingress or egress from any door,
window or fire escape; that tends to accumulate debris as a fire hazard; or
that is attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
   (B)   Signs shall not resemble, imitate or approximate the shape, size, form
or color of railroad or traffic signs, signals or devices. No sign shall be
placed so as to distract or interfere with traffic visibility or traffic
control.
   (C)   Private signs are prohibited within the public right-of-way of any
street or easement.
   (D)   Signs with rotating beams or flashing or flickering illumination are
prohibited.
   (E)   Signs painted or attached to vehicles, where the vehicle is parked on
a property and not intended to be moved, are prohibited.
   (F)   Signs painted directly onto the side or roof of a building are
prohibited.
   (G)   Signs constructed in violation of state or federal regulations are
prohibited.
   (H)   Signs that are placed to block or obstruct the view of another
existing sign from the public right-of- way, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission, are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 153.03) (Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-
2007)
§ 153.04 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Signs generally. No signs shall be erected or maintained within the
city, except upon application for and granting of a sign permit for the same by
the City Zoning Administrator. The fee for such a permit shall be set by a fee
schedule adopted by the City Council, and shall be in addition to any building
permit requirements.
   (B)   Off-site signs and billboards. All off-premises signs and billboards
shall require a conditional use permit, and shall not exceed the height and
area requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Highway signs. All signs along state and federal highways shall
conform to state and federal sign regulations. Billboards erected along
Interstate #35 (I-35) and State Highway #48 (Fire Monument Road) shall be
spaced a minimum of 1,000 feet apart, as measured from the nearest signs along
the same side of the roadway facing in either direction.
   (D)   Location of off-site signs and billboards. All permanent off-site
signs and billboards shall only be located in areas conjoining a state or
federal highway or county state aid highway (CSAH) zoned General Business or
Industrial.
   (E)   Sign maintenance.
      (1)   Painting. The owner of any sign shall be required to have such a
sign properly maintained to prevent rust, erosion or dilapidated appearance,
including all parts and supports of the sign, unless such parts or supports are
galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust.
      (2)   Area around signs. The owner or lessee of any sign, or the owner of
the land on which the sign is located, shall keep the grass, weeds or other
growth cut, and the area free from refuse, between the sign and the street, and
also for a distance of six feet behind and at the ends of the sign.
   (F)   Unsafe or dangerous signs. Any sign that becomes structurally unsafe
or endangers the safety of a building or premises, or endangers the public
safety, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having
the beneficial use of the building, structure or land upon which the sign is
located, within ten days after written notification from the Zoning
Administrator. The city may take actions as provided in Ch. 94 of the city
code, if the unsafe or dangerous sign is not removed within ten days.
   (G)   Sign height. All sign heights shall be measured from the adjacent
grade to the top of the sign, including all borders and trim.
   (H)   Sign area. Sign area calculations shall include the sign face.
(Prior Code, § 153.04) (Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-
2007)
§ 153.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following signs do not require a permit. However, they shall conform to
the requirements of this chapter:
   (A)   Signs less than four square feet in area and six feet in height;
   (B)   Under canopy signs; provided that, they are no more than one square
foot in area, do not exceed the width of the canopy, and provide a minimum of
eight feet of clearance between the sign and the ground; and
   (C)   Window signs placed only inside of buildings; provided, not more than
50% of the window is covered.
(Prior Code, § 153.05) (Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-
2007)
§ 153.06 PERMITTED SIGNS.
   (A)   The following signs are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and C
Districts.
      (1)   Each parcel shall be permitted one facade or one freestanding sign
per public street frontage, not to exceed a combined total of six square feet
in area. The height of freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet.
      (2)   Temporary signs not to exceed 32 square feet in area and six feet
in height. Temporary signs shall not be displayed for a period longer then 30
consecutive days.
      (3)   All signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from property
lines and shall not be located within 30 feet of an intersection.
   (B)   The following signs are permitted in the A and P/SP Districts.
      (1)   Each parcel shall be permitted facade signage and/or one
freestanding sign per public street frontage, not to exceed a combined total of
32 square feet in area. The height of freestanding signs shall not exceed six
feet.
      (2)   Temporary signs not to exceed 32 square feet in area and six feet
in height. Temporary signs shall not be displayed for a period longer than 30
consecutive days.
      (3)   All signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from property
lines, and shall not be located within 30 feet of an intersection.
   (C)   The following signs are permitted in the CB, GB, RB and I Districts.
      (1)   Signs that are placed on the exterior walls of buildings shall not
extend more than four inches from a building’s wall surface, unless the lowest
portion of the sign is eight feet or higher from adjacent grade, or protected
by landscaping or other measures to prevent underneath passage by either
pedestrian or vehicle traffic, shall not exceed 200 square feet in area for any
one building elevation and shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
      (2)   Awning or canopy signs that provide a minimum underside clearance
of eight feet, do not exceed maximum sign area permitted by this chapter and do
not negatively affect the safety of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Sign area
shall be calculated by measuring the smallest rectangle that can be drawn
around all advertising materials contained on the awning or canopy sign.
      (3)   In areas zoned GB or I, within 750 feet of the centerline of
Interstate Highway 35, freestanding pylon signs are allowed; provided, they do
not exceed 100 feet in height and 250 square feet of area, including borders
and trim. All signs on a site within this area shall not exceed a combined
total of 500 square feet in area in the CB, GB and I Districts.
      (4)   In all other areas zoned CB, GB and I, freestanding pylon signs are
allowed; provided, they do not exceed 35 feet in height and 250 square feet in
area. All signs on a site within this area shall not exceed a combined total of
400 square feet in area in the CB, GB and I Districts.
      (5)   In areas zoned RB that do not front on Minnesota Highways #23 or
#48, or County Highway #61, freestanding pylon or ground signs are allowed;
provided, they do not exceed eight feet in height and 200 square feet in area,
including borders and trim. In all other areas zoned RB, signs are allowed;
provided, they do not exceed 35 feet in height and 200 square feet in area,
including borders and trim. The total square footage of all signs on a site in
the RB District shall not exceed 300 square feet in area.
      (6)   Projecting signs that provide a minimum undersign clearance of at
least ten feet, and do not project more than 24 inches over a sidewalk, and
shall not project over any curb line or traveled portion of a roadway, or
exceed 20 square feet.
      (7)   All signs on a site shall not exceed a combined total of 500 square
feet in area in the CB, GB and I Districts.
      (8)   Business complex/strip mall-type development shall be permitted
signage, as approved by the Planning Commission during the required site plan
review process. A comprehensive signage plan shall be required to be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 153.06) (Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-
2007; Ord. 2-2019, passed 5-14-2019)
§ 153.07 OFF-PREMISES SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS.
   (A)   Off-premises advertising signs and billboards shall only be permitted
in the GB or I Districts as a conditional use. Such signs shall meet all
setback requirements, and shall not be located within 100 feet of any
residential zone, church, school or designated recreation area.
   (B)   (1)   Off-premises and billboard sign applications shall be processed
in accordance with §
155.065 of this chapter. In acting upon a request, it may be determined that,
in order to protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, or to
avoid traffic congestion or hazard, or to promote conformity of a proposed use
with the character of adjoining property and uses and the district as a whole,
or to protect such character, the issuance of a permit should be subject to
conditions.
      (2)   In considering conditional use requests, the Planning Agency shall
evaluate the use, utilizing the applicable requirements listed below.
         (a)   The land area and setback requirements of the property
containing such a use or activity shall be at least the minimum established for
the district.
         (b)   When abutting a residential use in a residential district, the
property shall be screened and landscaped as determined by the Planning Agency.
         (c)   Where applicable, all city, state and federal laws, regulations
and ordinances shall be complied with, and all necessary permits secured.
         (d)   All signs shall be in compliance with ordinance regulations, and
shall not adversely impact adjoining or surrounding residential uses.
         (e)   All lighting shall be designed as to have no direct source of
light visible from adjacent residential areas or from the public roadways.
         (f)   The architectural appearance and functional plan of the sign/
billboard and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or
areas as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting
influence.
         (g)   The proposed sign will not negatively impact the adjacent area
by interfering with available sunlight and air space.
         (h)   The proposed sign will not create a traffic hazard and not be
injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
   (C)   Off-premises signs permitted by a conditional use permit (CUP) or that
are pre-existing shall not count towards the allowable on-site signage, as
permitted by this chapter, unless stated in the approved CUP. Any pre-existing
off-premises sign shall require a CUP prior to it being moved or changed in
size, height or dimension. Size, location and height of off-premises signs
shall be included in the CUP for an approved off-premises sign.
(Prior Code, § 153.07) (Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-
2007)
§ 153.08 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Conditions of variances.
      (1)   A VARIANCE is a modification of the literal provisions of this
chapter, granted when strict enforcement of such provisions would cause undue
hardship or practical difficulties to the property owner in the use of his or
her land.
      (2)   The crucial points of a variance are:
         (a)   Undue hardship;
         (b)   Unique circumstances; and
         (c)   Applying to property.
      (3)   The hardship must not have been created by actions of the
landowner.
      (4)   The variance will not alter the essential character of the area,
and should be in conformance with the city growth management system. Granting
of the variance shall not allow any use that is neither a permitted or
conditional use within the zoning district on which the subject property is
located.
      (5)   The plight of the landowner must be due to unique circumstances. If
the hardship is common to several properties, the variance must not be granted.
      (6)   The proof that a landowner could realize a higher financial return
for his or her land as a result of the variance is not sufficient grounds for
granting a variance. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a
hardship if a reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of the
ordinance.
   (B)   Request for variance; fee. A person desiring to secure a variance, or
to appeal the interpretation and application of any provisions of this chapter
by the Zoning Administrator or Building Official, shall fill out and submit to
the Zoning Administrator or City Clerk a variance form, together with the
required filing fee as set by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 153.08) (Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-
2007)
§ 153.09 NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, all signs of any size
containing non- commercial speech may be posted from August 1 in any general
election year until ten days following the general election, and 13 weeks prior
to any special election until ten days following the special election. (This
does not mean that the stated times are the only times that non-commercial
signs or political signs may be posted.)
(Prior Code, § 153.09) Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 153.10 SUBSTITUTION CLAUSE.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of any sign otherwise allowed by this chapter may
substitute non- commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-
commercial copy.
      (2)   This substitution of copy may be made without any additional
approval or permitting.
   (B)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the inadvertent favoring of
commercial speech over non-commercial speech or favoring of any particular non-
commercial message over any other non-commercial message.
   (C)   This section prevails over any more specific provision to the
contrary.
(Prior Code, § 153.10) (Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or business or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day the violation is permitted to exist
constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 153.99) (Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 8-2007, passed 7-3-
2007)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Title
   
154.02   Purpose and scope
   
154.03   Definitions
   
154.04   Jurisdiction
   
154.05   Compliance
   
154.06   Required approvals of subdivisions plats
   
154.07   Conflict
   
154.08   Exceptions from regulations
   
154.09   Conveyance by metes and bounds
   
154.10   Subdivisions without central water and sewer
   
154.11   Subdivisions located in floodplain district
   
154.12   Minor subdivisions
   
154.13   Exemptions from chapter
   
154.14   Development compliance
   
154.15   Setback from pipeline easements
Subdivision Review
   
154.30   Pre-application meeting (sketch plan)
   
154.31   Preliminary plat approval
Procedures for Subdivision Review
   
154.45   Final plat
   
154.46   Final plat data requirements
   
154.47   Design standards
   
154.48   Public use dedication or contribution
   
154.49   Required improvements
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.60   Variances and amendments
   
154.61   Fees
   
154.62   Enforcement
   
154.63   Notification
   
154.64   Disclosure by seller
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Subdivision Regulations of the City of
Hinckley” and will be referred to herein as “this chapter”.
(Prior Code, § 154.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. Pursuant to the authority contained in M.S. § 462.358, as it
may be amended from time to time, this chapter is adopted for the following
purposes:
      (1)   To provide for the orderly, economic and safe development of land
urban services and facilities;
      (2)   To promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the residents of the city; and
      (3)   To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing
uniform procedures.
   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter relate to any division of a
tract of land into two or more parcels by platting, replotting, conveyance,
registered land survey or other means.
(Prior Code, § 154.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words used herein are
defined. The word “shall” is mandatory. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future; and the singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms
are herein defined.
      ALLEY. A public vehicular way which affords a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property and which is not intended for general
traffic circulation.
      BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision which is entirely bounded by
streets or by street, railroad right-of-way, waterway or exterior boundary of
the subdivision.
      BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line
and the property line.
      BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to a street between which line and
the nearest street right-of-way line no building may be erected or placed.
      CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Hinckley having
jurisdiction.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The comprehensive plan prepared and adopted by the
city indicating the general locations recommended for major land uses, streets,
parks, public buildings and other public improvements.
      COUNTY BOARD. The governing body of Pine County.
      CROSSWALK or PEDESTRIAN WAY. A publicly-owned right-of-way which crosses
a block and furnishes pedestrian access to adjacent streets or properties.
      DESIGN STANDARDS. Specifications to subdividers for the preparation of
plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things the optimum,
minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as right-of-way, blocks, easements
and lots.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to the use of a strip of land by
the public, a corporation or persons for specific purposes as the construction
of utilities, drainage ways and roadways.
      ENGINEER. The city or county engineer or a duly authorized consulting
engineer.
      FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdividers plan
of subdivision which will be submitted to the County Recorder’s office. Such
plat must conform to these subdivision regulations and all appropriate state
laws.
      GRADE, PERCENTAGE OF. The rise or fall of a street in feet and tenths of
a foot or each 100 feet of horizontal distance measured at the centerline of
the street.
      GROWTH MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. The goals, policies, programs, ordinances and
regulations used to guide the city’s growth and development.
      LOT. The smallest unit of a subdivision individually numbered or
designated on the plat for the purposes of description, recording, conveyance,
development and taxation.
      LOT (OF RECORD). A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise
legally described, as of the effective date of this chapter and recorded as
such in the County Recorder’s office or approved by the city as a lot
subsequent to such date, and which occupied by or intended for occupancy by one
principle building or principle use together with any accessory buildings or
such open spaces as required by this chapter and have its principle frontage on
a street, or a proposed street approved by the City Council.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the street right-of-way
line and the opposite rear line of the lot measured in the general direction of
the side lot lines.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
      LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between the side property lines
of a lot as measured at the building line.
      OWNER. Includes persons, partnerships, firms, associations, corporations
or combinations thereof, having proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided.
      PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. Public land and open spaces dedicated or reserved
for recreational purposes.
      PEDESTRIAN WAY. Public or private right-of-way across a block or within a
block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the
installation of utility lines.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Hinckley.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land planned and developed as a unit
rather than an aggregate of houses or individual lots.
      PLAT. A map or drawing indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of
land, intended to be filed for record.
      PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary plat map, drawing or chart indicating
the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the City Clerk-
Administrator, Zoning Administrator and the City Council for their
consideration as to its compliance with the growth management goals, policies
and these regulations.
      PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts made between private parties as to the
manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving
the physical and economic integrity of any given area.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land dedicated and publicly-owned for use as a street,
alley or crosswalk.
      STREET. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue or boulevard.
      STREET, COLLECTOR. A feeder street which provides connection primarily
between arterial streets or arterial streets and minor street. COLLECTOR
STREETS include the principal entrance streets of a residential development and
the principal streets for circulation within such development.
      STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A comparatively short minor street having one end
open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-
around.
      STREET, MAJOR OR ARTERIAL. A street of considerable continuity, which is
used primarily for heavy through traffic between major traffic generation
areas.
      STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
a highway or an arterial street, and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
      STREET, MINOR OR LOCAL. A street which serves primarily as access to
abutting properties and is not intended to carry through traffic.
      STREET, WIDTH. The street right-of-way width, measured at right angles to
the centerline of the street.
      SUBDIVIDER. Includes any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, trust or legal entity having sufficient interest in
the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same under this chapter.
      SUBDIVISION.
         (a)   The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, tracts or parcels for the purpose of transferring ownership or building
development, or if a new street is involved, any division or development of a
parcel of land.
         (b)   The term shall include re- subdivision of land.
      TANGENT. A straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve
where it intersects a curve.
      VERTICAL CURVE. The surface curvature on a street centerline located
between lines of different percentage of grade.
(Prior Code, § 154.03) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.04 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations governing plats and the subdivision of land shall apply to
the area within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 154.04) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.05 COMPLIANCE.
   After the adoption of this chapter, no lot in a subdivision shall be sold,
no permit shall be issued to alter or erect any building upon land in a
subdivision unless a subdivision plat has been approved and recorded and until
the improvements required by the City Council relative to subdivision have been
constructed or arranged for as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 154.05) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.06 REQUIRED APPROVALS OF SUBDIVISIONS PLATS.
   Before any plat shall have validity, it shall have been approved by the
Planning Commission and the City Council and recorded in the County Recorder’s
office.
(Prior Code, § 154.06) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.07 CONFLICT.
   It is not intended by this chapter to annul or interfere with any official
regulations or ordinances of the city; provided, however, that, when there is a
difference between minimum standards or dimensions herein and those contained
in other official regulations or ordinances of the city, the highest standards
shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 154.07) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.08 EXCEPTIONS FROM REGULATIONS.
   (A)   When requesting a subdivision, if either of the two following
conditions exists, the Zoning Administrator shall bring the request to the
attention of the Planning Commission, whereupon the Planning Commission shall
review the request and may recommend exemption of the subdivision from
complying with any procedural requirements of this chapter deemed inappropriate
for adequate review of subdivision requests.
      (1)   In any case in which compliance with §
154.09 of this chapter will create an unnecessary hardship and failure to
comply does not interfere with the intent of this chapter; provided that, such
conveyance does not necessitate the dedication of a public right-of-way and the
newly created parcel will not cause the other remaining portion of the property
to be in violation of this chapter or Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Where written justification is submitted by an applicant which
clearly indicates that the intent of this chapter can be satisfied without
enforcing all of the procedural requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City
Council by resolution may exempt the conveyance and the conveyance may then be
filed or recorded.
(Prior Code, § 154.08) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.09 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.
   No conveyance of one or more parcels in which the land is described by metes
and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after
the effective date of this chapter shall be filed or recorded, except in
certain cases of minor subdivisions as described in §
154.12 of this chapter and those conveyances exempted under §
154.13 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 154.09) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.10 SUBDIVISIONS WITHOUT CENTRAL WATER AND SEWER.
   In subdivisions where central water and/or sewer services are not presently
available, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may
require that the lots in the subdivision be in accordance with the minimum lot
area and lot width requirements of Ch. 155 of this chapter; and that the
subdivider convey two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
building development of sufficient size to safely accommodate a private well
and/or disposal system in accordance with applicable state law and regulations
and further that any such building development be confined to one of the
multiple lots conveyed. At such time as central water and/or sewer service
becomes available, and upon connection of the existing building development to
the same, the undeveloped lots may be conveyed to other persons and building
development may be permitted on the lots pursuant to the regulations and
requirements of the city’s zoning and subdivision ordinances then in effect.
(Prior Code, § 154.10) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.11 SUBDIVISIONS LOCATED IN FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   All subdivisions located in the Floodplain District shall be according to
Ch. 152 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 154.11) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.12 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   In the case of a subdivision resulting in three or less lots, situated in
areas where conditions are well defined, and no further re-subdivision is
expected, the governing body may exempt the subdivider from complying with some
of the requirements of these regulations after submission of a survey by a
registered land surveyor of the proposed subdivision, and the newly created
property lines will not cause any resulting lot to be in violation of these
regulations or
Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances. In the case of a request to subdivide a lot
which is a part of a recorded plat or to create not more than three new lots,
and the newly-created property lines will not cause any resulting lot to be in
violation of these regulations or
Ch. 155 of this chapter, the division may be approved by the governing body,
after submission of a survey by a registered land surveyor showing the original
lot and the proposed subdivision. There shall be only one minor subdivision
with regard to the original tract in any calendar year. The governing body
shall have the authority to deny minor subdivisions if it appears that the
intent of these regulations or the zoning code my be violated. Each parcel must
have frontage on a public road.
(Prior Code, § 154.12) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.13 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.
   The following conveyance shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter
and shall not constitute a subdivision:
   (A)   The parcel was a separate lot of record prior to the effective date of
this chapter;
   (B)   The parcel was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered
into prior to the effective date of this chapter;
   (C)   The parcel is a single parcel of land of not less than five acres and
having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance does not result in
the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which
is less than five acres in area or 300 feet in width and all parcels have
frontage on public right-of-way;
   (D)   The parcel relates to a division of a lot which is a part of a
recorded plat where the division is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to
an abutting lot or to create two lots, and the newly created lot will not cause
the other remaining portion of the lot to be in violation of this chapter or
Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances;
   (E)   Cemetery lots; and
   (F)   Parcels resulting from court orders, or the adjustment of a lot line
by the relocation of a common boundary as the result of a correctional survey
of a previously recorded parcel, or an instrument of conveyance to correct a
faulty description in previously recorded instrument of conveyance.
(Prior Code, § 154.13) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.14 DEVELOPMENT COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All subdivision developments will comply with the general provisions
subchapter of the zoning code.
   (B)   Specifically, the project developer will be defined according to
Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Also, the sale of property by the city for purposes of the proposed
subdivision will require notification to all contractors of the project
developer’s responsibilities regarding pre-development or mechanics costs.
(Prior Code, § 154.14) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord. passed 4-1-1997)
§ 154.15 SETBACK FROM PIPELINE EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the model setback ordinance set out in this
section is to increase public safety by requiring that new development be set
back from the pipeline locations.
   (B)   Applicability. This section applies to new residential and other
development that has occurred or for which development permits have been issued
before the effective date of this section.
   (C)   Setback. Buildings and places of public assembly subject to this
section shall not be constructed closer to the pipeline than the boundary of
the pipeline easement.
   (D)   Variances. Variance procedures adopted by the local unit of government
under M.S. §§ 462.351 through 462.365, as they may be amended from time to
time, shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 154.15) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 563, passed 8-6-1991)
Penalty, see §
154.99
SUBDIVISION REVIEW
§ 154.30 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING (SKETCH PLAN).
   Prior to the preparation of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall
review with city staff a sketch plan of the intended layout, a description of
the proposed development and such other information as may be requested. At
this meeting, city staff shall give advice as to whether or not the intended
layout conforms satisfactorily with the requirements of the subdivision
regulations and zoning code and shall so advise the subdivider, giving the
subdivider whatever suggestions and information may be needed for his or her
guidance in the preparation of the subdivision preliminary plat. It shall then
be the responsibility of the subdivider to prepare and submit application for
preliminary and final plat approval in accordance with this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 154.25) (Ord. 610, passed 8-7-2001)
§ 154.31 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   The subdivider shall file with the city’s Zoning Administrator ten
copies of the proposed subdivision with an application for preliminary plat
approval at a standard scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch. The Zoning
Administrator submits copies of the preliminary plan to the Planning
Commission, one copy to the City Engineer and a copy to the District Engineer
of the state’s Highway Department if the plan borders a federal, state or state
aid highway. The County Engineer should be provided a copy, if the subdivision
will require curb cuts or access points on a county road.
   (B)   The following shall be shown on the preliminary plat:
      (1)   Existing:
         (a)   All contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider;
         (b)   Easements: location, width and purpose;
         (c)   Streets on and adjacent to the property: name and right-of-way;
width and location; and legally established centerline elevation; walks, curbs,
gutters, culverts and the like;
         (d)   Utilities on and adjacent to the property: location, size and
invert elevation of sanitary storm sewers; location and size of water mains;
location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street
lights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate
the direction and distance to, and size of nearest ones, showing invert
elevation of sewers;
         (e)   Ground elevations on the property and adjacent land within 100
feet of the tract based on city datum. Contour lines shall be shown;
         (f)   Other conditions of the property and adjacent land within 100
feet of the property: Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas,
isolated preservable trees one foot or more in diameter, houses, barns, shacks
and other significant features; appropriate direction and gradient of ground
slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and location of
buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other non-residential land uses
or adverse influence;
         (g)   Zoning on and adjacent to the property; and
         (h)   Proposed public improvements of record: highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the property.
      (2)   Proposed:
         (a)   Streets and street names, right-of- way and roadway widths,
approximate elevations, grades and gradients;
         (b)   Other rights-of-way or easement locations, width and purpose;
         (c)   Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers or tract letters;
         (d)   Sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or
other public uses;
         (e)   Minimum required building setback lines;
         (f)   Site data, including total area, number of residential lots,
areas in parks and other public land and parcel dimensions and areas; and
         (g)   Other preliminary plans:
            1.   Finish grade and surface drainage of all parcels;
            2.   Suggested preliminary plan of sanitary and storm water sewers
with grades and sizes indicated for approval by the City Engineer and Zoning
Administrator; and
            3.   In areas where topographic features are such that erosion,
siltation or drainage problems may occur, a site plan will be required showing
how these problems will be resolved.
      (3)   Other data:
         (a)   Key map at small scale showing location of the preliminary plat
and other property for at least 660 feet in every direction;
         (b)   Title and certificate: correct legal description according to
official records in office of appropriate recorder; title under which proposed
subdivision is to be recorded with names and addresses of owners, notation
stating acreage, scale, north arrow, datum, benchmarks, certification of
registered surveyor and date of survey;
         (c)   Draft of special covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development; and
         (d)   Title opinion or title insurance policy indicating fee ownership
of land to be subdivided.
   (C)   All preliminary plats shall be filed with the city’s Zoning
Administrator. All preliminary plat applications shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission and a public hearing scheduled within 45 days of acceptance
of the application by the city. A fee shall be required to be paid at the time
of filing the preliminary plat. The fee shall be as established for subdivision
review in §
154.61 of this chapter. A new preliminary plat shall be required:
      (1)   In the event that the final plat does not conform to the
preliminary plat;
      (2)   In the event that the final plat is not submitted within the time
period specified under the provisions of this code; and
      (3)   In the event that the plat was not filed within 12 months after the
date of preliminary plat approval.
   (D)   Not less than ten days in advance of the hearing, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause a notice of such hearing to be published once in the
official newspaper of the city stating both the legal description and street
location of the proposed subdivision. In addition, notices shall be mailed to
all property owners within 350 feet of the property proposed to be subdivided
as well as to appropriate governmental agencies.
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall review the proposed subdivision at the
time and date specified in the notice of hearing at which time all interested
persons shall be heard. This meeting shall serve as the hearing on the proposed
plat. In case of all plats, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the City
Council the denial or approval of a preliminary or final plat, if it makes any
of the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed subdivision is in conflict with applicable general and
specific plans (e.g., comprehensive plan, capital improvement program, zoning
code and other city codes);
      (2)   The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is in
conflict with applicable development plans;
      (3)   The physical characteristics of this site, including, but not
limited to, topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and siltation,
susceptibility to flooding and water storage and retention, are such that the
site is not suitable for the type of development or use proposed;
      (4)   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of
development;
      (5)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage;
      (6)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely
to cause serious public health problems; and
      (7)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a
court.
   (F)   (1)   Following a review of the proposed subdivision and other
material submitted, the Planning Commission shall within 35 days after the
original public hearing date act thereon. The Planning Commission shall:
         (a)   Recommend approval;
         (b)   Recommend approval with conditions; and
         (c)   Recommend denial.
      (2)   Following Planning Commission action, the proposed subdivision
shall be submitted to the City Council at its next available meeting.
   (G)   City Council action on the proposed subdivision shall be accomplished
within 60 days from the date of the original Planning Commission hearing.
Approval of the proposed subdivision shall constitute approval of a preliminary
plat and shall be in resolution form.
   (H)   Within 12 months after receiving preliminary plan approval, the final
plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for
approval. A fee shall be required to be paid upon the submission of the final
plan. The fee shall be as established for subdivision review in §
154.61 of this chapter. Prior to the expiration of the preliminary plan
approval, the Planning Commission may extend the approval period for an
additional 12 months. The extension shall be in writing specifically designated
the expiration date. The extension shall not be subject to an additional fee
and only one such extension may be granted.
   (I)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the plat with
the appropriate county offices after final approval. Failure to do so within 12
months of final approval shall result in the requiring of a new preliminary
plat. This new preliminary plat must be reviewed in accordance with the
procedure set out in this chapter to ensure compliance with any new
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 154.26) (Ord. 610, passed 8-7-2001)
PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW
§ 154.45 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Request for subdivision, as provided within this chapter, shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such
application shall be accompanied by a fee set by City Council. This fee shall
not be refunded. Such application shall also be accompanied by ten copies of
the final plat. The Zoning Administrator shall refer the application and final
plat copies to the Planning Commission for consideration at least 15 days
before the next regular Planning Commission meeting.
   (B)   (1)   The City Zoning Administrator, on behalf of the Planning
Commission, shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall
be published in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to
the date of the hearing. Such notice shall also be mailed not less than ten
days to:
         (a)   All property owners of record according to the county assessment
records within 350 feet of the property;
         (b)   The Commissioner of the state’s Department of Natural Resources
if the proposed subdivision is located in part or in total within a public
water;
         (c)   The Commissioner of the state’s Department of Transportation and
the County Engineer if the proposed plat abuts or includes a state trunk
highway or a county state aid road, respectively; and
         (d)   All township boards of townships which a proposed subdivision
abuts.
      (2)   A copy of the notice and a list of the individuals and/or property
owners and addresses to which the notices were sent shall be attested to by the
city’s Clerk-Administrator and made part of the official record. The failure to
give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall
not invalidate the proceedings; provided, a bona fide attempt to comply with
this section has been made.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall consider the plat drawing and hold a
public hearing at its next regular meeting. The Zoning Administrator shall
refer the application, along with all related information, to the Planning
Commission for consideration. The applicant or a representative thereof shall
appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning
the final plat.
   (D)   In considering the final plat, the Planning Commission shall consider
the following factors:
      (1)   Consistency with the design standards and other requirements of
this chapter;
      (2)   Consistency with the city’s growth management system;
      (3)   Consistency with other city ordinances;
      (4)   The physical characteristics of the site, including, but not
limited to, topography, erosion, flooding potential, soil limitations and
suitability for the type of development or use contemplated;
      (5)   Subdivisions or portions thereof, located within the designed
Floodplain District, shall also be subject to the provisions of Ch. 152 of this
code of ordinances; and
      (6)   The need for dedication of land or fee for public use.
   (E)   The Planning Commission and city staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the applicant concerning the final plat or
to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant
concerning information to be declared necessary to establish compliance with
all pertinent sections of this chapter. The following information may be
required if it is deemed necessary and appropriate by the Planning Commission
and city staff:
      (1)   Existing topography, including contour lines at two-foot intervals.
Watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines and
other significant features shall also be known;
      (2)   Soil survey, grading plan, soil erosion and sediment control plan
and landscaping plan;
      (3)   Statement of proposed use of development including type and number
of structures and units;
      (4)   Statement of adequacy of existing or proposed utilities to
accommodate or serve the proposed development;
      (5)   Statement relative to the relationship of the proposed subdivision
with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions;
      (6)   Statement of estimated costs of proposed required improvements;
      (7)   Other information deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and
city staff; and
      (8)   Soil borings and percolation tests.
   (F)   (1)   Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall either:
         (a)   Approve or disapprove the requests;
         (b)   Approve or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning
Commission with modifications, alterations or differing conditions. Such
modifications, alterations or differing conditions shall be in writing and made
part of the City Council’s records; or
         (c)   Refer the recommendation back to the Planning Commission for
future consideration. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a
singular action.
      (2)   In all cases, the final plat shall be approved or disapproved by
the City Council within 120 days of the date of the final plat application,
unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to by the applicant.
   (G)   (1)   If accepted, the final plat shall be approved by resolution,
including acceptance of all agreements for basic improvements, public
dedication and other requirements as indicated by the City Council.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the City
Council’s action and reasons thereof. The decision of the City Council
regarding final plat approval is final subject to judicial review. If a final
plat is disapproved, the same plat cannot be refiled for review within six
months following the date of City Council disapproval.
      (3)   Approval of the final plat by the City Council shall last one year.
After that time, the final plat will be considered void unless the City Council
grants an extension. The extension shall be in writing specifically designating
the expiration date. The extension shall not be subject to an additional fee
and only one extension may be granted per final plat.
   (H)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the plat with
the appropriate county offices after final approval pursuant to this chapter
and M.S. § 505.08, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (I)   The subdivision developer shall provide a copy of all final plats
located in total or in part within a public water to the Commissioner of the
state’s Department of Natural Resources within ten days of final plat approval.
(Prior Code, § 154.30) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 610, passed 8-7-2001)
§ 154.46 FINAL PLAT DATA REQUIREMENTS.
   The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of state law
and shall include the following information:
   (A)   Name of subdivision;
   (B)   Scale, north arrow and date of plat;
   (C)   All plats shall be of either two standard sizes measuring 20 by 30 or
30 by 40 inches from outer edge to outer edge. A border line shall be placed
one- half inch inside the outer edges of the plat on the top, bottom and right
hand side of the plat, and two inches inside the outer edge of the left hand
side of the plat;
   (D)   Durable iron monuments shall be set at an angle and curve points on
the outside boundary lines of the plat, at all block corners and at all
intermediate points on the block lines indicating changes of direction in the
lines. The outside boundary lines of the plat shall be correctly designated
showing bearings on all straight lines, angles at all angle points and central
angle and radii length for all curves. All distances shall be shown between
monuments as measured to the nearest hundredths of a foot. If a curved line
constitutes the line of more than one lot in any block, the central angle for
that part of each lot on the curved line shall be shown. The outside boundary
lines shall close by latitude and departure with an error not to exceed one
foot in 7,500 feet;
   (E)   In any instance where a river, stream, creek, lake or pond constitutes
a boundary line within or of the plat, a survey line shall be shown with
bearings or angles and distances between all angle points and their
relationship to a water line and all distances measured on the survey line
between lot lines shall be shown. The survey line shall be shown as a dashed
line;
   (F)   Locations, dimensions and name or number of all existing or proposed
lots, blocks, streets, highways, alleys, parks and public lands;
   (G)   All rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, swamps and wetlands shall
be correctly located and designated;
   (H)   Name and boundary lines or any adjoining platted lands;
   (I)   Location and width of all easements to be dedicated;
   (J)   Name and address of developer and surveyor making the plat;
   (K)   A written instrument of dedication signed and acknowledged by the
owner of the land including a full and accurate description of the land platted
and set forth what part of the land is dedicated and also to whom, and for what
purpose these parts are dedicated;
   (L)   A written surveyor’s certificate certifying that the plat is a correct
representation of the survey, that all distances are correctly shown on the
plat, that all monuments have been correctly placed in the ground as shown, and
that all outside boundary lines are correctly designated on the plat, if there
are no wetlands, streets or highways to be designated, he or she shall so
state. The certificate shall be sworn to before any officer authorized to
administer an oath.
   (M)   Delinquent tax certification as follows:
 
 
No delinquent taxes and transfer entered this
                          day of                                 , 20         .
 
 
   (N)   Certification of city approval as follows:
 
 
Approved by the City of Hinckley, Minnesota this
                  day of                                  , 20          .
      Signed:                                                     
            Mayor
      Attested:                                                     
            City Clerk-Administrator
 
 
(Prior Code, § 154.31) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.47 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Streets and alleys.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   The character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.
         (b)   The arrangements of streets in a subdivision shall either
provide for the continuation of existing streets in surrounding areas, or
conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City Council
to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make
continuance of existing streets impractical.
         (c)   Residential streets or minor streets should be so arranged as to
discourage their use by through traffic.
         (d)   Where a subdivision abuts on or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen
plantings, non-access reservations along arterial property lines abutting the
arterial streets, deep lots or such other treatment as may be necessary for
protection of residential properties should be encouraged. Direct frontage and/
or access to arterial streets should be avoided.
         (e)   Street traffic should be designed to flow toward arterial and
collector streets. Streets should fit the contours of the land. Street grades,
where feasible shall not be greater than 8% and not less than 0.36%.
      (2)   Half streets. Dedication of half streets shall be prohibited,
except where essential to reasonable development of future subdivisions.
      (3)   Dead end streets and cul-de-sacs.
         (a)   Dead end streets are prohibited, but cul-de-sacs will be
permitted.
         (b)   Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 500 feet including a turn-
around at the closed end.
         (c)   The turn-around shall have a minimum outside curb radius of at
least 40 feet and a right-of-way radius of not less than 50 feet; except for T-
shaped turn arounds where permitted.
      (4)   Street intersections. Streets should intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles, except under unusual topographical conditions. The
minimum angle of street intersection shall be 80 degrees. Street intersections
shall not be off-set less than 150 feet as measured from the centerlines.
      (5)   Alleys. Alleys, where provided, shall not be less than 30 feet wide
in commercial areas and 20 feet wide in residential areas. Dead end alleys
should be avoided, but, if unavoidable, adequate turn- around areas shall be
provided at the closed end.
      (6)   Right-of-way standards. Public right-of- way widths shall be
dedicated using the following minimum standards or those recommended by the
state’s or county’s Highway Department when applicable (in feet):
                    Roadway
Public Right-of-Way Right-of-Way Paved Gravel****
                       Roadway
Public Right-of-Way    Right-of-Way Paved Gravel****
Arterial street        100          48    48
Collector street       66           44    32
Cul-de-sac*            66***        24*** 24
Marginal access street 66           24    24
Minor or local street  66           24    24
Pedestrian way         10           N/A   N/A
Private common access  **           **    **
NOTES TO TABLE:
* As provided in division (A)(5) of this section.
** The City Council may decide to approve private common access where
appropriate and may require such standards as deemed appropriate.
*** In addition to turnaround requirements outlined in division (A)(3) of
this section.
**** Three inches of Class 5.
 
      (7)   Street alignment. The horizontal and vertical alignment minimum
requirements on all street shall be as follows (in feet):
 
Street        Horizontal* Vertical**
Arterial      150         500
Collector     50          300
Cul-de-sacs   50          100
Intersections 15***       300
Minor         50          200
NOTES TO TABLE:
* Radii of center-line.
** Minimum sight distance as measured at four feet above ground level along
the centerline. For intersections as measured 15 feet from the edge of the
roadway.
*** Curb-line radius.
 
   (B)   Easements.
      (1)   Easements having a minimum width of ten feet shall be provided
along the side or rear lot lines as required for utility lines, and underground
mains and cables.
      (2)   Utility easements shall connect with easements established in
adjoining properties. All utility easements should be reviewed by the
appropriate utility company or corporation. Where feasible, all utilities shall
be placed underground.
      (3)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a floodage easement or drainage
right-of-way conformation substantially with the lines of such watercourse.
      (4)   Pedestrian walkway easements with right-of-way of not less than ten
feet in width shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulations,
or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other
community facilities as shall be determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
   (C)   Blocks.
      (1)   Length. Blocks shall not be greater than 1,800 feet in length,
except if necessary due to unusual topographical or other conditions. In
residential areas, blocks longer than 800 feet shall be provided with
pedestrian ways or easements near the center of the block.
      (2)   Width. Blocks should have sufficient width to provide two tiers of
lots of minimum depth to allow sufficient area for building and adequate off-
street parking.
   (D)   Lots.
      (1)   Generally. The lot size, width, shape and orientation shall be
appropriate for the proposed type of development and meet the minimum
requirements of the zoning code in effect upon approval of the final plat.
      (2)   Frontage. All lots shall have frontage upon a public street or upon
an approved private common access road.
      (3)   Corner lots. Corner lots for residential purposes shall have extra
width to allow appropriate building setback from an orientation to both
streets, as required by Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances in effect upon
approval of the final plat.
      (4)   Lot lines. All side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to
street right-of-way lines.
      (5)   Double and reverse-lots. Double frontage and reverse lots should be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential uses from
arterial streets, conflicting uses or other adverse conditions.
   (E)   Soil erosion and steep slopes.
      (1)   Topsoil and vegetation distributed or destroyed during or after
construction shall be replaced or replanted to minimize soil erosion.
      (2)   No construction or grading shall be allowed on slopes greater than
20%. The subdivider does have the option of dedicating steep slopes to the city
or an officially recognized home ownership association.
      (3)   During and after construction, slopes shall be protected from
erosion by quick establishment of vegetative cover, benches, terraces, mulches
or other proper protection devices or practices. Stands of existing vegetation
adequate to control erosion should be preserved wherever possible.
      (4)   Any land reclamation or filling shall conform to the applicable
regulations outlines within the Zoning Code.
   (F)   Drainage.
      (1)   Plans for surface water runoff and drainage shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission and City Council prior to final plat approval.
      (2)   The subdivision should be so designed that the drainage system
utilizes to the greatest extent possible existing natural overland flows, open
channel and drainage routes.
      (3)   The drainage system shall be constructed and operational during the
initial phase of construction.
   (G)   Yard, area and building regulations. The yard, area and building
requirements shall comply with the provisions set forth within this chapter and
all other applicable ordinances of appropriate jurisdictions.
(Prior Code, § 154.32) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.48 PUBLIC USE DEDICATION OR CONTRIBUTION.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Authority. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Council may require subdividers requesting platting or
replotting of land or a planned unit development within the jurisdictional
boundaries of this chapter to contribute a percent of the final gross area of
the subdivision to be dedicated to the public for public uses as parks,
playgrounds, public open space or storm water holding areas or ponds; or that
the subdivider contribute an equivalent amount in cash based upon the fair
market value of the undeveloped land as determined by the County Assessor at
the time of final plat approval; or any combination thereof. The form of
contribution (cash, land or any combination) shall be determined based upon the
following conditions outlined below. The determination of such contribution
shall be made during the subdivision review process.
      (2)   Residential subdivisions. In residential subdivisions, the
subdivider shall dedicate 10% of the undeveloped land proposed to be subdivided
for purposes outlined in division (A)(1) above, or an equivalent amount in
cash, or any combination thereof. The contribution shall be based upon a
finding of fact as outlined in division (A)(4) below.
      (3)   Commercial, industrial or other non- residential subdivisions. In
non-residential subdivisions, the city may decide not to require the subdivider
to contribute land, cash or any combination thereof. In those instances,
however, where the city deems it in the public interest to require a
contribution, the subdivider shall dedicate a percent of the undeveloped land
proposed to be subdivided for purposes outlined in division (A)(1) above, or an
equivalent amount in cash, or any combination thereof. The contribution shall
be based upon a finding of fact as outlined in division (A)(4) below.
      (4)   Conditions for contribution. It shall be deemed to be in the public
interest to require land dedication, cash contribution or any combination
thereof when the City Council, after review and recommendation, makes one or
more of the following findings of fact:
         (a)   All or part of the proposed subdivision has been designated as
park, playground, public open space, storm sewer holding areas or ponds on an
adopted city plan;
         (b)   Such contribution is necessary in order to protect adjacent land
uses from potential conflicting land uses which could exist on the land to be
subdivided;
         (c)   The increased number of residents to reside or be employed
within the subdivision will increase the recreational demands upon the city;
         (d)   Such contribution is necessary to provide proper surface water
runoff generated by the uses proposed within the subdivision;
         (e)   The land proposed to be subdivided contains or borders upon
existing unique topographical features including, but not limited to, ponds,
lakes, streams, timber stands, water holding areas, hills, steep slopes,
drainage areas or bluffs which should be preserved to prevent foreseeable
safety, pollution or erosion hazards or to provide unique recreational and
aesthetic qualities and enjoyment to the city; and
         (f)   Such contribution is necessary to comply with or fulfill the
goals, policies and programs of the city.
   (B)   Exception for outlots. In subdivisions which include outlots, the
subdivider may contribute land, cash or any combination thereof as provided in
division (A) above for the entire subdivision, including the land within the
outlots, or for only that land exclusive of the outlots. When such outlots are
subdivided, the contribution requirements shall be met in accordance with then
existing regulations as applicable, unless such contributions have been
previously met.
   (C)   Special fund. All monies collected from cash contributions shall be
placed in a special fund from which only those public uses outlined in division
(A)(1) above may be realized.
   (D)   Delayed contribution. Upon petition by the subdivider, the City
Council may approve a delay in the actual contribution of the cash required in
lieu of land until such time as development occurs on the property being
subdivided provided that a proper legal agreement is executed guaranteeing such
contribution. The subdivider is responsible for all costs in the preparing of
the agreement. Delayed contribution payment shall include 8% interest per year.
   (E)   Land dedication. In such cases where the subdivider is required to
dedicate land area, the City Council shall have the right to determine the
geographical location and configuration of the dedication.
(Prior Code, § 154.33) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.49 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The following improvements shall be complied with and
provided in accordance with city standards and approval and as provided within
the plat agreement as indicated in division (C) below.
   (B)   Improvements. All improvements identified below and as included within
the subdivision agreement shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider
according to standards and specifications approved by the City Council.
      (1)   The full width of all street rights-of-way and utility easements as
approved on the final plat will be finished at rough grade, that is, no more
than six inches from the finished grade.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer, water and drainage facilities, and electric
telephone and gas service lines shall be installed as required by the
subdivision agreement. When extension of trunk lines to the site are necessary,
it is the option of the city to participate in the financing of such
improvements. Where city water and sewer facilities are not available for
extension into the subdivision, the City Council may permit the use of
individual water and sewer systems in accordance with appropriate state and
city laws, ordinances and regulations.
      (3)   Where necessary, all streets shall be curbed, guttered and paved as
required by the subdivision agreement. The city may delay street paving if city
water, sewer or storm sewer facilities are not available but are anticipated in
the foreseeable future. If street paving is not required, all street rights-of-
way shall be finished at final grade.
      (4)   Where feasible, all utility service lines shall be placed
underground within easements or dedicated rights-of-way. All drainage and other
utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be
protected by proper easements and/or legal agreements.
   (C)   Subdivision agreement. Prior to the approval of the final plat by the
City Council, the owner or subdivider of the land covered by the plat shall
execute and submit to the City Council an agreement, binding on his, her or
their heirs, personal representatives and assigns, including:
      (1)   A provision that no private construction will be made on the plat
or no building permit shall be filed for such construction until all
improvements required under this chapter have been completed in a manner
approved by the City Council;
      (2)   A listing or schedule of when and what improvements shall be
required as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council;
      (3)   A certification by the City Clerk- Administrator or the City
Engineer that the improvements, agreements, and documents meet the minimum
requirements of all applicable ordinances; and
      (4)   A provision containing all conditions, if any, imposed by the City
Council upon approval of the final plat.
   (D)   Optional financing of improvements. The City Council may choose to
provide public financing to projects which are determined to serve a public
benefit to the city.
      (1)   Residential developments.
         (a)   The total cost of improvements shall be assessed in equal annual
installments over a period not to exceed ten years. After the balance of
principal of assessments is equal to or less than the amount of the security
agreement, the security agreement can be reduced as assessments are paid
thereafter at the rate or $1 for each $1 paid.
         (b)   In addition, the city may reduce the amount of the security
agreement against each lot upon which a building has been constructed, the lot
sold, and the outstanding assessments against the lot assumed by the buyer;
provided, however, that, no principal of assessments together with penalties
and interest is equal to or less than the amount of the security agreement.
      (2)   Non-residential developments.
         (a)   The total cost of the improvements shall be assessed in equal
annual installments over a period not to exceed ten years. After the balance of
principal of assessments is equal to or less than the amount of the security
agreement, the security agreement can be reduced as assessments are paid at the
rate of $1 for each $1 paid. In addition, the city may reduce the amount of the
security agreement by 100% of the unpaid principal of assessments against each
lot upon which a building has been constructed and a certificate of occupancy
issued; provided that, no reduction shall be granted until such time as the
outstanding principal of assessments together with penalties and interest is
equal to or less than the amount of the security agreement.
         (b)   In the event the subdivider fails to pay any installment of
special assessments, the city, at its option, in addition to its rights and
remedies hereunder, may declare all of the unpaid special assessments levied
pursuant to this agreement due and payable in full immediately and may commence
legal action against the subdivider to collect the entire unpaid balance,
including reasonable attorney’s fees. The subdivider shall be personally liable
for such special assessments.
(Prior Code, § 154.34) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.60 VARIANCES AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   Request for amendments or variances, as provided within this
chapter, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official
application form. The application shall be accompanied by complementary copies
of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change,
development or use. The Zoning Administrator shall refer the application, along
with all related information, to the Planning Commission for consideration and
report at a reasonable time before the next regular meeting.
      (2)   The city’s Clerk-Administrator, on behalf of the Planning
Commission, shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall
be published in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to
the date of the hearing. In the requests for variances, such notice shall also
be mailed not less than ten days to all property owners of record within 350
feet of the property to which the request relates, and if the variance relates
to land located in a public water, the notice shall also be mailed to the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources at least ten days prior to
such hearings. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and
addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to by the city’s
Clerk- Administrator and made a part of the official record. The failure to
give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall
not invalidate the proceedings; provided, a bona fide attempt to comply with
the requirements has been made.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall consider the request and hold a
public hearing at its next regular meeting. The Zoning Administrator shall
refer the application, along with all related information, to the Planning
Commission for consideration. The applicant or a representative thereof shall
appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning
the proposed variance or appeal.
      (4)   The Planning Commission and city staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the applicant concerning operational
factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of
the applicant concerning operational factors, such information to be declared
necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent
sections of this chapter.
      (5)   In requests for variances, the Planning Commission may recommend a
variance from the provisions of this chapter when, in its opinion, undue
hardship may result from strict compliance. In recommending any variance, the
Planning Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to
or desirable for the public interest. In making its recommendations, the
Planning Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of
land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to
reside or work in the proposed subdivision and traffic conditions in the
vicinity. A variance shall only be recommended when the Planning Commission
finds:
         (a)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
properties such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
         (b)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the
property is situated; and/or
         (c)   The variance is to correct inequities resulting from an extreme
physical hardship such as topography, soils, wetlands and the like.
      (6)   Within 60 days from the date of the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall make a recommendation, and in requests for variances shall
also make a finding of fact to the City Council. In the case that additional
information is requested pursuant to division (A)(4) of this section, the 60-
day period begins upon receipt of the information by the city.
      (7)    Upon receiving the recommendations of the Planning Commission, or
until 60 days after the public hearing at which the request was considered, the
City Council shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the
next regular meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and
made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
      (8)   Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
City Council shall either:
         (a)   Approve or disapprove the request as recommended by the Planning
Commission;
         (b)   Approve or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning
Commission with modifications, alterations or differing conditions. The
modifications, alterations or differing conditions shall be in writing and made
part of the Council’s records; or
         (c)   Refer the recommendations back to the Planning Commission with
future consideration. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a
singular action.
      (9)   Approval of a request shall require passage by majority vote of the
City Council present. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of the Council’s action. The variance decisions of the City Council
shall be final, subject to judicial review.
   (B)   Lapse of variance. Whenever within one year after granting a variance
the work as permitted by the variance shall not have been completed, then the
variance shall become null and void unless a petition for extension of time in
which to complete the terms has been granted by the City Council. The extension
shall be requested in writing and filed with the Zoning Administrator at least
30 days before the expiration of the original variance. There shall be no
charge for the filling of such petition. The request for extension shall state
facts showing a good faith attempt to complete the work permitted by the
variance. Such petition shall be presented to the City Council for a decision,
and shall be made only one time for a singular action.
(Prior Code, § 154.50) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.61 FEES.
   (A)   To defray administrative costs of processing requests for subdivision
review, amendments and variances, a base fee shall first be paid by all
applicants, in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City Council. The
fee schedule is as follows:
      (1)   Subdivision review: set by City Council;
      (2)   Variance: set by City Council;
      (3)   Amendments: set by City Council; and
      (4)   Minor subdivisions: set by City Council.
   (B)   In order to defray the additional cost of processing applications
(amendments, variance or subdivision) for developments, all applicants shall
pay the total cost of staff and/or consulting time spent exclusively in
producing materials for the applicant’s request, and all materials for the
request.
      (1)   “Materials” shall, include, but not limited to, maps, graphs,
charts, drawings and the like, and all printing or reproduction of same.
      (2)   “Staff and/or consulting time” shall include any time spent in
either researching for or actual production of materials.
      (3)   The hourly rate for staff and/or consulting time shall be
established and made available to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator
prior to the production of any materials and the applicant shall be given a
reasonable estimate of project time and/or materials costs.
   (C)   Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the City
Clerk-Administrator and are not refundable unless application is withdrawn
prior to referral to the Planning Commission and prior to any publication
required by the application. A deposit to cover staff or consulting time and
special materials will be established and required by the City Clerk-
Administrator at the time the base fee is paid.
(Prior Code, § 154.51) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 582, passed 9-3-1996)
Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.62 ENFORCEMENT.
   Unless approved as a final plat as provided herein, no subdivision shall be
entitled to record in the County Recorder’s office or have validity, and the
City Clerk-Administrator shall not issue building permits for any structure on
lot in any proposed subdivision. The city shall not permit any public
improvement to be installed unless the final plat is approved and recorded.
(Prior Code, § 154.52) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.63 NOTIFICATION.
   A certified copy of every ordinance, resolution, amendment or regulation
adopted under this chapter shall be filed with the County Recorder’s office.
Copies of resolutions governing subdivisions plats within the city but
contiguous to another city shall be filed with the governing body of the
contiguous city.
(Prior Code, § 154.53) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.64 DISCLOSURE BY SELLER.
   (A)   A person conveying a new parcel of land which, or the plat for which,
has not previously been filed or recorded, and which is part of or would
constitute a subdivision to which these subdivision regulations apply, shall
attach to the instrument of conveyance either:
      (1)   Recordable certification by the City Clerk-Administrator that the
subdivision regulations do not apply, or that the subdivision has been approved
by the City Council, or that the restrictions on the division of taxes and
filing and recording have been waived by resolution of the City Council in this
case because compliance will create an unnecessary hardship and failure to
comply will not interfere with the purpose of the regulations; or
      (2)   A statement which names and identifies the locations of the
appropriate city offices and advises the grantee that city subdivision and
zoning regulations may restrict the use or restrict or prohibit the development
of the parcel, or construction on it, and that the division of taxes and the
filing or recording of the conveyance may be prohibited without prior
recordable certification of approval, non-applicability or waiver from the
city.
   (B)   In any action commenced by a buyer of such a parcel against the seller
thereof, the misrepresentation of or the failure to disclose material facts in
accordance with this section shall be grounds for damages. If the buyer
establishes his or her right to damages, a district court hearing the matter
may in its discretion also award to the buyer an amount sufficient to pay all
or any part of the costs incurred in maintaining the action, including
reasonable attorney fees, and an amount for punitive damages not exceeding 5%
of the purchase price of the land.
(Prior Code, § 154.54) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any firm, person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these
regulations or who sells, leases or offers for sale or lease any lot, block or
tract of land herewith regulated before all the requirement of this chapter
have been complied with shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day that the violation is permitted to
exist constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 154.99) (Ord. passed 6-6-1978)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Scope
   
155.003   Definitions
   
155.004   Subdivisions
   
155.005   Planned unit developments
   
155.006   City sale of land
   
155.007   Setback from pipeline easements
   
155.008   Placement of residential dwellings
   
155.009   Opt-out of M.S. § 462.3593
District Regulations
   
155.020   Establishment of districts and maps
   
155.021   Districts for annexed areas and unzoned areas
   
155.022   District boundaries
   
155.023   District regulations generally
   
155.024   R-1 One-Family Dwelling District
   
155.025   R-2 One- and Two-Family Dwelling Districts
   
155.026   R-3 Multiple Dwelling Districts
   
155.027   R-4 Residential Manufactured Housing District
   
155.028   CBD Central Business District
   
155.029   GB General Business District
   
155.030   RB Residential Business District
   
155.031   I Industrial District
   
155.032   A Agricultural District
   
155.033   C Conservation District
   
155.034   Off-street parking and loading
Planned Unit Developments
   
155.045   General provisions
   
155.046   Purpose and intent
   
155.047   General requirements and standards
   
155.048   Special requirements and standards
   
155.049   Procedure for processing
   
155.050   Submission requirements
   
155.051   Amendments and administration
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.065   Conditional use permits
   
155.066   Home occupations
   
155.067   Interim uses
   
155.068   Appeals and variances
   
155.069   Building permit and certificate of occupancy
   
155.070   Enforcement by Zoning Administrator
   
155.071   Board of Adjustment and Appeals; fees; appeals
   
155.072   Amendment to the zoning chapter
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Hinckley City
Zoning Ordinance” or “Zoning Code”, except as referred to herein, where it
shall be known as “this chapter”.
(Prior Code, § 155.01) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.002 SCOPE.
   (A)   In interpreting and analyzing these zoning provisions, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
   (B)   Whenever the provisions herein require greater standards than are
required by any other statute, ordinance or regulations, the provisions of this
chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, ordinance
or regulations require greater standards than are required by the provisions
herein, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 155.02) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.003 DEFINITIONS.
   All words used in the present tense shall include the future; all words in
the singular number include the plural number and all words in the plural
number include the singular number; the word “building” includes the word
“structure” and “dwelling” includes “residence”; the word “person” includes
“corporation”, “co-partnership”, “association”, as well as an “individual”; the
word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building or structure on the same lot, the use of
which is incidental to the main use.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use subordinate to the main use on a lot and used for
purpose clearly incidental to those of the main use.
   AGRICULTURAL. The cultivating of soil and activities incidental thereto; the
growing of soil crops in the customary manner on open tracts of land; the
accessory raising of livestock and poultry. The term shall include incidental
retail selling by the producer of products raised on the premises; provided
that, space necessary for parking of vehicles of customers shall be furnished
off the public right-of-way.
   ALLEY. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
   ALTERATIONS. Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of
occupancy, any change in the structural members, load bearing or non-load
bearing, of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders,
the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as “altered” or
“reconstructed”.
   APARTMENT. A multi-use building arranged and intended as a place of
residence of a single family or a group of individuals living together as a
single housekeeping unit.
   BASEMENT. The portion of the building between the floor and the ceiling
which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical
distance from the grade to the floor is less than the vertical distance from
grade to ceiling.
   BILLBOARD. Any sign which has an area exceeding 150 square feet.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel containing at least one
dwelling unit, where for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite
periods, meals or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons not
members of the principal family therein.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade along the building edge to the highest point of
the roof surface in a flat roof, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the
mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between the building and
the specified lot line as prescribed in this chapter.
   CAMPGROUND. Public or private land or premises used or occupied for
compensation by campers.
   CANOPY. Any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and supported by
the building and projecting over public property.
   CONDITIONAL USE. Any use of land or buildings, or both, described in each
district and requiring the approval of the Council.
   DRIVE-IN. Any use providing the opportunity of selling, serving or offering
goods or services directly to customers in vehicles.
   DRIVEWAY. A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on an
individual lot or parcel of land.
   DWELLING. A building or portion used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including only one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwelling units.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED (GROUP, ROW OR TOWNHOUSE). A dwelling joined to other
dwellings by party walls.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed for or
containing three or more dwelling units and not including attached row
dwellings (party wall) type as defined herein.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A one-family dwelling designed for and used for
occupancy by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed or intended exclusively for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other; a duplex.
   DWELLING UNIT. Two or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel designed
for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having its own permanently
installed cooking and sanitary facilities.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems; traffic signals, hydrants or other
similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but not including
buildings.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or
a group of not more than five unrelated persons living together on the premises
or in a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding house, lodging house, hotel, club lodge, sorority or fraternity house.
   FLOOD. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation
of the areas adjacent to the channel
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The average frequency, statistically determined, for which
it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or
exceeded.
   FLOODPLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter
may be covered by flood waters.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of
the building, measured from the exterior walls.
   FLOOR AREA (LIVABLE). The same as “floor area” defined above, except
measured from interior walls excluding all areas occupied by cellars, garage,
porches, unoccupied attics, stairways, basements, storage, utility and heating
rooms.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The floor area of the building or buildings on that
zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot or, in the case of planning
developments or group housing projects, by the gross site area.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any premises used for the storage or care of motor vehicles
or premises where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, are repaired or
are kept for hire or for sale. Any sale of gasoline, oil and accessories are
only incidental to the principal use.
   GARAGE, TRUCK. A building which is used or intended to be used for the
storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one-half ton capacity.
   GRADE, GROUND. The average of the finished level at the center of all
exterior walls of the building.
   GRADE, STREET. The elevation of the establishment of the street in front of
the building measured at the center of the front.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the
family, residing on the premises, conducted entirely within the dwelling;
provided that, the use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes.
   HOTEL. A building occupied as the lodging place of transient individuals who
are lodged with or without meals.
   LIVING AREA. A house and detached garage in close proximity.
   LODGING HOUSE and ROOMING HOUSE. A building containing at least one dwelling
unit, wherein are provided lodging for compensation by pre- arrangement for
definite periods.
   LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings together with such open spaces as are required under this chapter and
having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved
access. The term is also known as ZONING LOT and shall include the words PLAT,
PIECE and PARCELS.
   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
   MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the
building and projecting over public property.
   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging,
treatment or assembly of products and materials that may emit objectionable and
offensive influences beyond the lot on which the use is located.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. All uses which include the compounding, processing,
packaging, treatment or assembly of products and materials provided such use
will not generate offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust, noise, vibrations or
other objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which the use is
located.
   MODULAR HOME. A manufactured dwelling unit, suitable for year around
occupancy and containing water supply, waste disposal and electric conveniences
designed for attachment to outside systems, all constructed in conformance with
city’s Building, Fire and Plumbing Codes.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure or use of land which is
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment hereto.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself of by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where
the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or
property.
   PARCEL. Having its own property identification filed with the county.
   PARK MANAGEMENT. The person or persons having charge, care or control or a
mobile home park.
   PARK STREET. A private way which affords principal means of access to
individual mobile home lots or auxiliary buildings.
   PARKING SPACE. A land area exclusive of driveways and aisles, of such shape
and dimensions so prepared as to be usable for the parking of motor vehicles,
in accordance with standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, which are
hereby adopted as amended by reference and available at the office of the City
Engineer.
   PERMIT. A written permit or certification issued by the building official
permitting the construction, alteration or extension of a permanent structure
under provisions of this chapter and regulations issued herein.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT or PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A large lot or tract of
land developed as a unit rather than as individual development wherein two or
more buildings may be located in relationship to each other rather than to lot
lines or zoning district boundaries.
   PLANNING AGENCY. The organization of the Planning Commission and the
Planning Department.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. Any publicly owned open area.
   REST HOME and NURSING HOME. A private home for the care of aged or infirmed,
or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders.
   ROW HOUSE. A group or row of dwellings, each containing one or more dwelling
units and all occupying one lot, as defined herein; except that, frontages may
be on a common court
   SETBACK. The mean horizontal distance between the front street right-of-way
line and the front line of the building or the allowable building lines as
defined by the front yard regulations of this chapter.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or device
which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure or land in view of the general public and which directs attention to
a product, place, activity, person, institution or business.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING. Directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere and upon the premises where
such a sign is located or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, BUSINESS. Directs attention to a business or profession conducted or
to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises
where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
   STREET. A thoroughfare which affords a principal means of access to abutting
property and which has been accepted by the city as a public way.
   STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by humans.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, foundations or girders, or any changes
in the roof and exterior walls.
   USED FOR. Includes the phrases “arranged for”, “designed for”, “intended
for”, “maintained for” and “occupied for”.
   VARIANCE.
      (1)   A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted
when strict enforcement of the chapter would cause undue hardship or practical
difficulties to the property owner in the use of his or her land. The crucial
points of VARIANCE:
         (a)   Undue hardship;
         (b)   Unique circumstances; and
         (c)   Applying to property.
      (2)   The hardship must not have been created by actions of the
landowner.
      (3)   The variance will not alter the essential character of the area and
should be in conformance with the city growth management system. Granting of
the VARIANCE shall not allow any use which is neither permitted or conditional
use within the zoning district on which the subject property is located.
      (4)   The plight of the landowner must be due to unique circumstances. If
the hardship is common to several properties, the VARIANCE must not be granted.
      (5)   The proof that a landowner could realize a higher financial return
for his or her land as a result of the VARIANCE is not sufficient grounds for
granting a VARIANCE. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a
hardship if a reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of this
chapter.
   YARD. An open space which can include an enclosed court on the same zoning
lot with a building or structure, which yard is unoccupied by a structure, and
exclusive or required parking are except as otherwise permitted in this
chapter.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a
depth equal to the shortest distance between the front line of the lot and the
nearest portion of the main building, including an enclosed or covered porch
provided that the front yard depth shall be measured from an existing or future
street line on which the lot fronts.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a
depth equal to the shortest distance between the rear line of the lot and the
main building.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the side line of the lot and the main building
extending from the front yard to the rear yard and having a width equal to the
shortest distance between the side line and the main building.
   ZONING MAP, OFFICIAL. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as part
thereof, designating the zoning district. The OFFICIAL MAP shall be used by the
Planning Commission, city staff and City Council in regard to zoning
classifications and districts.
(Prior Code, § 155.03) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 604, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 155.004 SUBDIVISIONS.
   All divisions of land within the city into two or more parcels will be
subject to the subdivision regulations of the city. (See Ch. 154 of this code
of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 155.04) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.005 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   All parcels of land developed as an integrated, coordinated parcel of mixed
uses will be subject to the Planned Unit Development District standards as
described in this chapter. Planned unit developments in the Shorelands District
will be subject to the city’s Shorelands Ordinance as well as the Planned Unit
Development District standards in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 155.05) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.006 CITY SALE OF LAND.
   (A)   (1)   For purposes of city ordinances, the PROJECT DEVELOPER is
defined as the owner, applicant and/or title holder of property to be
developed.
      (2)   In the case of joint ownership, or the sale of property by contract
for deed, as part of the project, the pre-development costs shall be the
responsibility of all parties involved in the transfer of property unless an
agreement between all parties has been mutually accepted and documented.
   (B)   (1)   In the case where the city is the seller of a parcel of land for
the purposes of development, all mechanical or pre-development costs shall be
the responsibility of the project developers as defined in this section.
      (2)   The project developer shall provide written notification to all
contractors and subcontractors involved in the development project that the
city will not be responsible for any pre- development costs if in fact the
project fails to completely develop.
      (3)   The city shall receive copies of such notification for its records.
(Prior Code, § 155.06) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. passed 4-1-1997)
§ 155.007 SETBACK FROM PIPELINE EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the model setback ordinance set out in this
section is to increase public safety by requiring that new development be set
back from the pipeline locations.
   (B)   Applicability. This section applies to new residential and other
development that has occurred or for which development permits have been issued
before the effective date of this section.
   (C)   Setback. Buildings and places of public assembly subject to this
section shall not be constructed closer to the pipeline than the boundary of
the pipeline easement.
   (D)   Variances. Variance procedures adopted by the local unit of government
under M.S. §§ 462.351 through 462.365, as they may be amended from time to
time, shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 155.07) (Ord. 563, passed 8-6-1991) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.008 PLACEMENT OF RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS.
   The city authorizes the placement of all residential dwellings in zones
permitted by this chapter within the city if such dwellings comply with the
following conditions.
   (A)   All dwellings shall comply with all zoning regulations for the zone in
which they are located.
   (B)   A building permit and any other required permits shall be obtained for
all dwellings.
   (C)   All dwellings shall be placed on permanent foundations which comply
with the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the state and which are solid for
the complete circumference of the building.
   (D)   Roof lines of all dwellings must have at least a three and one-half
pitch.
   (E)   The minimum widths of all dwellings shall be at least 20 feet,
measured from the face of exterior wall across the narrowest portion.
   (F)   All dwellings shall be constructed of conventional exterior dwelling
type material. No steel roofing is allowed on dwelling units, except in
conformance with the Uniform Building Code.
   (G)   All dwellings shall be built according to the Uniform Building Code as
adopted in the state, and all manufactured dwellings shall be built and
installed in accordance with M.S. §§ 327.31 to 327.35, as they may be amended
from time to time.
   (H)   This section shall have no application to manufactured dwellings
placed in a licensed manufactured home park.
(Prior Code, § 155.08) (Ord. 561, passed 2-5-1991; Ord. 591, passed 7-7-1998)
Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.009 OPT-OUT OF M.S. § 462.3593.
   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, subd. 9, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city opts out of the requirements of M.S. §
462.3593, as it may be amended from time to time, which defines and regulates
temporary family health care dwellings.
(Ord. 04-2016, passed 7-12-2016)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 155.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND MAPS.
   (A)   Zoning map. The zoning map adopted by the city, a copy of which is on
file with the city’s Clerk- Administrator, is hereby incorporated herein and
made a part hereof. The map and all notations, references and other information
shown thereon shall be as much a part of the chapter as if the matters and
information set forth by such map were all fully described herein.
   (B)   Zoning districts. The districts hereby established are each separate
and distinct with no district determined to be of a higher or a lower class.
The established districts are listed as follows:
   A, Agricultural District
   C, Conservation District
   CBD, Central Business District
   GBD, General Business District
   I, Industrial District
   PUD, Planned Unit Development
   R-1, One-Family Dwelling District
   R-2, One- and Two-Family Dwelling District
   R-3, Limited Multiple-Dwelling District
   R-4, Residential Manufactured Housing District
   RB, Residential Business
   S, Shoreland District (as shown on 1987 Flood Insurance Rate Map)
 
(Prior Code, § 155.20) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.021 DISTRICTS FOR ANNEXED AREAS AND UNZONED AREAS.
   (A)   Annexed areas. Area hereinafter annexed to the city shall be in the R-
1, One-Family Dwelling District, until placed wholly or partly in another
district by amendment to this chapter as provided for herein.
   (B)   Public/semi-public.
      (1)   Areas not included in any district shall be considered reserved for
public, institutional or necessary and appropriate uses as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   The front, side and rear yard requirements in this district will be
determined on a case basis by the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Site plans must be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator prior to
issuance of building permits.
(Prior Code, § 155.21) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. passed 4-6-2000)
§ 155.022 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, alleys or railroad lines shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in shoreline shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, lakes or other
bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the city limits shall
be construed as following such city limits.
   (E)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in a single
ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the extension of the
regulations for either portion of the lot beyond the district line into the
remaining portion of the lot may be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator
upon request of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 155.22) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.023 DISTRICT REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   The regulations of this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure of
land, and particularly except as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   No buildings, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied,
and no building structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in conformity
with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located.
   (C)   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered
to exceed the height or bulk, to accommodate or house a greater number of
families, to occupy greater percentage of lot area, to have narrower or smaller
rear yards, front yard, side yards or other open spaces, than herein required,
or in any other manner contrary to the provision of this chapter.
   (D)   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking required
about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this
chapter, shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking
or loading space similarly required for any other building.
   (E)   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall
be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall
meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
   (F)   If in a group of two or more contiguous lots or parcels of land owned
or controlled by the same person, the living quarters, living area or other
real property straddles or otherwise is placed on more than one parcel, or if
one or more of the lots is less than 50 feet in width (as measured at the front
setback), the property owner must merge the contiguous lots or parcels of land
such that the living quarters, living area or other real property is placed on
one singular parcel, or in the case of a substandard lot width, the remaining
lot(s) or parcel(s) of land are in compliance with the yard width requirements
of this code. Upon notification from the city, the property owner has 30 days
from the date the letter was received to comply with this section. Failure to
comply within the allotted time period will constitute a waiver of challenge by
the property owner to the city’s subsequent application with the county for
merger and/or subdivision of the parcels in accordance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 155.23) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 604, passed 9-5-2000)
Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.024 R-1 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area of low density
residential uses.
   (B)   Special requirements. Conversion of any use to other than a permitted
or conditional use is prohibited unless that use is determined to be in
compliance with the spirit and intent of the chapter.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:
      (1)   One-family dwellings;
      (2)   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, swimming pools and
additional private and private-club recreational uses, all non-commercial;
      (3)   Churches, parish houses, convents, child nurseries; and
      (4)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind: elementary and
secondary schools (public and private), parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community centers.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Air navigation facilities, cemetery, crematory, mausoleum,
government, public utilities and public service uses, hospitals, sanitariums,
homes for the aged and similar institutions and institutions of an educational,
philanthropic or charitable nature when required for the public health, safety
or welfare;
      (2)   Automobile parking lots when required for off-street parking spaces
for any use not more than 500 feet distant therefrom;
      (3)   The extension of a use into a district where it would otherwise be
prohibited, in a case where a district boundary line is so located that a lot
is in more than one district;
      (4)   Public buildings and public uses including multiple public housing
units, temporary and permanent;
      (5)   Apartments within existing single-family dwellings;
      (6)   Planned unit developments; and
      (7)   Other residential and commercial uses determined by the Planning
Agency to be of the same general character as the principal uses above and
found not to be detrimental to the general public health and welfare.
   (E)   Accessory uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the
principal use are allowed (for example, swimming pools, fallout shelters,
conservatories);
      (2)   Accessory uses shall not be located in any required side yard;
      (3)   Accessory buildings are permitted in any rear yard. Accessory
buildings shall not be erected within three feet of any lot boundary or alley;
and
      (4)   Home occupations. Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in
by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use which is clearly incidental to the
use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and subject to the following
requirements.
         (a)   No manufacturing business shall be allowed.
         (b)   Only members of the family occupying the premises and one person
outside the family, acting as an aid, shall carry on the home occupation.
         (c)   No mechanical or electric equipment not customarily found in a
home shall be employed, installed or maintained.
         (d)   No interior or exterior alterations shall be permitted and no
construction features shall be permitted which are not customarily found in a
dwelling.
         (e)   There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign, except as
permitted for a dwelling unit in the district, and no other exterior indication
of the home occupation.
         (f)   There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials
used in the occupation.
         (g)   The home occupation must be conducted entirely within a
building.
         (h)   No truck or similar vehicle used in conjunction with a home
occupation shall be parked unhoused upon a residential lot.
         (i)    Offices, clinics, doctors’ offices, hospitals, barber shops,
beauty parlors, dress shops, millinery shops, tea rooms, restaurants, tourist
homes, animal hospitals and kennels, music and dance schools, among others,
shall require conditional use permits.
         (j)   Such occupations as architects, artists, writers, clergy,
lawyers, teachers, dressmaking and similar domestic crafts shall be permitted.
   (F)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   Lot area of not less than 11,250 square feet for a dwelling unit is
required.
      (2)   Lot width of not less than 75 feet is required.
   (G)   Front, side and rear yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yards: a front yard of not less than 30 feet is required.
Unenclosed decks are subject to a 25-foot setback.
      (2)   Side yards: two side yards required, each with a width of not less
than seven and one-half feet.
      (3)   Rear yards: a rear yard with a depth of not less than 30 feet is
required. Unenclosed decks are subject to a ten-foot setback.
   (H)   Maximum ground coverage. No more than 33% of lot shall be covered by
main and all accessory buildings.
   (I)   Maximum building heights. Building heights permitted are two and one-
half stories, but not exceeding 35 feet. Accessory buildings shall not exceed
one and one-half stories or 18 feet in height.
   (J)   Minimum ground floor area. Minimum ground floor area shall be 960
square feet for a three bedroom, single-family dwelling unit and 860 square
feet for a two-bedroom single-family dwelling unit. Houses having one and one-
half or more stories shall have at least 720 square feet on the main floor.
   (K)   Existing 50-foot lots. No building permit will be issued unless
development exists on both sides of proposed lot. Existing 50-foot lots on
subdivision plats recorded prior to this chapter will be considered for
development on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 155.24) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 599, passed 6-6-2000;
Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002; Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 155.025 R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area of medium
density residential uses.
   (B)   Special requirements. Dwellings may be converted to one bedroom
apartments at the ratio of one for each 600 square feet of floor area in each
dwelling before conversion, exclusive of basement. Conversion to any use other
than a permitted or conditional use is prohibited, unless that use is
determined to be in compliance with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:
      (1)   One-family dwellings;
      (2)   Non-commercial gardening;
      (3)   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, swimming pools and
additional private and private-club recreational uses, all non-commercial;
      (4)   Churches, parish houses, convents, child nurseries;
      (5)   Public buildings and uses of the following kinds: elementary and
secondary schools (public), parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums, community
centers; and
      (6)   Two-family dwellings if on lots of such areas and widths as
hereinafter required.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Cemetery, crematory, mausoleum, government, public utility and
public service uses, hospitals, sanitariums, homes for the aged and similar
institutions and institutions of an educational, philanthropic or charitable
nature when required for the public health and safety or welfare;
      (2)   Automobile parking lots when required for off-street parking spaces
for any use not more than 500 feet distant therefrom;
      (3)   Planned unit development;
      (4)   The extension of a use into a district where it would otherwise be
prohibited, in a case where a district boundary line is so located that a lot
is in more than one district;
      (5)   Public buildings and public uses including public housing,
temporary and permanent;
      (6)   Apartments within existing single-family dwellings;
      (7)   Home occupation consistent with §
155.024(E)(4) of this chapter;
      (8)   Manufactured home parks as regulated by §
155.027 of this chapter; and
      (9)   Other residential and commercial uses determined by the Planning
Agency to be of the same general character as the principal uses above and
found not to be detrimental to the general public health and welfare.
   (E)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the
principal use are allowed.
      (2)   Accessory uses shall not be located in any required side yard.
      (3)   Accessory buildings are permitted in any rear yard. Accessory
buildings shall not be erected within three feet of any lot boundary or alley.
   (F)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   Lot area required is not less than 11,250 square feet for a one-
family dwelling. Not less than 11,250 square feet for two-family dwelling lot.
      (2)   Lot width required is not less than 75 feet.
   (G)   Front, side and rear yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yards: a front yard of not less than 30 feet is required.
Unenclosed decks are subject to a 25-foot setback.
      (2)   Side yards: two side yards required, each with a width of not less
than seven and one-half feet. Not less than seven and one-half feet each
permitted or more than 30 feet each required for any other kind of main
building.
      (3)   Rear yards: a rear yard with a depth of not less than 30 feet is
required, with not less than 30 feet permitted or more than 75 feet required
for any kind of main building. Unenclosed decks are subject to a ten-foot
setback.
   (H)   Maximum ground coverage. Not more than 33% of lot shall be covered by
main and all accessory buildings.
   (I)   Minimum ground floor areas. Two-family dwellings must have at least
860 square feet for a three-bedroom unit and 720 square feet for a two- bedroom
unit.
   (J)   Maximum building heights. Building heights permitted are two and one-
half stories, but not exceeding 35 feet. Accessory buildings shall not exceed
one and one-half stories or 18 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 155.25) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 599, passed 6-6-2000;
Ord. 602, passed 6-6-2000; Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002; Ord. 630, passed 12-7-
2004)
§ 155.026 R-3 MULTIPLE-DWELLING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to establish an area of high
density residential uses.
   (B)   Special requirements. Conversion of any dwelling shall be in
accordance with the state’s Uniform Building Codes, especially in relationship
to minimum floor area required.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:
      (1)   One-family dwellings;
      (2)   Non-commercial gardening;
      (3)   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, swimming pools and
additional private and private-club recreational uses, all non-commercial;
      (4)   Churches, parish houses, convents, child nurseries;
      (5)   Public buildings and uses of the following kinds: elementary and
secondary schools (public and private), parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community centers;
      (6)   Two-family dwellings if on lots of such areas and widths as
hereinafter required; and
      (7)   Multiple dwellings and dwelling groups.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Cemetery, crematory, mausoleum, government, public utility and
public service uses, hospitals, sanitariums, homes for the aged and similar
institutions and institutions of an educational, philanthropic or charitable
nature when required for the public health, safety or welfare;
      (2)   Automobile parking lots when required for off-street parking spaces
for any use not more than 500 feet distant therefrom;
      (3)   Planned unit developments;
      (4)   The extension of a use into a district where it would otherwise be
prohibited, in a case where a district boundary line is so located that a lot
is in more than one district;
      (5)   Public buildings and public uses including public housing,
temporary or permanent;
      (6)   Boarding and lodging houses;
      (7)   Manufactured home parks as regulated by §
155.027 of this chapter; and
      (8)   Other residential and commercial uses determined by the Planning
Agency to be of the same general character as the principal uses above and
found not to be detrimental to the general public health and welfare.
   (E)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lots as the
principal use are allowed.
      (2)   Accessory uses shall not be located in any required side yard.
      (3)   Accessory buildings are permitted in any rear yard. Accessory
buildings shall not be erected within three feet of any lot boundary or alley.
      (4)   Home occupations consistent with §
155.024(E)(4) of this chapter.
   (F)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   Multiple dwelling units have fewer than five dwelling units must
have a minimum lot area of 11,250 square feet. Not less than 1,500 square feet
additional for each dwelling unit over four.
      (2)   Lot width required is not less than 75 feet for a single-family
dwellings or not less than 75 feet for structures with more than one dwelling.
   (G)   Front, side and rear yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yards: a front yard of not less than 30 feet is required.
      (2)   Side yards: two side yards required, each with a width of not less
than seven and one-half feet for dwelling. Not less than seven and one-half
feet each permitted or more than 30 feet each required for any other kind of
main building.
      (3)   Rear yards: a rear yard with a depth of not less than 25 feet is
required. With not less than 30 feet permitted or more than 75 feet required
for any other kind of main building.
   (H)   Maximum ground coverage. Not more than 40% of the lot shall be covered
by main buildings and all accessory buildings.
   (I)   Minimum floor area. Multiple-family dwellings must have at least 860
square feet for a three-bedroom unit, 720 square feet for a two- bedroom unit
and 600 square feet for a one-bedroom unit.
   (J)   Maximum building heights. Building heights permitted are two and one-
half stories, but not exceeding 35 feet. Accessory buildings shall not exceed
one and one-half stories or 18 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 155.26) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 602, passed 6-6-2000;
Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002; Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 02-2016, passed 5-
3-2016)
§ 155.027 R-4 RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of the R-4 Residential Manufactured Housing
District is to promote health, safety, order, convenience and general welfare
by enforcing minimum standards for manufactured home parks, the location and
use of manufactured home parks and the design, construction, alteration and
arrangement of homes on the lots, authorizing the inspection of manufactured
home parks, the licensing of operators and fixing penalties for violations. No
building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, converted or
structurally altered, unless otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in an R-4 District:
      (1)   Manufactured homes in manufactured home parks;
      (2)   Public parks and playgrounds;
      (3)   Essential services; and
      (4)   Storm shelters.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-4 District:
      (1)   Detached accessory building (216 square foot maximum), 288 square
feet for garages;
      (2)   Deck;
      (3)   Patio;
      (4)   Room addition up to 200 square feet; and
      (5)   Entryway airlock up to 50 square feet.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in a R-4 District
(requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by this chapter):
      (1)   Improved, enlargement, extension or alteration of an existing
manufactured home park;
      (2)    Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or
community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to
elementary, junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions
such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues; provided that:
         (a)   Front yard depths shall be a minimum of 35 feet;
         (b)   Side yards shall be no less than 30 feet;
         (c)   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and
landscaping is provided in compliance with the appropriate section of this
chapter;
         (d)   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site
or on lots directly abutting or directly across a public street to the
principal use in compliance with the appropriate section of this chapter and
that such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding and
abutting residential uses in compliance with appropriate section of this
chapter; and
         (e)   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
and regulated where applicable by the appropriate section of this chapter.
      (3)   Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary
for the health, safety and general welfare of the community; provided that:
         (a)   Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and
required setbacks and side yard requirements are met;
         (b)   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with
no outside storage; and
         (c)   Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with the appropriate section of this chapter.
      (4)   Model homes/commercial sales areas;
      (5)   Day care; provided that:
         (a)   No overnight facilities are provided for the people served.
Individuals are dropped off and picked up daily;
         (b)   The front yard depth shall be a minimum of 35 feet;
         (c)   Not less than 40 square feet of outside play space per child be
provided and that such space be suitably fenced and/or screened in accordance
with conditions as specified by the City Council;
         (d)   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided in compliance
with the appropriate section of this chapter;
         (e)   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided
in compliance with the appropriate section of this chapter;
         (f)   The site and related parking and service shall be served by an
arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic
which will be generated; and
         (g)   All signing and informational or visual communication devices
shall be in compliance with the city sign ordinances, including Ch. 153 of this
code of ordinances.
      (6)   Nursing homes or similar group housing, but not including
hospitals, sanitariums or similar institutions; provided that:
         (a)   Side yards are double the minimum requirements established for
this district and are screened in compliance with the appropriate section of
this chapter;
         (b)   Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas.
The area shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with the
appropriate section of this chapter;
         (c)   The site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of
sufficient capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated;
         (d)   All signing and informational or visual communication devices
shall be in compliance with the appropriate section of this chapter;
         (e)   All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly
adhered to and all required operating permits are secured; and
         (f)   One off-street loading space is provided in compliance with the
appropriate section of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking facilities for adjacent commercial or multiple dwelling
establishments; provided that:
         (a)   Such parking is in excess of that required on the lot upon which
the principal use is located;
         (b)   When parking is the principal use, adequate screening from
abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with the
appropriate section of this chapter; and
         (c)   The site of the principal use and its related parking is served
by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the
traffic which will be generated.
      (8)   Other residential and commercial uses determined by the Planning
Agency to be of the same general character as the principal uses above and
found not to be detrimental to the general public health and welfare.
   (E)   Application.
      (1)   The following procedure must be followed to establish an R-
4 Manufactured Housing District.
      (2)   In order to obtain approval for a manufactured home or manufactured
home park, the property owner shall first apply in writing to the city’s Clerk-
Administrator on a form as he or she may from time to time designate. Such
application shall include a development plan and a plat plan prepared by and
bearing the seal of a state-registered surveyor or Engineer, showing the
following:
         (a)   Exact legal description of entire development property;
         (b)   Name, address, resume and three references of running similar
manufactured home parks of owners and developers;
         (c)   The existing survey of the entire development site;
         (d)   Location and size of all individual lots, storage areas,
recreation areas, laundry drying areas, roadways, parking sites, central office
and shelters;
         (e)   Location and size of all streets abutting the park and all
proposed driveways from such streets to the park;
         (f)   Street construction and surfacing plans and specifications,
including parking areas and sidewalks;
         (g)   Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface water drainage,
water supply systems, electrical service and gas service;
         (h)   Setback dimensions of all lots and entire manufactured home park
from adjacent roads, properties, natural area such as rivers, lakes, streams,
ponds and the like;
         (i)   Delineation and identification of any and all wetlands on or
near the development site;
         (j)   Plans for any and all structures;
         (k)   Location, owner, legal description of all casements on the site;
         (l)   Detailed landscaping plans and specifications;
         (m)   Lighting plans and specifications;
         (n)   Location and width of sidewalks;
         (o)   Description of the method of collecting and disposing of garbage
and refuse;
         (p)   Detailed description of mainten- ance procedures and grounds
supervision;
         (q)   Proposed development schedule including proposed deadlines for
completion of each stage; and
         (r)   Such other information as required by the City Engineer, City
Building Official, City Zoning Administrator, City Council or City Planning
Commission.
   (F)   Design standards. All manufactured home park site plans shall conform
to the following standards.
      (1)   Park site.
         (a)   Shall be drained and properly graded and meet criteria required
in shoreland and/or floodplain areas, meet city engineering and building
inspection requirements, and requirements stipulated by the local Board of Soil
and Water Conservation District; and
         (b)   Shall have at least two points of ingress and egress for
vehicles and these access points must get written approval from the appropriate
entity such as county, city or township for the proposed access. The access
points must meet their specific design requirements.
      (2)   Individual lots.
         (a)   Each lot for a manufactured home shall contain at least 5,000
square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupant.
            1.   Width: no less than 50 feet;
            2.   Depth: no less than 100 feet;
            3.   Provide a 14-foot by 70-foot raised gravel base. Sod to be
removed from base area; and
            4.   For double wides, provide a 27-foot by 56-foot raised gravel
base. Sod to be removed from base area.
         (b)   Each manufactured home lot shall have frontage on an approved
roadway and the comer of each manufactured home lot shall be marked and each
site shall be numbered.
      (3)   Setbacks.
         (a)   A manufactured home or manu- factured home park site shall have
a minimum setback from adjacent properties of at least 30 feet and this area
shall be landscaped. Where a street is adjacent to a property line, a 12-foot
landscape area shall be required. Screening and buffer zones shall be
established on the perimeter of the manufactured home park in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana, storage
cabinet, carport, windbreak or porch which has an opaque top or roof shall, for
purposes of all separation requirements, be considered to be part of the
manufactured home.
         (c)   There shall be an unused area not less than ten feet in depth
along each street or roadway and this area shall be sodded and landscaped,
except for required walkways, driveways or utilities.
         (d)    No manufactured home shall be parked closer than five feet to
the side lot lines, nor closer than ten feet to the front lot line, or within
ten feet of the rear lot line.
         (e)   There shall be an open space of at least ten feet between the
sides of adjacent manufactured homes or their accessory structures.
         (f)   Off-street automobile parking spaces shall not be nearer than
five feet from any lot line, except in cases of shared driveways and/or shared
garages on the lot line.
      (4)   Off-street automobile parking.
         (a)   Each lot shall have off-street parking space for two
automobiles. This parking space shall be a minimum of 20 feet by 20 feet. The
base shall be composed of a minimum of six inches of compacted Class 5 gravel,
topped with a minimum of two inches finished thickness of asphalt.
         (b)   Each park shall maintain a hard surfaced off-street parking lot
for guests of occupants in the amount of one space for each four sites. Each
parking space shall be a-minimum of ten feet by 18 feet and constructed the
same as division (F)(4)(a) above. An exception to this requirement may be made
in cases of on-site garages and adequate off street parking stalls on
individual lots.
         (c)   Access drives from roadways to all parking spaces and sites
shall be hard surfaced.
         (d)   Parking on-street shall be discouraged and if allowed,
restricted to only one side of the street. All on-street parking plans to be
approved by the city.
      (5)   Utilities.
         (a)   All manufactured homes shall be connected to a public water and
sanitary sewer system or a private water and sewer system approved by the
state’s Department of Health, the City Engineer and the City Council.
         (b)   Disposal of surface storm water shall conform to city storm
water management plans and shall be approved by the City Engineer and City
Council.
         (c)   All utility connections shall be approved by the city.
         (d)   The source of fuel for cooking, heating or other purposes at
each site shall be as approved by the city.
         (e)   All utilities shall be underground including those for street
and exterior lighting purposes. There shall be no overhead wires or supporting
poles.
         (f)   No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of
plumbing, electrical facilities and related mobile and manufactured home
equipment.
         (g)   The method of garbage, waste and trash disposal must be approved
by the city.
         (h)   The owner shall pay all required utility connections fees to the
city.
         (i)   Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the park in such
locations and to such specifications as required by the city’s Fire Marshal,
Fire Chief and Building Official.
      (6)   Internal roadways, streets and side- walks.
         (a)   Roadways shall be hard surfaced to meet the standards for at
least a seven-ton street, unless the applicant can demonstrate that a lesser
roadway will be feasible, along with plans to keep heavy service type trucks
from entering the park. All roadway surface plans to be approved by the city/
City Engineer.
         (b)   All roads shall have concrete, mountable, roll type curbs and
gutters.
         (c)   All streets shall have a roadbed of not less than 24 feet in
width. No parking shall be permitted on the street unless the roadbed shall be
at least 32 feet in width, and in this case will still be limited to one side
for street parking purposes.
         (d)   All streets and ways are hereby declared public only to the
extent that they shall be under the supervision and control of the police
enforcement powers of the city with respect to traffic laws and such other laws
as shall be applicable to public ways and places.
      (7)   Landscaping.
         (a)   Each individual lot shall be properly landscaped with hedges
and/or fences, grass sodding, and at least one tree of two inches in diameter.
         (b)   A compact hedge, privacy fence or landscaped area shall be
installed around each manufactured home park and be maintained at all times.
         (c)   All areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a plan approved
by the City Council.
      (8)   Recreation. The owners of all manufactured home parks shall
improve, for the use of occupants, at least 10% of the park’s total land areas
for recreational use (tennis courts, children’s play equipment, swimming pool,
golf green and the like). In open and park areas, a minimum of ten trees per
acre is required.
      (9)   Shelters. Each park shall include suitable storm and disaster
shelter facilities con- structed to accommodate the park residents. The storm
shelters must meet standards specified in the state regarding manufactured home
park shelter design, Minn. Rules parts 1370.0100 to 1370.0230, as amended, from
the Department of Administration, Building Code and Standards Division.
   (G)   General regulations. The owner of a manufactured home park shall be
responsible for assuring that the following regulations are complied with by
the park and its occupants.
      (1)   All areas of the park shall be property drained, kept free from
dust and maintained clean and free from refuse and debris.
      (2)   All individual manufactured homes shall be owner occupied; except
that, each owner may lease his or her manufactured home to a lessee for a
period not to exceed five months in any calendar year. The park owner shall
maintain a record of all such leases.
      (3)   The placement of more than one manufactured home on any single lot
unit shall not be permitted.
      (4)   Manufactured homes shall not be used for residential purposes if
they:
         (a)   Do not conform to the requirements of the Manufactured Home Code
of the state (Minn. Rules Ch. 1350);
         (b)   Have not been issued a permit by the Building Official. This
includes additions, decks and accessory structures over 120 square feet in
area;
         (c)   Are in an unsanitary condition or have an exterior in bad
repair;
         (d)   Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants
against all elements; and/or
         (e)   Are not properly blocked, anchored or utilities not properly
connected.
      (5)   The operator of every manufactured home park shall maintain a
registry of the park showing:
         (a)   The name and address of each resident manufactured home owner;
         (b)   The make, type and license number of each manufactured home;
         (c)   Forwarding address of all manufactured homes leaving park; and
         (d)   Date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home.
      (6)   A map of the park shall be displayed near the entrance to the park
and be illuminated during all hours of darkness.
      (7)   No persons shall be allowed to reside in a park, except those
occupying manufactured homes on established individual sites or a central
office or caretaker building.
      (8)   No manufactured home may be inhabited by a greater number of
occupants than that for which it was developed.
      (9)   Each manufactured home shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specific installation instructions, City Building Code
requirements and such installation plans and foundation plans prepared by a
state-certified engineer. All manufactured homes shall be permanently anchored
to prevent uplifting due to wind.
      (10)   The area beneath each manufactured home shall be enclosed with
appropriate skirting material that is of compatible color and material of the
manufactured home, shall not be in disrepair and the enclosed skirting shall
have access for inspection. Vinyl or aluminum that has been painted is
acceptable.
      (11)   No public address or loud speaker system shall be permitted in
such park, unless permitted by the City Council for special or one-time uses of
limited duration such as block parties or emergencies.
      (12)   Dogs and animals shall not run at large within the park.
      (13)   Laundry and clothing shall be hung out to dry only on lines
located in areas established and maintained exclusively for that purpose.
      (14)   No boats, hauling trailers, junk cars or other equipment shall be
stored upon the streets of the park or upon the patios or open spaces of any
individual lot. The manufactured home park shall provide a secured area for
this type of storage on-site, in compliance with the specifications of this
chapter.
      (15)   The installation or construction of any structures or improvements
within a park shall require a building permit as required by the city. All
plans for such installation or construction shall meet the requirements of the
state’s Department of Health and the city’s Zoning and Building Codes.
   (H)   Location.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful within this zoning district of the city for
any person to park any mobile or manufactured home on any street or highway, or
other public place or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or
unoccupied within the city, except as provided for in this chapter.
      (2)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any
street or highway for not longer than three hours subject to any other and
further prohibitions, and parking regulations or ordinances for that street or
highway.
      (3)   No person shall park or occupy any mobile home or manufactured home
which is situated outside of an approved manufactured home park.
   (I)   Temporary mobile home or manufactured home permits. Temporary
manufactured or mobile home permits may be issued by the City Council for the
temporary use of a mobile or manufactured home as a temporary office when the
mobile or manufactured home is located outside of an authorized manufactured
home park. The City Council may establish such conditions for the mobile or
manufactured home as it deems appropriate to insure the health, safety and
general welfare. The temporary permits shall be limited to periods of not more
than 90 days. Upon written application, the City Council may renew such
permits. A fee of $50 must accompany each application for a temporary mobile or
manufactured home permit and $10 for each renewal thereof. Each temporary
mobile or manufactured home shall be permit displayed in a conspicuous location
on the outside of the mobile or manufactured home.
   (J)   Inspection of manufactured home parks.
      (1)   Compliance with chapter. The Building Official is hereby authorized
and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine
satisfactory compliance with this chapter, including the power to enter at
reasonable times upon any private or public property for such purposes.
      (2)   Registration record. The Building Official, the Chief of Police or
County Sheriff, or their duly authorized representatives, shall have the power
to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the
manufactured home park.
      (3)   Access. It shall be the duty of the park management to give the
Building Official free access to all lots at reasonable times for the purpose
of inspection.
      (4)   Repairs. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a manufactured
home park to give the owner thereof or his or her agent or employee access to
any part of such manufactured home park at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alternations as are necessary to effect compliance with
this chapter.
      (5)   Emergency. Whenever the Building Official finds that an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety,
an order may be ordered, without notice of hearing, reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as deemed necessary
to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit or license.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Building Official, shall
be afforded a hearing before the Planning Commission as soon as possible.
Pending any such hearing, such emergency orders shall be in full force and
effect until and unless later removed, modified or changed by the Building
Official, the Planning Commission or the City Council.
   (K)   Required illumination of park. All parks shall be furnished with
lighting units so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting
heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination
for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night. The illumination
specifications shall be reviewed and approved by the city and City Engineer:
      (1)   All parts of the park systems: 0.6 foot candle; and
      (2)   Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections
and steps or stepped ramps, to be individually illuminated with a minimum of
0.6 foot candle.
   (L)   Walkways.
      (1)   General requirements. All parks shall be provided with safe,
convenient, all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use,
durable and convenient to maintain, between individual manufactured homes, the
park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden
changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
      (2)   Common walk system. A common walk system shall be provided and
maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such
common walks shall be a minimum of 36 inches wide and shall be constructed
adjacent to the concrete curb of all streets. This sidewalk shall be connected
to each lot patio by a cement walk not less than 24 inches in width.
      (3)   Individual walks. All manufactured homes shall be connected to
common walks, to paved streets or to paved driveways or parking spaces
connecting to a paved street.
   (M)   Service buildings and other community service buildings.
      (1)   General. The requirements of this section shall apply to service
buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities, laundry
facilities, indoor recreation areas and commercial areas supplying essential
goods or services for the exclusive use of park occupants.
      (2)   Structural requirements of buildings. All portions of the structure
shall be property protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay,
corrosion, insects and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be
of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or
penetration of moisture and weather.
      (3)    Barbecue pits, outdoor fireplaces and cooking shelters. Cooking
shelters, barbecue pits and outdoor fireplaces shall be so located,
constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance
both on the property on which used and on neighboring property, and shall
comply with all appropriate ordinances, laws or other regulations. Wood burning
stoves and incinerators are not allowed.
   (N)   Refuse handling. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the
manufactured home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect breeding, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
   (O)   Insect and rodent control.
      (1)   Grounds, buildings and structures. Grounds, buildings and
structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and
infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and
rodents shall conform with any requirements of the County Health Department,
State Department of Health, city or other duty authorized authority over such
matters.
      (2)   Parks. Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris
which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and
other pests.
      (3)   Storage areas. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent
rodent harborage. Lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at
least one foot above ground.
      (4)   Screens. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation
exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be
appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
      (5)   Brush, weeds and grass. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall
be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious
insects. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed,
poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered
detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth
of any description.
   (P)   Fuel supply and storage. Approved natural gas piping systems shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations
governing such systems. No outside or buried fuel tanks will be allowed.
   (Q)   Fire protection.
      (1)   Litter, rubbish and the like. Manufactured home parks shall be kept
free of litter, rubbish and other flammable material.
      (2)   Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers rated for Classes
A, B and C fires shall be kept visible in services buildings and at other
locations conveniently and readily accessible for use by all of the occupants
and shall be maintained in good operating condition. Their capacity shall not
be less than ten pounds.
      (3)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with
the following requirements.
         (a)   The water supply system shall permit the operation of standard
city fire hydrants.
         (b)   Fire hydrants shall be spaced an average of 400 feet with no
spacing to exceed 500 feet. Spacing measurements shall be taken following curb
lines.
   (R)   Miscellaneous requirements. The following are responsibilities of the
manufactured home park owners.
      (1)   The person to whom a license for a manufactured home park is issued
shall operate the park in compliance with this chapter and shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (2)   The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities
under this chapter.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the operator of the manufactured home park
to keep a register containing a record of all manufactured home owners and
occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the date of
arrival and departure of each manufactured home. The park shall keep the
register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers,
public health officials and other officials whose duty necessitates acquisition
of the information contained in the register. The register record for each
occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three years
following the date of departure of the registrant from the park.
(Prior Code, § 155.27) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 561, passed 2-5-1991;
Ord. 575, passed 3-7-1996; Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002)
§ 155.028 CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is designed and intended as a specialized
district directed to serve the pedestrian in a compact central area for the
city. The CBD District will provide for a high-density shopping and business
environment, especially stressing the pedestrian function and interaction of
people and businesses, rather than being heavily oriented toward the use of
automobiles.
   (B)   Special requirements; enclosure of uses. Every use, unless expressly
exempted by this chapter or allowed by a conditional use permit, shall operate
in its entirety within a completely enclosed structure; the exemption of a use
from the requirement of enclosure will be indicated by the phrase “need not be
enclosed” appearing after any use exempted or in the case of a permitted
establishment by the granting of a conditional use permit, subject to the
conditions in the conditional use section.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:
      (1)   Antique store;
      (2)   Apparel and accessory store;
      (3)   Appliance store, sales and service;
      (4)   Art supply store;
      (5)   Art gallery;
      (6)   Artist studio or school;
      (7)   Bakery retail;
      (8)   Bank, including drive-in bank;
      (9)   Barbershop;
      (10)   Beauty shop;
      (11)   Blueprinting and photostatting;
      (12)   Book store;
      (13)   Business machines store;
      (14)   Camera and photographic supply store;
      (15)   Candy, ice cream and confectionery store;
      (16)   Caterer;
      (17)   Clinic, dental, chiropractic and veterinarian;
      (18)   Dance studio;
      (19)   Delicatessen store;
      (20)   Department store;
      (21)   Dressmaking, seamstress;
      (22)   Drugstore;
      (23)   Floral sales;
      (24)   Furniture store and home furnishings;
      (25)   Garden supplies store; need not be enclosed; provided, all
unenclosed portions of the use are located on the rear one-half of the zoning
lot;
      (26)   Gift, novelty or souvenir store;
      (27)   Grocery store;
      (28)   Hardware store;
      (29)   Health equipment store;
      (30)   Interior decorator;
      (31)   Jewelry store;
      (32)   Laboratory, dental or medical;
      (33)   Locksmith;
      (34)   Luggage store;
      (35)   Music store, accessories and studio;
      (36)   Newsstand;
      (37)   Office of any type;
      (38)   Optician;
      (39)   Optical goods;
      (40)   Paint and wallpaper store;
      (41)   Photographic studio or picture processing;
      (42)   Radio and television broadcasting (excluding transmitter);
      (43)   Savings and loan association; state or federally chartered;
including drive-in facilities;
      (44)    School, (private);
      (45)   Shoe repair shop;
      (46)   Sporting goods store;
      (47)   Stationery store;
      (48)   Tailor;
      (49)   Telephone exchange;
      (50)   Theater, not including drive-in theater;
      (51)   Theatrical studio;
      (52)   Ticket agency;
      (53)   Toy store;
      (54)   Travel bureau or agency;
      (55)   Variety store;
      (56)   Café;
      (57)   Catalog service and mail order house;
      (58)   Rental store, not including outdoor storage;
      (59)   Bars and taverns;
      (60)   Bicycle sales and repair;
      (61)   Carpet, rugs and floor coverage sales;
      (62)   Commercial recreation, such as bowling alleys, billiard halls and
the like;
      (63)   Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations including pressing;
      (64)   Appliance store, including incidental repair and assembly, but not
fabrication or manufacturing;
      (65)    Fraternal organizations and civic clubs;
      (66)   Printing shops and newspaper offices;
      (67)   Plumbing and heating shops with no outdoor storage; and
      (68)   Childcare.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Apartments;
      (2)   Parking of vehicles; need not be enclosed;
      (3)   Planned unit developments;
      (4)   Public or quasi-public development;
      (5)   Restaurants, cocktail lounges and other eating or drinking
establishments which require additional parking spaces;
      (6)   Other residential and commercial uses determined by the Planning
Agency to be of the same general character as the principal uses above and
found not to be detrimental to the general public health and welfare; and
      (7)   Service stations.
   (E)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning
lot as the principal use are allowed.
   (F)   Minimum lot size. All structures shall be located on a zoning lot
having a minimum area of 6,000 square feet and a minimum street frontage of 50
feet.
   (G)   Front, side and rear yard requirements. All structures shall be set
back not less than ten feet from any railroad right-of way. No other yards
required. The space resulting from the foregoing setbacks (yard requirements)
shall be utilized only for access to the permitted use or for landscaping
purposes.
   (H)   Maximum ground coverage. No maximum ground coverage requirements.
   (I)   Maximum building heights. Building heights of two and one-half stories
or 35 feet shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 155.28) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 618, passed 5-6-2003;
Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 07-2023, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 155.029 GB GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The GB District is designed and intended to promote the
development of uses which require large concentrations of automobile traffic.
The district is also designed to accommodate those commercial activities which
may be incompatible with the uses permitted in the CBD District and whose
service is not confined to any one neighborhood or community.
   (B)   Special requirements.
      (1)   All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings, with the following exceptions: establish- ments
of the “drive-in” type display of merchandise for sale to the public, and off-
street parking and loading.
      (2)   The unenclosed parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in
the conduct of a permitted business listed hereafter in this section, shall be
discouraged.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:
      (1)   Ambulance service;
      (2)   Appliance store, sales and storage;
      (3)   Auction rooms;
      (4)   Auto, glass, muffler and upholstery shop;
      (5)   Auto parts and accessory sales, including outdoor display of auto
accessories; provided that, the outdoor display or storage is separated from
abutting development by ornamental fencing or screen planting;
      (6)   Auto sales;
      (7)   Auto storage; new or used;
      (8)   Auto repair garage;
      (9)   Bank;
      (10)   Beauty or barber shop;
      (11)   Bicycle store;
      (12)   Blueprinting, photostatting and lithographing;
      (13)   Boat sales and repair, not including dismantling or wrecking;
      (14)   Bowling alley and billiard parlor;
      (15)   Bus, railway or airline depot or ticket office;
      (16)   Catalog service and mail order house;
      (17)   Club or lodge;
      (18)   Dairy products store;
      (19)   Dance hall;
      (20)   Diaper service;
      (21)   Discount store;
      (22)   Drugstore;
      (23)   Dry cleaning;
      (24)   Electric contractor;
      (25)   Exterminator;
      (26)   Floral sales;
      (27)   Food locker plant: a food locker plant renting only individual
lockers for home customer storage of food, including sale of retail, delivery
of individual home orders and the cutting and packaging of meats or game, but
not including slaughtering or eviscerating thereof;
      (28)   Fruit store;
      (29)   Garden supplies and landscape nursery;
      (30)   Grocery store;
      (31)   Gunsmith;
      (32)   Hall, renting for meetings, conventions or social gatherings;
      (33)   Hardware store;
      (34)   Health equipment and supply store;
      (35)   Health club or gym;
      (36)   Hotel, motel or tourist home;
      (37)   Ice plant;
      (38)   Janitorial service;
      (39)   Laboratory, scientific and testing;
      (40)   Laundromat;
      (41)   Linen supply;
      (42)   Liquor store (off-sale);
      (43)   Locksmith;
      (44)   Medical facilities including clinics, appliances, sales and
fittings;
      (45)   Mortuary;
      (46)   Motorcycle store;
      (47)   Newsstand;
      (48)   Paint and wallpaper store;
      (49)   Painting and decorating contractor;
      (50)   Parking and/or commercial storage of vehicles; need not be
enclosed;
      (51)   Pawn shop;
      (52)   Pet store;
      (53)   Photographic studio, picture processing or equipment;
      (54)   Planned unit developments or shopping centers;
      (55)   Plumbing contractor;
      (56)   Printing, publishing and allied industries;
      (57)   Radio and television broadcasting (including transmitter and
studios);
      (58)   Sign contractor;
      (59)   Second hand store;
      (60)   Tailor;
      (61)   Taxidermist;
      (62)   Theatrical studio;
      (63)   Tire recapping and supply store;
      (64)   Upholstery shop of any type;
      (65)   Variety store;
      (66)   Veterinarian, including observation kennels for household pets;
provided, however, all such kennels are contained within completely enclosed
structures;
      (67)   Rental store, not including outdoor storage;
      (68)   Lumberyard;
      (69)    Auto wash;
      (70)   Auto detailing;
      (71)   All permitted uses in the CBD; and
      (72)   Childcare.
   (D)    Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Any drive-in type establishment;
      (2)   Any use other than those enumerated as permitted uses intended to
provide amusement on the payment of a fee;
      (3)   Auto laundries;
      (4)   Auto service stations;
      (5)   Community or convention centers;
      (6)   Landing or take-off area for rotorcraft, not including maintenance,
repair, fueling or hanger facilities;
      (7)   Marine sales and service;
      (8)   Public or quasi-public development;
      (9)   Restaurants, cocktail lounges and other eating and drinking
establishments;
      (10)   Shipping and storage or merchandise solely intended to be retailed
by the established principal permitted use;
      (11)   Sports arena or stadium; and
      (12)   Other commercial and residential uses determined by the Planning
Agency to be of the same general character as the permitted uses above and/or
found not to be detrimental to the general public health and welfare.
   (E)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning
lot as the principal use are allowed.
   (F)   Minimum lot size. All structures shall be located on a zoning lot
having a minimum area of 6,000 square feet and a minimum street frontage of 50
feet.
   (G)   Front, side and rear yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard: except as otherwise hereinafter provided, all uses
allowed in the GB Districts (permitted or conditional uses) shall provide a
front yard of 15 feet which shall be devoted exclusively to landscaping, except
for necessary access drives;
      (2)   Side yard: none; and
      (3)   Rear yard: none.
   (H)   Transitional yard requirements. In the GB District, the minimum
transitional yard requirements shall not be less than those specified below.
      (1)    Where a side lot coincides with a side or rear lot line in an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line.
The yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be
required under this chapter for a residential use on the adjacent residential
lot.
      (2)   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent
residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. The yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required
under this chapter for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot.
      (3)   Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent
residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. The yard
shall be not less than that which would be required for a residential use on
the adjacent residential lot.
      (4)   Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with a
front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard
equal in depth to the minimum yard required by the chapter on the adjacent
residential lot shall be provided along the front or side lot lines.
   (I)   Maximum ground coverage. The sum total of the ground area covered by
all structures (permitted or conditional uses) shall not exceed 75% of the
zoning lot on which the structures are located.
   (J)   Signs. Marquees and canopies may project to within not more than two
feet of the curb of the street; provided, the base of any such marquee or
canopy is at least eight feet above the grade of the sidewalk.
   (K)   Off-street parking.
      (1)   There shall be provided by the developer/owner off-street parking
spaces as described on a parking plan submitted in accordance with the parking
requirements and approved by the city for all uses as hereinafter specified.
      (2)   Off-street parking spaces are to be provided on gravel or surface
lots or separated from abutting residential development in a matter required by
the Planning Commission. Conditions imposed by the Planning Commission could
include, but may not be limited to, ornamental fencing, screen planting,
landscaping or other natural vegetative screening.
      (3)   All off-street parking spaces for all uses shall be located on the
same zoning lot as the use for which such parking is required or within 300
feet walking distance thereof.
(Prior Code, § 155.29) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002;
Ord. 618, passed 5-6-2003; Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 07-2023, passed 11-
14-2023)
§ 155.030 RB RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the R-B Residential Business District is to
provide for high density residential uses, low intensity commercial uses and
the intermixing of related and complementary uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-B District.
   Residential uses.
      (1)   One-family dwellings, one- and two- family dwellings, and multiple
dwellings;
      (2)   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, swimming pools and
additional public and private club recreational uses, all non-commercial;
      (3)   Churches, parish houses, convents, child nurseries; and
      (4)   Public buildings and uses of the following kind: elementary and
secondary schools (public and private), parks, playgrounds, libraries, museums,
community center.
   Commercial uses.
      (1)   Antique store;
      (2)   Apparel and accessory store;
      (3)   Appliance store, sales and service;
      (4)   Art supply store;
      (5)   Art gallery;
      (6)   Artist studio or school;
      (7)   Auto parts and accessory sales;
      (8)   Bakery;
      (9)   Bank, including drive-in bank;
      (10)   Barber shop;
      (11)   Beauty shop;
      (12)   Blueprinting, photostatting;
      (13)   Book store;
      (14)   Business machines store;
      (15)   Café;
      (16)   Camera and photographic supply store;
      (17)   Candy, ice cream and confectionery store;
      (18)   Catalog service and mail order house;
      (19)   Caterer;
      (20)   Clinic, dental, chiropractic, veterinarian;
      (21)   Club or lodge;
      (22)   Dairy products store;
      (23)   Dance studio/dance hall;
      (24)   Delicatessen store;
      (25)   Department store;
      (26)   Diaper service;
      (27)   Discount store;
      (28)   Dressmaking, seamstress;
      (29)   Drugstore;
      (30)   Dry cleaning;
      (31)   Electric contractor;
      (32)   Exterminator;
      (33)   Furniture store and home furnishings;
      (34)   Fruit store;
      (35)   Garden supplies store and landscaping, need not be enclosed;
provided, all unenclosed portions of the use are located on the rear one-half
of the zoning lot;
      (36)   Gift, novelty or souvenir store;
      (37)   Grocery store;
      (38)   Gunsmith;
      (39)   Hardware store;
      (40)   Health equipment store;
      (41)   Health club or gym;
      (42)   Hotel, motel or tourist home;
      (43)   Interior decorator;
      (44)   Janitorial service;
      (45)   Jewelry store;
      (46)   Laboratory, scientific and testing;
      (47)   Laboratory, dental or medical;
      (48)   Laundromat;
      (49)   Linen supply;
      (50)   Locksmith;
      (51)   Luggage store;
      (52)   Medical appliances, sales and fitting;
      (53)   Mortuary;
      (54)   Music store, accessories and studio;
      (55)   Newsstand;
      (56)   Office of any type;
      (57)   Optician;
      (58)   Optical goods;
      (59)   Paint and wallpaper store;
      (60)   Pawn shop;
      (61)   Pet store;
      (62)   Photographic studio, picture processing or equipment;
      (63)   Radio and television broadcasting (excluding transmitter);
      (64)   Savings and loan association; state or federally chartered;
including drive-in facilities;
      (65)   School (private);
      (66)   Shoe repair shop;
      (67)   Sign contractor;
      (68)   Sporting goods store;
      (69)   Stationery store;
      (70)   Tailor;
      (71)   Taxidermist;
      (72)   Telephone exchange;
      (73)   Theater, not including drive-in;
      (74)   Theatrical studio;
      (75)   Ticket agency;
      (76)   Toy store;
      (77)   Travel bureau or agency;
      (78)   Variety store; and
      (79)   Veterinarian, including observation kennels for household pets;
provided, however, all such kennels are contained within completely enclosed
structures.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the R-
B Districts:
      (1)   All conditional uses as allowed in the R Districts;
      (2)   Structures combining residential and non-residential uses;
      (3)   Manufactured home parks as regulated by §
155.027 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Other residential and commercial uses determined by the Planning
Agency to be of the same general character as the principal uses above and
found not to be detrimental to the general public health and welfare.
   (D)   Accessory uses. All permitted accessory uses allowed in the R
Districts.
   (E)   Special requirements.
      (1)   All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings, with the following exceptions: establishments of
the “drive-in” type display of merchandise for sale to the public, and off-
street parking and loading.
      (2)   The unenclosed parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in
conduct of a permitted business listed hereafter in this section, shall be
discouraged.
   (F)   Minimum lot size. All commercial structures shall be located on a
zoning lot having a minimum area of 7,500 square feet and a minimum street
frontage of 50 feet.
   (G)   Front, side and rear yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard: except as otherwise hereinafter provided, all uses
allowed in the RB Districts (permitted or conditional) shall provide a front
yard of 15 feet which shall be devoted exclusively to landscaping, except for
necessary access drives;
      (2)   Side yard: none;
      (3)   Rear yard: none; and
      (4)   All residential structures shall conform to the front, side and
rear yard requirements of the R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zones.
   (H)   Transitional yard requirements. In the RB District, the minimum
transitional yard requirements shall not be less than those specified below.
      (1)   Where a side lot coincides with a side or rear lot line in an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along the side lot line.
The yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be
required under this chapter for a residential use on the adjacent residential
lot.
      (2)   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent
residence district, a yard shall be provided along the rear lot line. The yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required
under this chapter for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot.
      (3)   Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent
residence district, a yard shall be provided along the rear lot line. The yard
shall be not less than that which would be required for a residential use on
the adjacent residential lot.
      (4)   Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with a
front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard
equal in depth to the minimum yard required by this chapter on the adjacent
residential lot shall be provided along the front or side lot lines.
   (I)   Maximum ground coverage. The sum total of the ground area covered by
all structures (permitted or conditional uses) shall not exceed 75% of the
zoning lot on which the structures are located.
   (J)   Signs.
      (1)   General sign provisions. Business signs and advertising devices
shall be allowed in this district. No signing of a permitted use shall project
higher than 20 feet above the building height, nor more than a total of 35 feet
above the sidewalk level. All flashing, revolving and intermittently lighted
signs are expressly prohibited.
      (2)   Sign area and number. The gross area in square feet of all signs
shall not exceed six times the lineal feet of frontage of the zoning lot;
however, the gross surface area of all illuminated signs shall not exceed three
times the lineal feet of frontage of the zoning lot. A maximum of 150 square
feet shall be permitted for free standing signs.
      (3)   Sign projection. No signs projecting more than 18 inches from a
building into the public right-of-way shall be permitted in this district.
Projecting signs may be allowed only after Planning Commission review and if
the following conditions are met: adequate anchorage, underside clearance of at
least 14 feet, location, size and display so designed as not to conceal
neighboring displays. Underside clearance of less than 14 feet is allowed;
provided, they are enclosed at the base by landscaping and protected to avoid
the underneath passage of persons or autos.
      (4)   Parking signs. Parking signs may be wall, ground or projecting
signs; provided that, the signs may not project more than four feet from any
building wall and no more than four feet into any right-of-way.
      (5)   Marquees and canopies. Marquees and canopies may project to within
not more than two feet of the curb of the street; provided, the base of any
such marquee or canopy is at least eight feet above the grade of the sidewalk.
   (K)   Off-street parking. There shall be provided by the developer/owner
off-street parking spaces as described on a parking plan submitted in
accordance with the parking requirements and approved by the city for all uses
as hereinafter specified.
   (L)   Exterior storage.
      (1)   In R-B Districts, all materials, machinery and equipment shall be
stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible form
adjoining or adjacent lands, except for the following: laundry drying and
construction materials; machinery and equipment currently being used on the
premises.
      (2)   No materials or equipment may be stored outside, except those
directly related to the principal use or those being used for construction on
the premises. At gasoline service stations, all vehicles for service and
parking areas shall be screened from neighboring lands.
      (3)   In business districts, displays of merchandise extended more than
five feet into the setback area or more than five feet in front of the existing
building if such building abuts against or extends into the required setback
area shall be construed to be an encroachment on the setback requirements. It
is unlawful for the owner or occupant to permit such encroachments, except that
merchandise may be displayed on service station pump islands. Displays of
merchandise shall not reduce the off-street parking area required by this
chapter.
   (M)   Refuse. In all areas, all waste material, debris, refuse or garbage
shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed
container designed for such purpose. The owner of vacant land shall be
responsible for keeping the land free of refuse and weeds.
   (N)   Screening and landscaping.
      (1)   All open off-street parking areas containing more than six parking
spaces shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any
property situated in a residential district by a wall, fence or densely-planted
compact hedge or trees not less than five feet nor more than eight feet in
height. However, the Planning Commission may waive this requirement if the
closest point of such parking area is at least 75 feet from the nearest
residential property line, or if all the abutting residential property owners
agree to waive the screening requirement.
      (2)    In all R-B Districts, any off-street parking areas of more than
six parking spaces shall require a conditional use permit. In order for the
developer or landowner to apply, they must supply plans for the landscaping and
screening of the parking area. Plans for the landscaping and screening shall be
submitted for approval to the Planning Commission before a conditional use
permit shall be issued. Information required, but not limited to, is as
follows:
         (a)   Legal description of property (parking area and other uses on
all related lots);
         (b)   A drawing or map (to scale) illustrating the plan with north
point arrow;
         (c)   Reasons/rationale for the parking plan;
         (d)   Location, type, size and the like of screening and landscaping
materials (existing and proposed) drawn on plan; and
         (e)   Any other relevant information requested by the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission.
   (O)   Maintenance. All structures and required landscaping or screening
shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly to the adjoining areas and shall
be kept clean, trimmed, free of debris, in good repair and in overall decent
condition.
   (P)   Glare. Any lighting shall be arranged so as not to shine directly on
any residential zone.
   (Q)   Traffic control. The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled
and controlled in a matter that will avoid congestion on public streets,
traffic hazards and excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly
truck traffic. Traffic into and out of business areas shall be forward moving
and backing into public streets shall be discouraged.
   (R)   Drainage. In the development, improvement or alteration of land, the
natural direction of drainage shall not be changed unless plans for the
development are submitted to the City Engineer for approval and unless the
change is approved by the City Council. Runoff shall be properly channeled into
a storm drain, watercourse or ponding area. All new uses and structures are
prohibited unless provision is made for curb and gutter along the public
streets adjacent to the land to be used, except when specifically waived by the
Planning Commission. All plans and provisions for complying with this paragraph
shall be submitted to the City Clerk-Administrator for approval.
   (S)   Electrical emissions. There shall be no electrical disturbances
(except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation
at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
(Prior Code, § 155.30) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 602, passed 6-6-2000;
Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002)
§ 155.031 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The I Industrial District is established to provide exemplary
standards of development for certain industrial uses that prefer to be located
in choice or strategic sites. With proper control, these areas should become
compatible with commercial or residential areas.
   (B)   Special requirements. None.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:
      (1)   Art equipment supplies - manufacture;
      (2)   Automobile service station;
      (3)   Bags, boxes and paper containers, manufacturing and storage;
      (4)   Bakery products;
      (5)   Bottling establishments;
      (6)   Blank books, looseleaf binders fabrication and assembly;
      (7)   Books and bookbinding;
      (8)   Cabinet and woodworking establishments;
      (9)   Clothing manufacture;
      (10)   Camera and photographic manufacturing;
      (11)   Cold storage plants, commercial printing, publishing, engraving
and reproduction firms;
      (12)   Confectionery and related products, manufacture and packaging;
      (13)   Dental instruments and supplies;
      (14)   Dry cleaning and dying establishments;
      (15)   Electric lighting and wiring equipment - manufacture;
      (16)   Electric measuring and testing equipment - manufacture;
      (17)   Electronic tubes and other components - manufacture;
      (18)   Electrical products and appliances - manufacture and assembly;
      (19)   Footwear - manufacture and fabrication;
      (20)   Hand and edge tools (except machine tools) - manufacture and
assembly;
      (21)   Hardware warehousing and distribution operations;
      (22)   Ice plants and ice cream plants;
      (23)   Jewelry manufacture;
      (24)   Laboratory instruments and associated equipment, scientific and
testing;
      (25)   Laundries;
      (26)   Luggage, handbags, and similar items - manufacture and assembly,
lumber yards;
      (27)   Mail order houses;
      (28)   Medical and surgical instruments and supplies;
      (29)   Newspaper plants and offices;
      (30)   Office furniture and supplies;
      (31)   Optical instruments and lenses - manufacture and assembly;
      (32)   Patterns - design and manufacture;
      (33)   Pottery shop;
      (34)   Precision instruments;
      (35)   Plastics manufacture;
      (36)   Plumbing fixture and equipment - wholesale;
      (37)   Radio and television - assembly and parts fabrication;
      (38)   Sport equipment - manufacture and assembly;
      (39)   Scientific and research instruments and equipment manufacture and
assembly;
      (40)   Signs and advertising display materials;
      (41)   Telephone and telegraph technical apparatus - manufacture and
assembly;
      (42)   Temperature controls - fabrication and assembly;
      (43)   Trade schools;
      (44)   Welding supply; and
      (45)   Wholesale business facilities.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Planned industrial developments;
      (2)   Any manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage,
servicing, repair and testing of materials, goods or products similar to those
permitted uses which conform with the performance standards set forth in this
district;
      (3)   Freight terminals; and
      (4)   Other manufacture, processing, storage, commercial or residential
uses determined by the Planning Agency not to be obnoxious, unhealthful or
offensive by reason of the potential emission or transmission of noise,
oxidation, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious matter or glare or heat.
   (E)   Accessory uses. Uses incidental to the principal use are allowed.
   (F)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   Every individual lot, site or tract shall have an area of not less
than one-half acre.
      (2)   Every lot or tract shall have a width of not less than 100 feet
abutting a public right-of-way.
      (3)   There shall be a required minimum 10% reservation of the total lot
area for landscaping use. The landscaping shall conform in design and
appearance with the overall development plan as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   (G)   Front, side and rear yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard: there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 35 feet between building and the street right-of-way line to be devoted
exclusively to landscaping except for necessary points of access;
      (2)   Side yard: there shall be two side yards, one on each side of a
building. Each side yard shall be not less than 15 feet in width; and
      (3)   Rear yard: there shall be a rear yard not less than 30 feet in
depth.
   (H)   Transitional yards requirements. When any lot line coincides with a
lot line of an adjacent residential district, the setback shall be at least 30
feet.
   (I)   Maximum ground coverage. In the I District, the sum total of the
ground area covered by all structures (permitted and conditional) on the zoning
lot on which the structures are located shall not exceed 60%.
   (J)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading facilities. Off-street
parking and loading/unloading facilities shall be required as established in
the this chapter. All off-street parking and loading/unloading spaces shall be
located on the same lot as the principal use.   
   (K)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Intent. It is the intent of this division (K) to provide that
industry and related activities shall be established and maintained with proper
appearance from streets and adjoining properties and to provide that each such
permitted use shall be a good neighbor to adjoining properties by the control
of the following.
      (2)   Noise. Noise shall be measured on any property line of the tract on
which the operation is located. Noise shall be muffled so as not to become
objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency, shrillness or intensity.
At the property line, the sound pressure level of noise radiated continuously
from a facility shall not exceed the values given in Table A herein.
Table A
Maximum permissible sound-pressure levels of specified points of measurement
for noise radiated continuously from a facility.
Band Cycles Per Second (Frequency) Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels)
Table A
Maximum permissible sound-pressure levels of specified points of measurement
for noise radiated continuously from a facility.
Band Cycles Per Second (Frequency) Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels)
20 - 75                            72
76 - 150                           67
151 - 300                          59
301 - 600                          52
601 - 1,200                        46
1,201 - 2,400                      40
2,401 - 4,800                      34
Over 4,801                         32
 
      (3)   Odor. No activity or operation shall cause at any time the
discharge of toxic, noxious or odorous matter beyond the limits of the
immediate site where it is located in such concentrations as to be obnoxious or
otherwise detrimental to or endanger the public health, welfare, comfort or
safety or cause injury to property or business.
      (4)   Glare. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from
floodlights, spotlights or high temperature processes, and as differentiated
from general illumination, shall not be visible beyond the site of origin at
any property line.
      (5)   Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illuminations shall
be directed away from adjacent properties.
      (6)   Smoke, dust, fumes or gases. Every operation shall conform to local
standards.
      (7)   Hazard. Every operation shall be carried on in accordance with
local fire and safety codes.
      (8)   Water supply. The design and construction of water supply
facilities and water supply source shall be in accordance with local and State
Department Health standards and requirements.
      (9)   Waste. All sewage and industrial wastes shall be treated and
disposed in such manner as to comply with the state’s Department of Health
standards and requirement, and local codes.
      (10)   Compliance. In order to assure compliance with the performance
standards set forth above, the Planning Commission may require the owner or
operator of any permitted use to make such investigations and tests as may be
required to show adherence to the performance standards.
      (11)   Review. All subsequent additions and out-buildings constructed
after the erection of an original building or buildings shall be reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator.
   (L)   Regulations on screening. All principal and conditional uses, except
business signs, which are situated within 50 feet of a residential district
shall be screened and buffered from the district by a wall and separation of
open space which shall have a minimum depth of 30 feet and shall include a
required fence or vegetative screening of not less than seven feet in height
above the level of the residential district property at the district boundary.
Walls or fences of lesser heights or planting screens may be permitted by the
Board of Adjustment and Appeals if there is a finding that the nature or extent
of the use being screened is such that a lesser degree of screen will as
adequately promote and protect the use and enjoyment of the properties within
the adjacent residential district, or there is a finding that a screening of
the type required by this chapter would interfere with the provision of
adequate amounts of light and air to same properties. All required screening
devices shall be designed so that they are architecturally harmonious with the
principal structures on the site and they shall be properly maintained so as
not to become unsightly, hazardous or less opaque than when originally
constructed.
(Prior Code, § 155.31) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002;
Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 155.032 A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to preserve agricultural land from
premature conversion to non- agricultural land uses.
   (B)   Special requirements. None.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:
      (1)   Agricultural activities and farmsteads;
      (2)   Park and forest preserve;
      (3)   Church;
      (4)   Golf course except miniature course or driving range;
      (5)   Roadside stand for the sale of agricultural products; and
      (6)    Greenhouse or nursery.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Extraction of rock, sand or gravel;
      (2)   Public building erected by any government agency;
      (3)   Cemetery;
      (4)   Privately-operated outdoor recreational facility;
      (5)   Golf driving range;
      (6)   Single-family dwelling on a site of not less than one acre;
      (7)   Private sod surfaced airstrips used solely by the land owner;
      (8)   Other agricultural, commercial or residential uses determined by
the Planning Agency to be of the same general character as the principal uses
above and found not to be detrimental to the general public health and welfare;
and
      (9)   Off-premises signs; provided that, they are no more than 35 feet in
total height and less than 200 square feet in total area. Lighting shall be
permitted, provided it meets requirements stated in
Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   A lot area of not less than one acre for each non-farm dwelling
unit is required.
      (2)   A lot width of not less than 100 feet is required for each non-farm
dwelling unit.
   (F)   Front, side and rear yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard: a front yard of not less than 40 feet is required;
      (2)   Side yards: two side yards are required, each having a width of not
less than 20 feet; and
      (3)   Rear yard: a rear yard of not less than 50 feet is required.
   (G)   Maximum building heights. Building heights permitted are two and one-
half stories, but shall not exceed 35 feet for non-farm dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 155.32) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002;
Ord. 623, passed 9-2-2003; Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 155.033 C CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is established to retain open space within the
city and also to notify public bodies and the public in general of land which
is constrained for construction activities.
   (B)   Special requirements. No filling, grading, dredging, excavation or
construction shall be allowed within the Conservation District without having
first obtained a conditional use permit from the city.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses:
      (1)   Agricultural activities;
      (2)   Park; and
      (3)   Forest, nature or other preserve.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted:
      (1)   Structural park improvements; and
      (2)   Any fill proposed to be deposited in the Conservation District must
be shown to have some beneficial purpose and the amount thereof must not exceed
that necessary to achieve the intended purpose, as demonstrated by a plan
submitted by the owner showing the uses to which the filled land will be put
and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other materials. The fill
shall be protected against erosion by rip-rap, vegetative coverage,
bulkheading.
   (E)   Conditional use standards.
      (1)   In extra-ordinary cases, conditional uses may be granted upon
application, but only when the proposed use is determined to be in the public
interest. No conditional use shall be granted which the council determines will
or has a tendency to:
         (a)   Increase the height or duration of flood water in any
watercourse;
         (b)   Be consistent with the objectives of encouraging land uses
compatible with the preservation of the natural land forms, vegetation,
wildlife, marshes and wetlands within the city; and
         (c)   Develop land and water areas essential to continue the temporary
or permanent holding of run-off of surface water.
      (2)   No conditional use shall be granted unless the applicant, in
support of his or her application, shall submit engineering data, surveys, site
plans and other information as the city may require in order to determine the
effects of the development on the affected land and water areas.
(Prior Code, § 155.33) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.034 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Scope of regulations. The off-street parking requirements and off-
street loading requirements of this section shall apply within all zoning
districts, except the CBD District.
   (B)   Computation. When in the process of determining the number of off-
street parking and loading spaces there occurs a fraction of a space, such
fraction shall be deemed as a requirement for an additional whole space. The
parking requirements for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the
same as required for a use of similar nature as determined by the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   Site plan. All plans submitted for a building permit on residential
developments exceeding R-2 density and all other developments requiring parking
spaces or loading facilities shall include a site plan approved by the Planning
Commission. The site plan shall be a part of the building permit and no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all items shown on the site plan
for parking and loading facilities have been completed. The plot plan should
include at least the following:
      (1)   Zoning, setbacks and statement of use;
      (2)   North point and scale;
      (3)   All adjacent streets and alleys;
      (4)   Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and street trees;
      (5)   Entire ownership of lot or parcel being developed;
      (6)   Completely dimensioned parking lay- outs;
      (7)   All parking spaces clearly marked;
      (8)   Owner’s name and current address; and
      (9)   Description of surface; asphalt, class five and the like.
   (D)   Parking of commercial vehicles or equipment. No commercial vehicles or
equipment exceeding 9,000 pounds gross weight shall be parked, stored or
otherwise continued in a residential district for a maximum of 24 hours unless
in a completely enclosed structure or unless they are being used in conjunction
with a legitimate service being rendered for the benefit of the residential
premises.
   (E)   Parking and storage of certain vehicles. Automotive vehicles or
trailers of any kind or type without current legal license plates or those
inoperable shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property
other than in completely enclosed buildings.
   (F)   Reduction and use of parking and loading space. Off-street parking and
loading facilities provided to comply with required parking area under this
chapter shall not subsequently be reduced below the requirements of this
chapter unless a conditional use permit is applied for and a fee paid ($75).
The extent of the reduction of required parking area will be considered by the
Planning Commission. In its consideration, the Planning Commission will study,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   The on-street parking available by the site;
      (2)   The expected usage of the site and parking demand;
      (3)   Surrounding land uses and zone districts; and
      (4)   The provisions of this chapter affecting the parking lot or loading
area.
   (G)   Screening and landscaping. All open automobile parking areas
containing more than six parking spaces shall be effectively screened on each
side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residence district or
any institutional premises by a wall, fence, densely-planted compact hedge,
trees or other effective screen not less than five feet, nor more than eight
feet in height as determined by the Planning Commission. However, the Planning
Commission and City Council may waive this requirement if the closest point of
the parking area is at least 75 feet from the nearest residential property
line. By mutual consent of all abutting residential property owners, this
screening required may be waived.
   (H)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties and public streets in such a
way as not to create a nuisance.
   (I)   Signs. Accessory signs shall be permitted on parking areas in
accordance with the provisions specified under each zoning district.
   (J)   Table of parking requirements. Each single automobile parking space
shall use 180 square feet as a recommended area.
Use Number of Required Parking Spaces Off-street Loading and Unloading Spaces
                                      Required
Use                       Number of Required Parking Off-street Loading and
                          Spaces                     Unloading Spaces Required
                          6 spaces plus 1 space for
Animal hospitals and      each 200 square feet of
kennels                   gross floor area over      N.A.
                          10,000 square feet of
                          gross floor area.
                          1 space for each 4
Auditorium, stadium,      permanent seats in the     1 for each structure over
gymnasium, community      largest assembly plus 1    100,000 square feet of
center                    for each 250 square feet   gross floor area
                          of office area
Automobile, car wash      5 spaces plus 5 for each   N.A.
                          wash lane
Automobile service        3 for each service stall
stations                  plus 1 for each attendant  N.A.
                          on the major shift
                          5 spaces for each lane or  1 space for each structure
Bowling alleys            alley                      over 20,000 square feet of
                                                     gross floor area
                                                     1 space for the first
                          5 spaces per 1,000 square  10,000 square feet of
Commercial uses           feet of retail sales floor gross floor area and 1
                          area                       space for each additional
                                                     50,000 square feet of
                                                     gross floor area
                          5 spaces for each 100
Drive-in restaurants      square feet of business    N.A.
                          area
Elderly housing           1 space per dwelling unit  N.A.
                          1 space for each 400
Furniture, automobile and square feet of gross floor 1 space plus 1 additional
boat sales and appliance  area in the first 25,000   space for each 25,000
sales                     square feet and 1 space    square feet of gross floor
                          for each 600 square feet   area
                          thereafter
Hospitals, rest homes,    1 for each 4 beds, plus 1  1 space plus 1 additional
nursing homes and the     for each employee on the   space for each 100,000
like                      major shift                square feet of gross floor
                                                     area
Manufacturing and         1 space for each employee  1 space for each 50,000
research, experimental    on the shift or 1 space    square feet of gross floor
stations                  for each 300 square feet,  area
                          whichever is greater
Miniature golf course,
archery range, golf,      10 spaces respectively     N.A.
driving range
Motel, hotel              1 space per dwelling unit  -
Multiple-family           2 spaces per dwelling unit N.A.
                                                     1 space for buildings
                                                     between 30,000 square feet
Office building,          1 space for each 250       and 100,000 square feet of
professional offices,     square feet of gross floor gross floor area and 1
banks                     area                       space for each additional
                                                     100,000 square feet of
                                                     gross floor area
Restaurants and other     1 space for each 4 seats   1 for each structure over
food dispensing           plus 1 for each 2          10,000 square feet of
establishment except      employees on the shift     gross floor area
drive-in restaurant
Single-family             2 spaces per dwelling      N.A.
Skating rink or dance     1 space for each 250
hall                      square feet of gross floor As required
                          area
Two-family                2 spaces per dwelling unit N.A.
                          1 space for each employee
Warehousing and wholesale on the major shift plus 1  As required
business establishments   space for each company
                          vehicle
 
   (K)   Joint parking. Provision of joint parking areas for several uses in
the same block or in the same vicinity is permissible, in which case the number
of stalls required shall be the sum total of the individual requirements;
provided that, where it is found by the Planning Commission, upon application
thereto, that the parking demand generated by the different uses included in
any joint arrangement to provide parking stalls required herein occurs at
distinctly different times, as in the case of a store generating demand for
parking during its daytime business hours and thereafter generating peak demand
for parking after such daytime hours and, in similar cases, the agency may
recommend to reduce the total number of parking stalls to be jointly provided.
   (L)   Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for
loading berths on the individual zoning lots; provided, the following
conditions are fulfilled.
      (1)   Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central
loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade.
      (2)   Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the sum
of the several types of uses served. Area of types of uses may be totaled
before computing number of loading berths.
      (3)   No zoning lot served shall be more than 500 feet removed from the
central loading zone area.
      (4)   The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the
zoning lot served shall not be less than seven feet in width and have a
clearance of not less than seven feet.
(Prior Code, § 155.34) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 155.045 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development District (PUD) is
to provide for the integration and coordination of land parcels as well as the
combination of land parcels as well as the combination of varying types of
residential, commercial and industrial uses.
   (B)   Application. All permitted, permitted accessory or conditional uses
contained in other zoning districts of this chapter shall be treated as
permitted uses to eliminate the overlapping procedural requirements of
individual conditional use provisions.
   (C)   Special procedures. The establishment of a Planned Unit Development
District shall be subject to the amendment requirements of §
155.070 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 155.50) (Ord. passed 4-1-1997)
§ 155.046 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the grouping of land
parcels for development as an integrated, coordinated unit as opposed to
traditional parcel by parcel, piecemeal, sporadic and unplanned approach to
development. This subchapter is intended to introduce flexibility of site
design and architecture for the conservation of land and open space through
clustering of buildings and activities through conditional use provisions. It
is further intended that Planned Unit Developments are to be characterized by
central management, integrated planning and architecture, joint or common use
of parking, maintenance of open space and other similar facilities and a
harmonious selection and efficient distribution of uses.
   (B)   Specifically, it is intended to encourage:
      (1)   Innovations in residential development to the end that the demands
for housing of all economic levels may be met by greater variety in tenure,
type, design and siting of dwellings and by the conservation and more efficient
use of land in such developments;
      (2)   Higher standards of site and building design through the use of
trained and experienced engineers, architects, landscape architects and
planners;
      (3)   More convenience in location of accessory commercial and service
area;
      (4)   The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics
such as natural topography and geologic features and the prevention of soil
erosion;
      (5)   A creative use of land and related physical development which
allows a phased and orderly transition of land from rural to urban uses;
      (6)   An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities
and streets thereby lowering housing costs and public investments;
      (7)   Developments and a development pattern in harmony and consistent
with the objectives of the city’s Comprehensive Plan;
      (8)   A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of zoning and subdivision regulations of the city; and
      (9)   To allow variation from the provision of this chapter including
setbacks, height, lot area, width and depth, yards and the like, while
continuing to protect the public health, welfare and safety.
(Prior Code, § 155.51) (Ord. passed 4-1-1997)
§ 155.047 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Ownership. An application for PUD approval must be filed by the
landowner or jointly by all landowners of the property included in a project.
The application and all submissions must be directed to the development of the
property as a unified whole. In the case of multiple ownership, the approval of
the final plat shall be binding on all owners. In absence of an ownership
application, the project developer may submit with the development application
the written consent of all property owners within the proposed PUD. The
financial commitments incurred through any portion of the development shall be
responsibility of the ownership
   (B)   Comprehensive Plan consistency. The proposed PUD shall be generally
consistent with the adopted city Comprehensive Plan.
   (C)   Common open space. Common open space, at least sufficient to meet the
minimum requirements established in this chapter, and such complementary
structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit
and enjoyment of the residents of the PUD, shall be provided within the area of
the PUD.
   (D)   Operating and maintenance requirements for PUD common open space/
facilities. Whenever common open space or service facilities are provided
within the PUD, the PUD plan shall contain provisions to assure the continued
operation and maintenance of such open space and service facilities to a
predetermined reasonable standard. Common open space and service facilities
within a PUD may be placed under the ownership of one or more of the following
or may include a method deemed most appropriate by the City Council:
      (1)   Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated; and
      (2)   Property owners association; provided, all of the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   Prior to the use, occupancy, sale or the execution of contracts
for sale of an individual building unit, parcel, tract, townhouse, apartment or
common area, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an
equivalent document as specified M.S. Ch. 515B, as it may be amended from time
to time, shall be filed with the City Clerk-Administrator, such filing to be
made prior to the filings of the declaration of documents or floor plans with
the recording officers of the county.
         (b)   The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or
equivalent document may specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance
affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses or apartments may
subject the properties to the terms of the declaration.
         (c)   The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions may
provide that an owner’s association or corporation may be formed and if such an
association or corporation is formed property owners may be members of the
association or corporation which shall maintain all properties and common areas
in good repair and which shall assess individual property owners proportionate
shares of joint or common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the
review and approval of the City Attorney. The intent of this requirement is to
protect the property values of the individual owner through establishing
effective private control.
         (d)   The declaration shall additionally, amongst other things,
provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to maintain
properties in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the city
or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due and in
the event the city incurs any expenses not immediately reimbursed by the
association or corporation, then the city shall have the right to assess each
property its pro rata share of the expenses. Such assessments, together with
interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each property
against which such assessment is made.
         (e)   Membership in the association must be mandatory for each owner,
and any successive buyer.
         (f)   The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a
given period of years.
         (g)   The association must be responsible for liability insurance,
local taxes and the maintenance of the open space facilities to be deeded to
it.
         (h)   Property owners must pay their pro rata share of the cost of the
association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association which
meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with
state law.
         (i)   The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
         (j)   The by-laws and rules of the association and all covenants and
restrictions to be recorded must be approved by the City Council prior to the
approval of the final PUD plan.   
   (E)   Staging of common open space. The con- struction and provision of all
of the common open space and public improvements and recreational facilities
that are shown on the final development plan for a PUD must proceed at the same
rate as the construction of dwelling units or other private facilities.
   (F)   Density. The exact density allowable shall be determined by standards
agreed upon between the applicant and the city staff in accordance with
existing zoning district requirement. An increase/transfer for density shall be
allowed upon proof of the applicant that some of the following conditions
exist:
      (1)   The area where the density is transferred must be within the
project area and owned by the applicant;
      (2)   Density transfer will allow for a greater degree of innovative
design;
      (3)   Density transfer will allow for more efficient use of public
facilities and utilities; and
      (4)   Density transfer will allow for preserva- tion of sensitive
environment areas.
   (G)   Utilities. In any PUD, all permanent utilities, including telephone,
electricity, gas and telecable shall be installed underground.
   (H)   Roadways.
      (1)   Private roadways within the project shall have an improved surface
of 25 feet or more in width and shall be so designated as to permit fire trucks
and emergency medical service vehicles to provide protection to each building.
Parking shall be prohibited within this 25-foot roadway.
      (2)   No portion of the required private road system may be used in
calculating required off-street parking space.
      (3)   The uniqueness of each proposal for a PUD requires that
specifications and standards for streets, utilities and services may be subject
to minor modifications from the specifications and standards established in the
city subdivision ordinance (Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances) governing their
construction. The City Council may therefore waive or modify the specifications
or standards where it is found that they are not required in the interests of
the residents or of the entire city. The plans and profiles of all streets,
utilities and services shall be reviewed, modified if necessary and approved by
the City Engineer and Building Official prior to the final approval of the PUD
plan by the City Council.
   (I)   Landscaping. In any PUD, landscaping shall be provided according to a
plan approved by the City Council, which shall include a detailed planting list
with sizes and species indicated as part of the final plat. In assessing the
landscaping plan, the City Council shall consider the natural features of the
particular site, the architectural characteristics of the proposed structures
and the overall scheme of the PUD plan.
   (J)   Public services. The proposed project shall be served by the city
water and sewer system and fire hydrants shall be installed at such locations
as required by the Fire Marshal to provide fire protection.
   (K)   Building height. Height limitations shall be the same as imposed in
the respective districts.
   (L)   Refuse. Provision for trash pick-up shall be made according to a plan
approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
   (M)   Site improvement agreement. Prior to the issuance of a building permit
as part of the Planned Unit Development, the permit applicant, builder or
developer shall execute and deliver to the City Council a site improvement
agreement.
   (N)   PUD progress. In the opinion of the city, if development has not
progressed reasonably well according to the approved schedule, the developer
shall be required to submit a statement to the city setting forth reasons for
the lack of progress. The Planning Commission may initiate rezoning to
eliminate the PUD zoning classification if it finds that the development has
not occurred according to the adopted schedule; it shall not be necessary for
the City Council to find that the rezoning to a PUD was in error.
   (O)   Pre-development costs. All pre-development costs will be the
responsibility of the project developer or property owner. The city, according
to the general provisions of this chapter, will require copies of written
notification to all contractors and subcontractors of the project stating such
responsibility prior to approval of PUD.
(Prior Code, § 155.52) (Ord. passed 4-1-1997)
§ 155.048 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Residential Planned Unit Development.
      (1)   Purpose. It is the intent of this division (A) to establish special
requirements for the granting of a conditional use permit for residential PUD
projects. In developments where residential developments are proposed, the
following general standards may apply.
         (a)   Housing variety may include a differentiation in housing types,
housing exteriors and floor plans.
         (b)   Preservation of natural site features, wetlands, lowlands,
wooded areas and the like, protected by the state’s Department of Natural
Resources, by the city and/or county ordinances. The protection of these
natural resources may be considered for a density transfer.
         (c)   Creation of park/public areas for active and passive park use or
other public purposes such as schools, public buildings and the like which meet
the intent of the city’s park and recreation chapter of the Comprehensive Plan
and are consistent with the public dedication requirements for the proposed
development.
         (d)   Installation of public improvements designed to serve areas
beyond the project boundary.
      (2)   Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a Planned Unit
Development - General Residential Project is proposed and permit requested
shall contain not less than three acres of land.
      (3)   Required frontage. The tract of land for which a project is
proposed and permit requested shall have a width of not less than 200 feet
perpendicular to the side lot line or have 200 feet of frontage on the public
right-of-way whichever is most restrictive.
      (4)   Yards.
         (a)   The front, side and rear yard restrictions at the periphery of
the Planned Unit Development site shall be designed in a manner consistent with
adjacent planned land uses.
         (b)   No building shall be nearer than its building height to the rear
or side property line when such line abuts an R-1 or R-2 Use District.
         (c)   No building shall be located less than 20 feet from the back of
the curb line along those roadways which are part of the internal street
pattern.
         (d)   No building within the project shall be nearer to another
building than one-half the sum of the building heights of the two buildings.
      (5)   Townhouses and condominiums.
         (a)   Minimum unit lot frontage for townhouses shall be not less than
20 feet.
         (b)   Dwelling unit and accessory use requirements are in compliance
with the district provisions in which the development is planned.
         (c)   No townhouse shall have a single exterior wall longer than 80
feet, nor an offset between walls of more ten feet.
         (d)   Townhouse projects shall have a usable open space area equal to
400 square feet per dwelling.
         (e)   Condominium buildings containing eight units or less and not
more than two stories may entail zero lot line construction; provided that, the
association covenant provides for it accordingly.
      (6)   Density transfer for units other than single family. In proposed
developments where uses other than single-family detached structures are
proposed, the city will consider a density transfer upon proof by the applicant
that some of the following features are being provided as part of the proposed
development:
         (a)   Preservation of natural site features, wetlands, lowlands,
wooded areas and the like, protected by the state’s Department of Natural
Resources, by the city and county ordinances.
         (b)   Creation of park/public areas for active park use or other
public purpose such as schools, public buildings and the like, which meet the
intent of the park and recreation chapter of the city’s Comprehensive Plan and
are consistent with the public dedication requirements for the proposed
development.
         (c)   Landscaping plan showing addi- tional boulevard trees, rear yard
treatments, buffering from existing developments and the like beyond required
standards.
         (d)   Installation of public improvements designed to serve areas
beyond the project boundary.
   (B)   Commercial or Industrial Planned Unit Development.
      (1)   Purpose. It is the intent of this division (B) to establish special
requirements for the granting of a conditional use permit to allow commercial
or industrial PUD projects.
      (2)   Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a Planned Unit
Development - Commercial or Industrial Project is proposed and permit is
requested shall contain not less than five acres for commercial and industrial
projects.
      (3)   Frontage. The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a
permit requested shall have a width of not less than 200 feet perpendicular to
the side lot line or have 200 feet of frontage on the public right-of-way
whichever is most restrictive.
      (4)   Yard. No building shall be nearer than 50 feet to the side or rear
property line when such line abuts an R-1, R-2 or R-3 Use District.
      (5)   Landscaping, screening and surfacing. All site treatment shall be
consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Mixed Use Planned Unit Development.
      (1)   Purpose. The intent of this division (C) is to establish special
requirements for the granting of a zoning district amendment to allow mixed use
PUD projects which are in compliance with the permitted and conditional uses
allowed within the PUD District and in accordance with the provisions and
procedures as prescribed in this section.
      (2)   Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a mixed use PUD
is proposed shall not contain less than five acres.
      (3)   Frontage. The tract of land for which the project is proposed shall
have a width of not less than 200 feet perpendicular to the side lot line or
have 200 feet of frontage on the public right-of-way, whichever is most
restrictive.
      (4)   Yards. Minimum setbacks shall be the same as imposed in the
respective PUD use districts.
      (5)   Landscaping, screening and surfacing. All site treatment shall be
consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 155.53) (Ord. passed 4-1-1997)
§ 155.049 PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING.
   (A)   Application conference. Upon filing of an application for PUD, the
applicant of the proposed PUD shall arrange for and attend a conference with
the city staff. At such conference, the applicant shall be prepared to
generally describe their proposal for a PUD. The primary purpose of the
conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather
information and obtain guidance as to the general suitability of the conformity
to the provisions of this code before incurring substantial expense in the
preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
   (B)   General concept plan.
      (1)   Purpose. The general concept plan provides an opportunity for the
applicant to submit a plan to the city showing their basic intent and the
general nature of the entire development without incurring substantial cost.
This concept plan serves as the basis for the informational meeting so that the
proposal may be publicly considered at an early stage. The following elements
of the proposed general concept plan represent the immediately significant
element which the city shall review and for which a decision shall be rendered:
         (a)   Overall maximum PUD density range;
         (b)   General location of major streets and pedestrian walkways;
         (c)   General location and extent of public and common open space;
         (d)   General location of residential and non-residential land uses
with approximate type and intensities of development;
         (e)   Staging and time schedule of development; and
         (f)   Other special criteria for development.
      (2)   Process.
         (a)   Developer attends application conference;
         (b)   File application for a conditional use permit or rezoning
concurrently with the sub- mission of the general concept plan at least 21 days
prior to Planning Commission meeting consisting of the information and
submissions required under the general concept stage;
         (c)   City staff reviews application, prepares report and
recommendations;
         (d)   Planning Commission receives application and report of city
staff;
         (e)   Planning Commission makes a recommendation to the city council
on the general concept plan;
         (f)   City Council holds an informational meeting to inform property
owners within 350 feet of the proposed PUD of the general concept plan; and
         (g)   City Council reviews all recommendations and approves or denies
application on general concept plan.
      (3)   Optional submission of development stage plan. In cases of a single
stage PUD or where the applicant wishes to begin the first stage of a multiple
stage PUD more expeditiously, he or she may, at his or her option, submit
development stage plans for the proposed PUD simultaneously with the submission
of the general concept plan. In such case, the applicant shall comply with all
the provisions of this chapter applicable to submission of the development
stage plan.
      (4)   Limitation of general concept plan approval. Unless a development
stage plan has been filed within nine months from the date City Council grants
general concept plan approval or, in any case, where applicant fails to file
development stage and final plans to proceed with development in accordance
with the provisions of this code and of an approved general concept plan, the
approval may be revoked by City Council action. The City Council, at its
discretion, may extend the filing date for a development stage plan, when for
good cause shown, the extension is deemed appropriate. Approval of the general
concept plan should be limited to the general acceptability of the land uses
proposed and their relationships to the area. The action shall in no way bind
the City Council to subsequent action on more detailed plans.
   (C)   Development stage.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the development stage plan is to provide a
specific and particular plan upon which the Planning Commission will base its
recommendation to the City Council and with which substantial compliance is
necessary for the preparation of the final plan.
      (2)   Submission of development stage plan. Upon approval of the general
concept plan, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk-Administrator a
development stage plan consisting of the information and submissions required
under the development stage for the entire PUD, or for one or more stages
thereof in accordance with a staging plan approved as part of the general
concept plan. The development stage plan shall refine, implement and be in
substantial conformity with the approved general concept plan.
      (3)   Review and action by city staff and Planning Commission. Upon a
receipt of a completed development stage plan, the City Clerk-Administrator
shall refer such plan to the appropriate city staff, Planning Commission and
other review agencies.   
      (4)   Process.
         (a)   Developer makes application for subdivision (first phase of PUD,
development stage plan) at least 21 days prior to Planning Commission meeting.
         (b)   Within 60 days of the submission, or such further time as may be
agreed to by the applicant and city staff, the Planning Commission shall review
the development stage plan and submit a written report and recommendations to
the City Council. If the Planning Commission fails to make a report within 60
days after receipt of the application, then the City Council may proceed
without the report. The report shall contain the findings and recommendations
of the Planning Commission with respect to the conformity of the development
stage plan to the approved general concept plan, with respect to the merit or
lack of merit of any departure of the development stage plan from substantial
conformity with the general concept plan, and with respect to the compliance of
the development stage plan with the provisions of this code and all other
applicable federal, state and local codes and ordinances.
         (c)   Within 30 days of receipt of the report and recommendations of
the Planning Commission, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the
plans. Within 60 days of the public hearing, the City Council will either grant
approval, resubmit the plan to the Planning Commission for further
consideration, or deny approval of the plan.
         (d)   Upon City Council approval, the City Attorney shall draw up a
PUD agreement which stipulates the specific terms and conditions established
and approved by the City Council and accepted by the applicant. This agreement
shall be signed by the Mayor, the City Clerk-Administrator and the applicant.
         (e)   Where the development stage plan is denied approval, City
Council action shall be by resolution setting forth the reasons for its action.
A certified copy of the document evidencing City Council action shall be
delivered to the applicant. The applicant will have 60 days to submit a revised
development stage plan to the Planning Commission according to Step 1 of this
process. After the 60-day period, a revised general concept plan must be
submitted to the Planning Commission unless otherwise arranged with the Zoning
Administrator.
         (f)   If the general stage plan is denied approval three times within
one year of the original submission date, the applicant will be required to
submit a revised general concept plan according to division (D)(2) below.
      (5)   Limitation on detailed plan approval. Unless a final plan covering
the area designated in the first stage of the development stage plan has been
filed within six months from the date City Council grants development stage
plan approval, or in any case where the applicant fails to file final plans and
to proceed with development in accordance with the provisions of the code and/
or an approved development stage plan, the approval shall expire. The City
Council may, at its discretion, extend for not more than one additional period
of six months the filing deadline for any final plan when, for good cause
shown, the extension is necessary. In any case where development plan approval
expires, the City Council shall forthwith adopt a resolution repealing the
general concept plan approval and the development stage plan approval for that
portion of the PUD that has not received final plan approval and re-establish
the zoning and other ordinance provisions that would otherwise be applicable.
      (6)   Review and evaluation criteria. The evaluation of the proposed
development stage plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
criteria.
         (a)   Adequate property control is provided to protect the individual
owner’s rights and property values and the public responsibility for
maintenance and upkeep.
         (b)   The interior circulation plan plus access from and onto public
rights-of-way does not create congestion or dangers and is adequate for the
safety of the project resident and the general public.
         (c)   A sufficient amount of usable open space is provided.
         (d)   The arrangement of buildings, structures and accessory uses does
not unreasonably disturb the privacy or property values of the surrounding
residential uses.
         (e)   The architectural design of the project is visually compatible
with the surrounding area. Architectural style or type of buildings shall not
solely be a basis for denial or approval of the development stage plan.
However, the overall appearance and compatibility of individual buildings to
other site elements of surrounding development will be given primary
considerations in the review stages of the Planning Commission and City
Council.
         (f)   The drainage and utility system plans are submitted to the City
Engineer and shall be subject to approval.
         (g)   The development schedule insures a logical development of the
site which will protect the public interest and conserve land.
         (h)   Dwelling unit and accessory use requirements are in compliance
with the district provisions in which the development is planned.
   (D)   Final plan.
      (1)   Purpose. The final plan is to serve as a complete, thorough and
permanent public record of the PUD and the manner in which it is to be
developed. It shall incorporate all prior approved plans and all approved
modifications thereof resulting form the PUD process. It shall serve in
conjunction with other city ordinances as the land use regulation applicable to
the PUD.
      (2)   Submission of the final plan. Upon approval of the development
stage plan, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk-Administrator a final
plan consisting of the information and submissions required by the final plan
stage, for the entire PUD or for one or more stages. The final plan is intended
only to add detail to, and to put in final form, the information contained in
the general concept plan and the development stage plan which shall conform to
the development stage plan in all respects.
      (3)   Review of final plan. The City Engineer shall review the final
plans to assure their compliance with the general concept and development stage
plans. The City Engineer shall require appropriate revisions by the applicant
wherever they do not so comply. The City Engineer shall report findings to the
City Clerk- Administrator who shall notify the applicant in writing of approval
of the final plan.
      (4)   City Council action. The City Council may approve the PUD final
plan with a majority vote.
      (5)   Recording of final plan. Within 30 days of the City Clerk-
Administrator’s notice of approval, the applicant shall record the final plan,
or such portions thereof as are appropriate, with the county’s Register of
Deeds or Register of Titles.
      (6)   Building and other permits. No building permit shall be granted on
land for which a plan for a PUD is in the process of review or which does not
conform to the approved final plan or for one phase of the final plan. Upon
receiving notice from the City Clerk-Administrator that the approved final plan
has been recorded and upon appropriate application of the applicant, building
and other permits may be issued to the applicant if the following conditions
are met:
         (a)   Public open space, if applicable, has been deeded to the city
and officially recorded;
         (b)   A development contract has been approved and executed by all
parties;
         (c)   The homeowner’s association, if applicable, by-laws, covenants
and deed restrictions have been approved by the City Attorney and officially
recorded;
         (d)   The construction plans for proposed structures have been
approved by the City Building Official; and
         (e)   All detailed site plans have been approved by the City Council.
      (7)   Limitation of final plan approval. Within one year after the
approval of a final plan for PUD, or such shorter time as may be established by
the approved development schedule, construction shall commence in accordance
with such approved plan. Failure to commence construction within the period
shall, unless an extension has been granted as hereinafter provided,
automatically renders void the PUD permit and all approvals of the PUD plan.
The area encompassed within the PUD shall thereafter be subject to those
provisions of the zoning ordinances, and other ordinances, applicable in the
district in which it is located. In such case, the City Council shall forthwith
adopt a resolution repealing the PUD permit and PUD approvals and re-
establishing the zoning and other ordinance provisions that would otherwise be
applicable.
      (8)   Annual review. The Zoning Administrator shall review each Planned
Unit Development at least once each year and shall make a report through the
Planning Commission to the City Council on the status of the development in
each PUD District. If development is not progressing reasonably well, according
to schedule, the owner shall be required to submit a statement to the Zoning
Administrator setting forth the reasons for the lack of progress. If the City
Council finds that the development has not occurred according to the
established development schedule or is not otherwise reasonable in the view of
the City Council, the City Council may initiate rezonings to remove the Planned
Unit Development district in any event. It shall not be necessary for the City
Council to find the rezoning to a PUD district was in error.
(Prior Code, § 155.54) (Ord. passed 4-1-1997; Ord. 618, passed 5-6-2003)
§ 155.050 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   The applicant shall submit a sufficient number of copies, as required by the
City Clerk-Administrator, of the following exhibits, analyses and plans during
the PUD review process.
   (A)   Certification of plans. All architectural and engineering plans shall
be designed by a professional architect or engineer registered in the state.
The site plans may be prepared by a professional site planner but must be
certified by a registered engineer or architect.
   (B)   General concept plan.
      (1)   General information.
         (a)   The landowner’s name and address and their interest in the
subject property;
         (b)   The applicant’s name and address if different from the
landowner;
         (c)   The names and addresses of all professional consultants who have
contributed to the development of the PUD plan being submitted, including
attorney, land planner, engineer and surveyor; and
         (d)   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the
subject property to effectuate the proposed PUD, including a statement of all
legal, beneficial, tenancy and contractual interest held in or affecting the
subject property and including an up-to-date certified abstract of title or
registered property report, and such other evidence as the City Attorney may
require to show the status of title or control of the subject property.
      (2)   Present status.
         (a)   The address and legal description of the subject property;
         (b)   The existing zoning classification and present use of the
subject property and all lands within 500 feet thereof; and
         (c)   A map depicting the existing development of the subject property
and all lands within 500 feet thereof and showing the precise location of
existing streets, property lines, easements, water mains and storm and sanitary
sewers, with invert elevations on and within 100 feet of the subject property.
      (3)   Written statement. A written statement generally describing the
proposed PUD and the market which it is intended to serve, showing its
relationship to the city’s Comprehensive Plan and how the proposed PUD is to be
designed, arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable regulations of the city.
      (4)   Site conditions.
         (a)   Where deemed necessary by the city, graphic reproductions of the
existing site conditions at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet
(or scale requested by City Engineer) shall be submitted and shall contain the
following:
            1.   Contours: minimum two foot intervals;
            2.   Location, type and extent of tree cover;
            3.   Slope analysis;
            4.   Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands, and streams and
flood plains within 300 feet of the subject property;
            5.   Significant rock outcropping;
            6.   Existing drainage patterns;
            7.   Vistas and significant views; and
            8.   Soil conditions as they affect development.
         (b)   All of the graphics should be the same scale as the final plan
to allow easy cross reference. The use of overlays is recommended for clear
reference.
      (5)   Schematic drawing content. Schematic drawing of the proposed
development concept including, but not limited to, the general location of
major circulation elements, public and common open space, residential and other
land uses.
      (6)   Area estimates. A statement of the estimated total number of
dwelling units proposed for the PUD and a tabulation of the proposed
approximate allocations of land use expressed in acres and as a percent of the
total project area, which shall include at lest the following:
         (a)   Area devoted to residential uses;
         (b)   Area devoted to residential use by building type;
         (c)   Area devoted to common open space;
         (d)   Area devoted to public open space;
         (e)   Approximate area devoted to streets;
         (f)   Approximate area, and potential floor area, devoted to
commercial uses; and
         (g)   Approximate area, and potential floor area, devoted to
industrial or office uses.
      (7)   Schedule of construction. When the PUD is to be constructed in
stages during a period of time extending beyond a single construction season, a
schedule for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted stating
the approximate beginning and completion date for each such stage or unit and
the proportion of the total PUD public or common open space and dwelling units
to be provided or constructed during each such stage and the overall chronology
of development to be followed from stage to stage.
      (8)   Care and maintenance of open spaces or service facilities. When the
proposed PUD includes provisions for public or common open space or service
facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be made for the
care and maintenance of such open space or service facilities shall be
submitted. If it is proposed that such open space be owned and/or maintained by
any entity other than a governmental authority, copies of the proposed articles
of incorporation and by-laws of such entity shall be submitted during the
development stage.
      (9)   Restrictive covenants. General intents of any restrictive covenants
that are to be recorded with respect to property included in the proposed PUD.
      (10)   Market feasibility study. Where deemed necessary, a market
feasibility study including an analysis of the proposal’s economic impact on
the city shall be submitted.
   (C)   Development stage. Development stage submissions should depict and
outline the proposed implementation of the general concept stage. This will be
included for background and to provide a basis for the submitted plan. The
development stage submissions shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Zoning classification required for development stage submission and
any other public decision necessary for implementation of the proposed plan;
      (2)   Preliminary plans, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet (or scale requested by the City Engineer) containing at least
the following information:
         (a)   Proposed name of the development (which shall not duplicate, nor
be similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the
county wherein the subject property is situated);
         (b)   Property boundary lines, dimensions of the property and any
significant topographical or physical features of the property;
         (c)   The location, size, use and arrangement including height in
stories and feet and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area,
for proposed building and existing buildings which will remain, if any;
         (d)   The location, dimensions and number of all driveways, entrances,
curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces, access alleys, and all other
circulation elements including bike, pedestrian walkways and the total site
coverage of all circulation element;
         (e)   Location, designation and total area of all common open space;
         (f)   Proposed lots and blocks, if any and numbering system;
         (g)   The location, use and size of structures and other land uses on
adjacent properties;
         (h)   Preliminary sketches of proposed landscaping;
         (i)   General grading and drainage plans for the developed PUD; and
         (j)   Any other information that may be required by the Planning
Commission or City Council in conjunction with the approval of the general
concept plan.
      (3)   An accurate legal description of the entire area within the PUD for
which final development plan approval is sought;
      (4)   A tabulation indicating the approximate gross square footage, if
any, of commercial and industrial floor space by type of activity (e.g.,
drugstore, dry cleaning, supermarket);
      (5)   Preliminary architectural plans indicating use, floor plan,
elevations and exterior wall finishes of proposed buildings, including mobile
homes;
      (6)   A detailed site plan, suitable for recording, showing the physical
layout, design and purpose of all streets, easements, rights-of-way, utility
lines and facilities, lots, block, public and common open space, general
landscaping plan, structures, including mobile homes and uses;
      (7)   Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustrating changes
to existing topography and natural site vegetation. The plan should clearly
reflect the site treatment and its conformance with the approved concept plan;
      (8)   A preliminary and final plat prepared by a land surveyor, duly
registered in the state, in accordance with M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended
from time to time, which shall contain a notarized certification by such
surveyor that the plat represents a survey made by the surveyor and that the
monuments shown herein exist as located, and that all dimensions are correct,
as required by M.S. § 505.03, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time,
and a notarized certification by owner or owners of the adoption of the plat
and the dedication of streets and other public areas as required by M.S. §
505.03, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (9)   A soil erosion control plan approved by the appropriate watershed
districts, Department of Natural Resources or any other agency with review
authority clearly illustrating erosion measures to be used during construction
and as permanent measures;
      (10)   A statement summarizing all changes which have been made in any
document, plan data or information previously submitted, together with revised
copies of any such document, plan or data;
      (11)   Such other and further information as the Planning Commission,
City Engineer or City Council shall find necessary to a full consideration of
the entire proposed PUD or any stage thereof; and
      (12)   The Planning Commission may, by a written order, excuse any
applicant from submitting any specific item of information document required
herein which it finds to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific
proposal for PUD approval.
   (D)   Final plat stage. After approval of a general concept plan for the PUD
and approval of a development stage plan for a section of the proposed PUD, the
applicant will submit the following material for review by city staff prior to
issuance of a building or other permits:
      (1)   Detailed landscaping plans;
      (2)   Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to
the sale of any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment
and activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and
maintenance of any public or common open space or service facility;
      (3)   All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication
of land and recordation of documents;
      (4)   Final architectural working drawings of all structures;
      (5)   Final engineering plans and specifi- cations for streets, utilities
and other public improvements, together with a community/developer agreement
for the installation of such improvements and financial guarantees for the
completion of such improvements;
      (6)   Any other plan, agreements or specifications necessary for the city
staff to review the proposed construction; and
      (7)   Title opinion by Council to developer showing good and marketable
title in the names of the owners of the property. This opinion, together with
an updated abstract should be submitted to the City Attorney for review.
(Prior Code, § 155.55) (Ord. passed 4-1-1997)
§ 155.051 AMENDMENTS AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Generally. Amendments may be made in the approved final plan when they
have shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the
final plan was approved or by changes in the development policy of the city.
      (1)   Minor changes in location, siting and height of buildings and
structures may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator if requested, and if
caused by unforeseen circumstances.
      (2)   All other changes in use, rearrangement of lots, blocks and open
space must be authorized by the City Council and Planning Commission under
procedures outlined in this chapter.
   (B)   Authorized changes. Changes may be authorized only under the following
procedures:
      (1)   Minor extensions, alterations or modifications of existing
structures may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator if they are consistent
with the intent and purpose of the final plan and do not increase the size of
any building or structure by more than ten percent than originally proposed in
the development stage plan; and
      (2)   Changes in the use of common open space due to unforeseen
circumstances which exceed the intent of the final plan may be authorized only
by amendment to the final plan according to the procedures.
   (C)   Failure to begin PUD. If no construction has begun or no use
established within 24 months of the approval of the final plan, the final plan
shall lapse and no further development shall be allowed. The applicant must
submit a new development stage plan according to the procedures outlined in
this subchapter.
   (D)   Fees. The applicant shall pay a fee of $125 to the city before the
submission of the general concept plan. The applicant shall provide, at its own
expense, copies of all plans, records and reports requested by the City Clerk-
Administrator or Planner. The applicant will pay a fee of $150 to the city upon
submission of the development stage plan. No action will be taken on general
concept plan or development stage plan until payment is made.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
155.999 of this chapter. Each day that the violation is permitted to exist
constitutes a separate offense.
   (F)   Effectuation/severability. It is hereby declared to be the intent that
the provisions of this subchapter are separable in accordance with the
following.
      (1)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions
of this subchapter to be invalid, the judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this subchapter not specifically included in the judgment.
      (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any portion of this subchapter to a particular property,
building or other structure, the judgment shall not affect the application of
the provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in the judgment.
   (G)   Effective date of subchapter. This subchapter shall be in full force
and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 155.56) (Ord. passed 4-1-1997)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.065 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The principal objective of this chapter is to provide for an
orderly arrangement of compatible building and land uses, and for the proper
locations of all types of uses required by the city. To accomplish this
objective, each type and kind of use is classified as permitted in one or more
of the various districts established by this chapter. However, in addition to
those uses specifically classified and permitted in each district, there are
certain additional uses which may be allowed because of their unusual
characteristics or the service they provide the public. These conditional uses
require particular consideration as to their proper location in relation to
adjacent established or intended use and the planned development of the
community; therefore, both staff recommendations and public meetings are
required before granting a conditional use.
   (B)   Authority. The issuance of any permit shall not be approved until the
recommendations of the Planning Commission have been received or until 60 days
have elapsed since the referral of the matter to the Planning Commission, and
unless it shall be found, in each case, that the location of the use for which
the permit is sought, the manner of conducting the same and any building or
facilities or services which are involved will not be dangerous or otherwise
detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity thereof, or to the
public welfare, and will not impair the use, enjoyment or value of any property
in the vicinity.
   (C)   Procedure. An application for a conditional use shall be on the form
required by the Planning Commission and may be made by any governmental office,
department, board or commission or by any person having a freehold interest,
applicable to the parcel described in the application. The applicant shall pay
a fee set by City Council to the city before public notice is published or city
staff time is expended. All application for a conditional use shall be
accompanied by a site plan in accordance with city procedures. Public notice
shall be given not more than 30 days, nor less than ten days, in advance by
publishing a notice in the official newspaper of the area. This notice shall
describe the particular conditional use and shall contain a brief description
thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall send written notice to all property
owners or residents within 350 feet of the property. Assessor tax records and
street address shall be deemed sufficient for the location of certification of
ownership of the adjacent properties.
   (D)   Standards. In acting upon a request it may be determined that, in
order to protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, or to
avoid traffic congestion or hazard or for promoting conformity of a proposed
use with the character of adjoining property and uses and the district as a
whole, or for protecting such character, the issuance of a permit should be
subject to conditions.
      (1)   In considering conditional use requests, the Planning Agency shall
evaluate the use, utilizing the applicable requirements listed below.
         (a)   The land area and setback requirements of the property
containing such a use or activity shall be at least the minimum established for
the district.
         (b)   When abutting a residential use in a residential district, the
property shall be screened and landscaped as determined by the Planning Agency.
         (c)   Where applicable, all city, state and federal laws, regulations
and ordinances shall be complied with and all necessary permits secured.
         (d)   All signs shall be in compliance with ordinance regulations and
shall not adversely impact adjoining or surrounding residential uses.
         (e)   Adequate off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with §
155.034 of this chapter. The parking and loading shall be screened and
landscaped from abutting residential uses in compliance with §
155.034(G) of this chapter.
         (f)   The proposed water, sewer and other utilities shall be capable
of accommodating the proposed use.
         (g)   The street serving the use or activity is of sufficient design
to accommodate the proposed use or activity, and the use or activity shall not
generate such additional extra traffic to create a nuisance or hazard to
existing traffic or to surrounding land uses.
         (h)   All access roads, driveways, parking areas and outside storage,
service or sales areas shall be surfaced or grassed to control dust and
drainage.
         (i)   All open and outdoor storage, sales and service areas shall be
screened from view from the public streets and from abutting residential uses
or districts.
         (j)   All lighting shall be designed as to have no direct source of
light visible from adjacent residential areas or from the public streets.
         (k)   The use or activity shall be properly drained to control surface
water runoff.
         (l)   The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building
and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas as to
cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence.
         (m)   Where structures combine residential and non-residential uses,
the uses shall be separated and provided with individual outside access, and
the uses shall not conflict in any manner.
      (2)   All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change
when the Planning Commission or City Council, upon investigation, finds that
the community safety, health, welfare and public betterment can be served as
well or better by modifying the conditions.
(Prior Code, § 155.70) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 613, passed 3-6-2002;
Ord. 618, passed 5-6-2003)
§ 155.066 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent competition with
business districts and to provide a means through the establishment of specific
standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted in
residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health, safety and general
welfare of the surrounding neighborhood or compromise the residential character
of the area. In addition, this section is intended to provide a mechanism
enabling the distinction between permitted home occupations and special or
customarily “more sensitive” home occupations, so that special home occupations
may be reviewed through a hearing process.
   (B)   Application. Subject to the non-conforming use provision of this
section, all occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the provisions
of this section. This section shall not be construed, however, to apply to home
occupations accessory to farming.
   (C)   Procedures and permits.
      (1)   Permitted home occupation. Any permitted home occupation, as
defined in this section, may operate without a specific permit.
      (2)   Special home occupation. Any home occupation which does not meet
the specific requirements for a permitted home occupation as defined in this
section shall require a special home occupation permit which shall be applied
for, reviewed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of §
155.065(C) of this chapter.
      (3)   Declaration of conditions. The City Council may impose such
conditions on the granting of a special home occupation permit as may be
necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this section.
      (4)   Effect of permit. A special home occupation permit may be issued
for a period of one year after which the permit may be reissued for periods of
up to three years each. Each application for permit renewal shall, however, be
processed in accordance with the provisions of §
155.065(C) of this chapter regarding conditional use permits; except that, no
public hearing is required on the permit renewal, unless deemed necessary by
the Planning Commission. However, if the Planning Commission deems a public
hearing necessary, notice of the permit renewal application must be provided to
all property owners of land within 350 feet of the boundary of the property in
question. Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall not
invalidate any proceedings as set forth within this section.
      (5)   Transferability. Permits are licenses which are personal to the
permittee and shall not run with the land, nor be transferable.
      (6)   Lapse of special home occupation permit by non-use. Whenever within
one year after granting a permit, the use as permitted by the permit shall not
have been initiated, then the permit shall become null and void unless a
petition for extension of time in which to complete the work has been granted
by the City Council, through recommendation by the Planning Commission. The
extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the City Planner at
least 30 days before the expiration of the original permit. The request for
extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to initiate the use.
The petition shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a recommendation
to the City Council.
      (7)   Reconsideration. Whenever an application for a permit has been
considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for a permit
affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the
City Council for at least six months from the date of its denial unless a
decision to reconsider such matter is made by not less than four-fifths vote of
the full City Council.
      (8)   Renewal of permits. An applicant shall not have a vested right to a
permit renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. In applying for
and accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees that his or her monetary
investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized over the life of the
permit and that the permit renewal will not be needed to amortize the
investment. Each application for the renewal of a permit will be considered de
novo without taking into consideration that a previous permit has been granted.
The previous granting or renewal of a permit shall not constitute a precedent
or basis for the renewal of a permit.
   (D)   Requirement, general provisions. All home occupations shall comply
with the following general provisions and according to definition, the
applicable requirement provisions.
      (1)   General provisions.
         (a)   No home occupation shall produce light glare, noise, odor or
vibration that in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby
property.
         (b)   No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will
create electrical interference to surrounding properties.
         (c)   Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the residential use of the premises, should not change the residential
character thereof and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the
surrounding residential uses.
         (d)   No home occupation shall require internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in
dwellings, except where required to comply with local and state fire and police
recommendations.
         (e)   There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials
used in the home occupation, except personal automobiles used in the home
occupation may be parked on the site.
         (f)   The home occupation shall meet all applicable Fire and Building
Codes.
         (g)   All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the
city’s Nuisance Ordinance.
         (h)   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the occupation is contained entirely within the
principal building and will not require any on-street parking facilities. The
City Council shall have the authority to further restrict the hours of
operation as necessary to meet the purpose of this section.
      (2)   Requirements, permitted home occupations.
         (a)   No person other than those who customarily reside on the
premises shall be employed.
         (b)   All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely
within the principal dwelling and may not be conducted in accessory buildings
or attached garage.
         (c)   Permitted home occupations shall not create a parking demand in
excess of that which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no
vehicle is parked closer than 15 feet from the curb line or edge of paved
surface.
         (d)   Permitted home occupations include and are limited to: home
offices; art studio; dressmaking; secretarial services; professional offices;
teaching with musical dancing and other instructions which consist of no more
than one pupil at a time; and similar uses.
         (e)   The home occupation shall not involve any of the following:
repair service or manufacturing which requires commercial-grade equipment or
equipment available only on a business- to-business basis; teaching which
customarily consists of more than one pupil at a time; over-the-counter sale of
merchandise produced off the premises, except for those brand name products
that are not marketed and sold in a wholesale or retail outlet.
      (3)   Requirements, special home occupation.
         (a)   No person other than a resident shall conduct the home
occupation, except where the applicant can satisfactorily prove unusual or
unique conditions or need for non-resident assistance and that this exception
would not compromise the intent of this section.
         (b)   Examples of special home occupations include: barber and beauty
services; day care-group nursery; photography studio; group lessons; saw
sharpening; small appliances and small engine repair; and the like.
         (c)   The special home occupation may involve any of the following:
stock-in-trade incidental to the performance of the service, repair service or
manufacturing which requires equipment other than customarily found in a home,
the teaching with musical, dancing and other instruction of more than one pupil
at a time.
         (d)   Special home occupations may be allowed to accommodate their
parking demand through utilization of on-street parking. In such cases where
on-street parking facilities are necessary, however, the City Council shall
maintain the right to establish the maximum number of on-street spaces
permitted and increase or decrease that maximum number when and where changing
conditions require additional review.
   (E)   Non-conforming use. Existing home occupations lawfully existing on the
effective date hereof may continue as non-conforming uses. They shall, however,
be required to obtain permits for their continued operation. Any existing home
occupation that is discontinued for a period of more than 30 days, or is in
violation of the provisions under which it was initially established, shall be
brought into conformity with the provisions of this section.
   (F)   Inspection. The city hereby reserves the right upon issuing any home
occupation permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being
conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section or any
conditions additionally imposed.
(Prior Code, § 155.71) (Ord. 600, passed 6-6-2000; Ord. 630, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 155.067 INTERIM USES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses
is:
      (1)   To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent
location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction;
      (2)   To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City
Council, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed with the respective district; and
      (3)   To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change
to an area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan; provided
that, the use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is
in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing
uses and development.
   (B)   Procedure. Uses defined as interim uses which do not presently exist
within a respective zoning district shall be processed according to the
standards and procedures for a conditional use permit as established in §
155.065(C) of this chapter.
   (C)   General standards. An interim use shall comply with the following:
      (1)   Meet the standards of a conditional use permit set forth in §
155.065 of this chapter;
      (2)   The use is allowed as a conditional use in the respective zoning
district;
      (3)   The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified
with certainty; and
      (4)   The use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on the
public.
   (D)   Termination. An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of
the following events, whichever occurs first:
      (1)   The date stated in the permit;
      (2)   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued;
      (3)   Upon change in the city’s zoning regulations which renders the use
non-conforming; and
      (4)   The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located
to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning
district.
   (E)   Certification of taxes paid. Prior to approving an application for an
interim use permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the city that
there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest or city
utility fees due upon the parcel or land to which the interim use permit
application relates.
(Prior Code, § 155.72) (Ord. 601, passed 6-6-2000)
§ 155.068 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (A)   Appeals. Appeals from the ruling of the Zoning Administrator
concerning the enforcement and administration of the provisions of this chapter
may be made by any affected person in accordance with the requirements of §
155.069 of this chapter.
   (B)   Variances. When a request is made for a variance from the literal
provisions of this chapter in instances where their strict enforcement would
cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property
under consideration, the Planning Commission will hear such requests for such
variances only when it is demonstrated that such actions will be in keeping
with the spirit and intent of the chapter. The Planning Commission may not
permit as a variance any use that is not permitted under this chapter for
property in the zone where the affected person’s land is located. The Planning
Commission may impose conditions in the granting of variances to insure
compliance and to protect adjacent properties. The fee for a variance
application is set by City Council and is to be paid to the City Clerk-
Administrator before city staff time is utilized and the applications
processed.
   (C)   Site plan. All applications for appeals and/or variances shall be
accompanied by a site plan in accordance with city procedures.
(Prior Code, § 155.73) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.069 BUILDING PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to proceed with the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement,
demolition or removal of any building or part thereof without first obtaining a
building permit.
   (B)   Requests for a building permit shall be made to the city’s Clerk-
Administrator on an application in accordance with adopted policies. Each
application for a permit to construct or alter a building shall be accompanied
by a plan drawn to scale showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon and
the size and location of the building and accessory buildings to be erected.
Applications for any kind of building permit shall contain such other
information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of the
chapter. The fee for a building permit shall be based on the current state
building valuation data. Building permit fees are collected and deposited in
the city’s General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 155.74) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.070 ENFORCEMENT BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
the provisions of this chapter and shall perform the following duties:
   (A)   Review and issue all applications pertaining to use of land, building
or structures, and forward request for conditional use permits, variances or
rezoning to the Planning Commission, or approve same when the application
conforms with the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Keep a record of all non-conforming uses;
   (C)   Periodically inspect buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. In regard to performance
standards, the Zoning Administrator may require the services of a testing
laboratory to determine compliance. The cost of employing the laboratory shall
be paid for by the owner if a violation of this chapter is established;
   (D)   Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision
of this chapter, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it;
   (E)   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures
or take any action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions;
   (F)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including all
maps, amendments, conditional uses and variations; and
   (G)   Maintain a current file of all applications and building permits, all
certificates of occupancy and all copies of notices of violation,
discontinuance or removal for such time as necessary to ensure a continuance,
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and, on request, provide
information to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in any
specific property.
(Prior Code, § 155.75) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.071 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS; FEES; APPEALS.
   (A)   Governing body. A Board of Adjustments and Appeals is hereby
established as specified below.
   (B)   Appointment. The Planning Commission is hereby constituted and
established as the Board of Adjustments and Appeals.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Board of Adjust- ment and Appeals shall have
the power and duties of hearing and deciding appeals or requests on the
following cases:
      (1)   Appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the
enforcement of this chapter;
      (2)   Requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter
in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because
of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration;
      (3)   Appeals from any action of the building inspector in denying or
granting a building permit; and
      (4)   In recommending a variance to the City Council, the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals may impose conditions to ensure compliance and to
protect adjacent properties. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals may not
recommend as a variance any use that is not permitted under this chapter for
the property in the zone where the affected person’
   (D)   Fees. Before any city staff time is expended on a variance request, a
fee of $75 must be paid to the city by the applicant. Within 60 days after
filing of a request for a variance or an appeal from an administrative order or
determination, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall set a date for hearing
thereon and shall hear such persons as wish to be heard, either in person or by
agent or attorney. Notices of any hearing shall be mailed not less than ten
days before the date of the hearing to the person or persons who file in appeal
or request, and in case of a request from a variance to each owner of property
situated wholly or partially within 350 feet of the property to which the
variance relates insofar as the names and addresses of the owners can be
determined by the Planning Commission from records available. Within a
responsible time after the hearing the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall
make its recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall make the
final decision.
   (E)   Records of proceedings. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall
provide for a record of its proceedings, which shall include the minutes of its
meetings, its findings, and the action taken on each matter heard by it,
including its recommendation. The city’s Clerk-Administrator shall maintain a
permanent record of the disposition of all appeals to it from decisions of the
Board of Adjustments and Appeals.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any
decision of the City Council may appeal to the District Court of the county by
filing a petition setting forth that the decision is illegal in whole or in
part, specifying the grounds of such illegality and by filing a copy of the
notice of appeals with the city’s Clerk-Administrator with original petition,
showing proof of filing with the city’s Clerk-Administrator, must be filed
within 30 days after filing, with or of the decision appealed from in the
office of the city’s Clerk-Administrator. The case shall be heard and
determined by court without a jury.
   (G)   Other powers. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have such
other additional powers as are given to Board of Adjustments and Appeals by
state law.
(Prior Code, § 155.76) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 618, passed 5-6-2003)
§ 155.072 AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING CHAPTER.
   (A)   Initiation. An amendment to this chapter may be initiated by the City
Council, the Planning Commission or by petition of affected property owners,
contingent on the following requirements.
      (1)   An amendment petitioned by affected property owners shall be
submitted first to the Zoning Administrator who shall make the initial
determination as to whether the amendment would conform to this chapter and to
state law, other code provisions, regulations and plans adopted by the City
Council. If a proposed amendment is found to meet the foregoing requirements
and before further action is taken by the Planning Commission and the City
Council, the petitioner shall pay a fee of $75 to the city.
      (2)   An amendment not initiated by the Planning Commission shall be
referred to the Planning Commission for study and report and may not be acted
upon by the City Council until it has received the recommendation of the
Planning Commission on the proposed amendment or until 60 days have elapsed
from the date of reference of the amendment without a report by the Planning
Commission.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall hold public hearings on all proposed
amendments to the zoning ordinance before submitting their recommendations to
the City Council.
   (B)   Quorum. After meeting the above requirements, this chapter may be
amended by the City Council in the same manner as other chapters except that
zoning amendments shall require the affirmative vote of the majority of all
members of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 155.77) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day that the violation is permitted to
exist constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 155.99) (Ord. 560, passed 6-6-1978)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   PUBLIC WAYS
      
IV.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
      
V.   VARIANCES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
             Extending the city boundaries to include the northwest quarter of the
      1-2-   northeast quarter of Section 25, Township 41, Range 21, and all that
17    1909   part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section
             25 lying east of the right-of- way of the Northern Pacific Railway
             Company
508   4-8-   Annexing part of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
      1968   Section 25, Township 41, Range 21
513   5-5-   Annexing certain parts of Section 25, Township 41, Range 21
      1970
515A  12-1-  Annexing a portion of Auditor’s Lot 3, Section 25, Township 41, Range
      1970   21
531   8-5-   Annexing a portion of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
      1980   Section 25, Township 41, Range 21
533   11-4-  Annexing a portion of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section
      1980   30, Township 41, Range 20
544   8-7-   Annexing a portion of the south half of the northeast quarter of the
      1984   northeast quarter of Section 25, Township 41, Range 21
             Annexing a portion of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 41,
             Range 21; a portion of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter
550   5-3-   of Section 25, Township 41, Range 21; a portion of the southwest
      1988   quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 30, Township 41, Range 20;
             and a portion of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
             Section 30, Township 41, Range 20
      6-7-   Annexing a portion of the northwest quarter of Section 30, Township 41,
551   1988   Range 20, and a portion of the northeast quarter of Section 25,
             Township 41, Range 21
552   6-7-   Annexing a portion of the northeast quarter of Section 25, Township 41,
      1988   Range 21
554   3-7-   Annexing the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 23,
      1989   Township 41, Range 21
565   9-1-   Annexing the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 19, Township
      1992   41, Range 20
      10-5-  Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
566   1993   owned by JVN Investors (Fred Olander, Agent) and Northern Natural Gas
             and abutting the city
569A  4-5-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1994   owned by Grand Casino Management abutting the city
569B  4-5-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1994   owned by Grand Casino Management abutting the city
569C  4-5-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1994   owned by Grand Casino Management abutting the city
569D  4-5-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1994   owned by Grand Casino Management abutting the city
569E  5-3-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1994   owned by Grand Casino Management abutting the city
569F  5-3-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1994   owned by Grand Casino Management abutting the city
569G  5-3-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1994   owned by Grand Casino Management abutting the city
569H  6-27-  Amending Ord. 569- D extending the corporate limits of the city to
      1994   include certain land owned by Grand Casino Management abutting the city
573   8-1-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1995   owned by Fred Olander/JVN Investors abutting the city
577   4-2-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1996   owned by Mickey Nilsen and Ken Smith abutting the city
      4-2-   Amending Ord. 577 to correct the legal description that extends the
577A  1996   corporate limits of the city to include certain land owned by Mickey
             Nilsen and Ken Smith abutting the city
      5-7-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain
578   1996   unincorporated territory completely surrounded by land with the city
             limits or owned by the city and abutting thereon
585   2-4-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1997   owned by American Dream Development, Inc., abutting the city
586   2-4-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      1997   owned by St. Paul Lutheran Church abutting the city
598   3-6-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      2001   owned by the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe Indians
609   3-6-   Extending the corporate limits of the city to include certain land
      2001   owned by the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe Indians
      1-2-   Annexing property located at 609 Fire Monument Road together with all
611   2002   public rights-of-way, easements and roads within, abutting and adjacent
             to this parcel located in Barry Township
      8-8-   Annexing property described as the north 1,633.23 feet of the west half
621   2003   of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 41, Range 21, lying
             west of Interstate Highway No. 35, Pine County, Minnesota
625   2-3-   Annexing property described as the northwest quarter of the southeast
      2004   quarter of Section 23, T-41N, R-21W, Pine County, Minnesota
      11-1-  Annexing property described as part of the southeast quarter of the
634   2005   southeast quarter of Section 20, Township 41, Range 20, Pine County,
             Minnesota
      12-6-  Annexing property described as part of the north 60 acres of the south
635   2005   half of the northeast quarter of Section 29, Township 41, Range 20,
             Pine County, Minnesota
             Annexing property described as the east half of the southeast quarter
638   2-7-   of the southwest quarter and the west half of the southwest quarter of
      2006   the southeast quarter of Section 23, Township 41, Range 21, Pine
             County, Minnesota
             Annexing property described as the east half of the southwest quarter
639   2-7-   of the southeast quarter and the west half of the southeast quarter of
      2006   the southeast quarter of Section 23, Township 41, Range 21, Pine
             County, Minnesota
      12-5-  Annexing property described as the part of the south half of the
645   2006   southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 30, Township 41,
             Range 20, Pine County, Minnesota
5-07  4-3-   Annexing property owned by Dale and Marlene Gray and Jerry Schultz
      2007   abutting Barry Township
2-08  4-1-   Annexing property owned by Dale and Marlene Gray and Jerry Schultz
      2008   which consists of 33.05 acres
4-    12-1-  Annexing property located in the Town of Barry, Pine County, abutting
2009  2009   the City of Hinckley on its north boundary, consisting of a total of
             55.9 acres
02-   3-11-  Annexing property in the Town of Barry, Pine County, consisting of a
2014  2014   total of 120 acres
01-   3-14-  Annexing property in the Town of Barry, Pine County, consisting of a
2023  223    total of 9 acres
            
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
16    7-11-  Granting to J.J. Colburn the right to put in and maintain in the
      1908   street and public grounds electric lights, poles and wires
      5-14-  Granting permission to the Eastern Minnesota Power Company to erect
20    1912   and maintain poles, masts, wires and other fixtures for the purpose
             of furnishing light, powers and heat by means of electricity
22    7-7-   Granting to Hinckley Electric Company the right to put in and
      1913   maintain electric light poles and wires through 5-8-1928
      11-20- Granting to Tri-State Telephone and Telegraph Company the right to
24    1914   construct, maintain and operate telephone lines for a period of 25
             years
      5-10-  Granting to the Farmers’ Cooperative Telephone Company the right to
25    1915   construct, maintain and operate telephone lines and to maintain a
             telephone exchange for a period of 25 years
      9-7-   Granting to the Standard Oil Company permission to construct and
26    1916   maintain warehouses, tanks and other buildings necessary to meet the
             requirements of its business at this point for a period of ten years
46    - -    Granting to Minnesota Power and Light Company the right to construct
      1928   and maintain an electric distribution system
51    3-1-   Granting to Minnesota Power and Light Company the right to construct
      1938   and maintain an electric distribution system for a period of 20 years
      9-27-  Granting to Iron Ranges Natural Gas Company the right to manufacture,
56    1950   import, transport, sell and distribute gas for heating, illuminating
             and other purposes for a period of 22 years
             Granting to Northern Natural Gas Company (operating as Peoples
57    3-2-   Natural Gas) a non-exclusive authority to erect and maintain a gas
      1954   plant and/or gas system for the transmission, distribution and sale
             of natural gas for all uses for a period of 25 years
      6-6-   Granting to Minnesota Power and Light Company the right to construct
517   1972   and maintain an electric distribution and transmission system for a
             period of 20 years
             Granting to Northern Natural Gas Company (operating as Peoples
529   10-3-  Natural Gas) a non-exclusive authority to erect and maintain a gas
      1978   plant and/or gas system for the transmission, distribution and sale
             of natural gas for all uses for a period of 25 years
      6-5-   Creating and awarding a cable communications franchise to Savage
541   1984   Communications, d/b/a Hinckley Cable TV, for an initial period of 15
             years
      10-3-  Granting to Minnesota Power and Light Company the right to construct
557   1989   and maintain an electric distribution and transmission system for a
             period of 20 years
596   11-2-  Creating and awarding a cable communications franchise to Savage
      1999   Communications, d/b/a Hinckley Cable TV, for a period of 15 years
622   8-5-   Granting a natural gas franchise to Aquila, Inc., d/b/a Aquila
      2003   Networks, a Delaware corporation, for a period of 25 years
3-    10-6-  Granting to Minnesota Power a franchise to construct and maintain an
2009  2009   electric distribution and/or transmission system for a period of 20
             years
02-   7-8-   Granting a cable communications franchise to Savage Communications,
2025  2025   d/b/a SCI Broadband, for a period of 15 years
            
 
TABLE III: PUBLIC WAYS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
29            6-12-1919   Laying out and opening an alley in Block 124 from
                          East First Avenue to East Second Avenue
45            1-3-1928    Laying out and opting an alley in Block 116 from East
                          First Avenue to East Second Avenue
                         
 
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
             Changing the classification of the northwest quarter of the southwest
532   9-2-   quarter east of the right-of- way of Interstate Highway #35, Section 19,
      1980   Township 41, Range 20, from an agricultural district to an industrial
             district
      8-2-   Changing the classification of part of the east half of the east half of
539   1983   the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 25, Township 41,
             Range 21, from R-1 One- Family to R-B Residential Business
      10-4-  Changing the classification of the north half of the east half of the west
540   1983   half of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 25,
             Township 41, Range 21, from R-1 One-Family to R-B Residential Business
555   3-7-   Establishing the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 23,
      1989   Township 41, Range 21, as annexed in Ord. 554, as an R-3 Zone
556   3-7-   Establishing the land annexed in Ord. 550, 551 and 552 as general business
      1989   zones
579   5-7-   Changing the classification of parcel number 40.0135.000 from Residential
      1996   Business to General Business
580   6-4-   Changing the classification of parcel number 40.0005.001 from Residential
      1996   One- Family (R-1) to General Business (GB)
587   11-4-  Changing the classification of Lots 1 through 5 of the Folsum Addition from
      1997   Public/Semi- Public (P/SP) to Residential Business (RB)
588   12-2-  Changing the classification of Lots 43 and 45 through 49 of the Auditor’s
      1997   Outlots from Agricultural (A) to Residential Single- Family (R-1)
589   10-7-  Changing the classification of Lots 11, 12, 13 and 14 of Block 141 from
      1997   Public/Semi-Public (P/SP) to Multi- Family Residential (R-3)
607   3-6-   Changing the classification of the property located at 608 Fire Monument
      2001   Road from One- Family Dwelling (R- 1) to General Business District (GB)
608   3-6-   Changing the classification of properties located at 402 and 404 Old
      2001   Highway 61 South from Industrial (I) to General Business District (GB)
             Changing the classification of the property owned by the First Lutheran
624-A 1-6-   Church from Agricultural District to General Business District (GB) and
      2004   Public/Semi-Public District for the property located northeast of the
             intersection of Fire Monument Road (Hwy. 48) and Morris Avenue (CSAH 140)
627   5-4-   Changing the classification of the property identified by PID 40.5321.000
      2004   from One-Family Dwelling District (R- 1) to General Business District (GB)
      5-4-   Changing the classification of the property identified by PID 40.5381.000
628   2004   from One-Family Dwelling District (R- 1) to Residential Business District
             (RB)
632   8-2-   Changing the classification of the property identified by PID 40.0051.000
      2005   from One-Family Dwelling District (R- 1) to General Business District (GB)
3-    2-6-   Changing the classification of the property described as Fairway Pines from
2007  2007   General Business District (GB) and One-Family Dwelling District (R-1) to
             Planned Unit Development (PUD)
             Changing the classification of portions of the south 1,047.75 feet of: (a)
             the southwest and southeast quarters of the southeast quarter of Section
7-    7-3-   19, Township 41, Range 20; and (b) the southwest and southeast quarters of
2007  2007   the southwest quarter of Section 20, Township 41, Range 20; a total of
             118.19 acres, from One-Family Dwelling (R-1) to General Business District
             (GB)
03-   8-11-  Changing the zoning of property identified by PID 40.5322.000 and
2015  2015   40.5323.000 from One-Family Dwelling District (R-1) to General Business
             District (GBD)
02-   5-3-   Designating a 5.36- acre portion of property identified by PID 40.5650.000
2016  2016   as R-3 Multiple Dwelling District
06-   11-15- Changing the zoning of property ientified by PID 40.5649.000 frm General
2022  2016   Business District (GBD) to Multiple Dwelling District (R-3)
             Changing all portions of the property identified by PID 40.0154.007,
01-   5-13-  40.0154.008 and 40.0154.009 from General Business District (GBD) to
2025  2025   Multiple Dwelling District (R-3)
              
            
 
TABLE V: VARIANCES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Granting a variance from the cul-de-sac length
Res. 9-04     - -2004     requirement to allow a cul-de-sac of approximately
                          678 feet, and from the roadway alignment requirements
                          to allow a 33-foot right-of-way to access the site
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Section Code Section
M.S. Section              Code Section
12.25                     37.01,
                          37.04
12.37                     37.06
Ch. 13                    34.02,
                          110.01
Ch. 13D                   33.05
14.57 through 14.69       112.21
14.57 to 14.70            111.36,
                          111.99
18G.13                    93.02,
                          93.04
Ch. 80A                   112.15
Ch. 84                    72.32
84.81 through 84.88       72.01
84.872                    72.02
Ch. 103F                  152.001
Ch. 103G                  152.101
115.01(8)                 51.001
115.07                    51.001
145A.05                   130.03
157.16                    111.03
157.16, subd. 3(d)        111.03
168B.011, subd. 3         94.07
                          70.01,
Ch. 169                   72.01,
                          72.32
169.041                   71.05
169.345                   71.06
Ch. 216D                  91.14
216D.01 through 216D.09   91.14
                          91.11,
237.162                   91.19,
                          91.25
237.163                   91.19,
                          91.25
Ch. 260B                  130.99
Ch. 278                   112.21
300.06                    91.13
325F.73 through 325F.744  112.03
325F.731 through 325F.744 112.17
325F.733                  112.15
325F.734 through 325F.742 112.15
Ch. 325J                  112.03
326B.101 to 325B.194      150.01
326B.121                  150.01
326B.133                  150.01
326B.148                  38.01,
                          150.01
326B.151                  38.01
327.31 to 327.35          155.008
Ch. 329                   113.03
Ch. 333                   112.17
                          111.01,
                          111.02,
Ch. 340A                  111.20,
                          111.23,
                          111.36,
                          111.99
340A.101                  111.03,
                          111.20
340A.301, subd. 6(a)      111.22
340A.301, subd. 6(c)      111.22
340A.301, subd. 6(i)      111.22
340A.301, subd. 6(j)      111.22
340A.301, subd. 7         111.22
340A.301, subd. 7(b)      111.22
340A.301, subd. 7(d)      111.22
340A.4011, subd. 1        111.22
340A.404, subd. 1(b)      111.22
340A.404, subd. 1(4)      111.55
340A.404, subd. 4(a)      111.22
340A.404, subd. 4(b)      111.22
340A.408                  111.23
340A.408, subd. 2(b)      111.22
340A.408, subd. 3         111.22
340A.408, subd. 5         111.23
340A.409                  111.25,
                          111.54
340A.413                  111.55
340A.413, subd. 3         111.20
340A.414                  111.35
340A.414, subd. 6         111.22
340A.503, subd. 6         130.03
340A.504                  111.33
340A.504, subd. 3         111.22
340A.504, subd. 3(b)      111.22
340A.509                  111.02
340A.801                  111.25
342.01                    130.04
347.50 to 347.565         90.40
347.51                    90.40
347.515                   90.40
347.52                    90.40
347.52(a)                 90.40
347.52(c)                 90.40
349.11 through 349.61     112.46
349A.01 through 349A.15   112.46
364.03(3)                 112.16
364.06                    34.02,
                          110.01
364.09                    34.02,
                          110.01
366.011                   32.12
366.012                   32.12
412.231                   130.03
412.501 through 412.531   33.01,
                          33.04
412.521(2)                33.07
415.01                    32.12
415.11                    30.01
Ch. 429                   10.99,
                          91.24
429.01, subd. 2           10.98
429.061                   94.10
429.101                   93.07,
                          94.10
437.02                    113.03
Ch. 462                   91.24,
                          152.001
462.354(1)                33.20
462.357                   114.01
462.358                   154.02,
                          154.48
462.3593                  155.009
462.351 through 462.364   33.20,
                          33.24
462.351 through 462.365   154.15,
                          155.007
463.21                    150.44
463.151                   150.44
463.251                   150.40,
                          150.44
463.251, subd. 2          150.41
463.251, subd. 3          150.41
463.251, subd. 4          150.43
469.190                   35.16,
                          35.26
471.6985                  111.53
471.924                   112.17
473.121(2)                112.17
Ch. 505                   155.050
505.03, subd. 1           155.050
505.08                    154.45
Ch. 515B                  155.047
582.031, subd. (b)        150.41
582.032, subd. 7          150.41
609.205(4)                90.40
609.226, subd. 1          90.40
626.87, subd. 1           34.02
626.862                   10.20
631.48                    10.99
                          
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2018 Code
Prior Code      2018 Code
30.01           30.01
31.01           31.01
32.01           32.01
32.02           32.02
32.03           32.03
32.04           32.04
32.05           32.05
32.06           32.06
32.07           32.07
32.08           32.08
32.09           32.09
32.10           32.10
32.11           32.11
32.12           32.12
33.01           33.01
33.02           33.02
33.03           33.03
33.04           33.04
33.05           33.05
33.06           33.06
33.07           33.07
33.20           33.20
33.21           33.21
33.22           33.22
33.23           33.23
33.24           33.24
33.35           33.35
33.36           33.36
33.37           33.37
34.01           34.01
34.15           34.02
35.01           35.01
35.10           35.15
35.11           35.16
35.12           35.17
35.13           35.18
35.14           35.19
35.15           35.20
35.16           35.21
35.17           35.22
35.18           35.23
35.19           35.24
35.20           35.25
35.21           35.26
35.99           35.99
36.01           36.01
38.01           38.01
50.01           50.01
50.02           50.02
50.03           50.03
50.04           50.04
50.05           50.05
50.06           50.06
50.07           50.07
50.08           50.08
50.09           50.09
50.25           50.20
50.26           50.21
50.27           50.22
50.28           50.23
50.29           50.24
50.30           50.25
50.31           50.26
50.32           50.27
50.33           50.28
50.34           50.29
50.35           50.30
50.50           50.45
50.51           50.46
50.52           50.47
50.53           50.48
50.54           50.49
50.70           50.60
50.71           50.61
50.72           50.62
50.73           50.63
50.74           50.64
51.001          51.001
51.002          51.002
51.003          51.003
51.004          51.004
51.005          51.005
51.015          51.020
51.016          51.021
51.017          51.022
51.018          51.023
51.019          51.024
51.055          51.050
51.056          51.051
51.057          51.052
51.058          51.053
51.059          51.054
51.060          51.055
51.061          51.056
51.062          51.057
51.063          51.058
51.064          51.059
51.080          51.070
51.081          51.071
51.082          51.072
51.083          51.073
51.084          51.074
51.085          51.075
51.086          51.076
51.087          51.077
51.088          51.078
51.089          51.079
51.090          51.080
51.091          51.081
51.092          51.082
51.093          51.083
51.094          51.084
51.110          51.095
51.111          51.096
51.112          51.097
51.113          51.098
51.114          51.099
51.115          51.100
51.116          51.101
51.117          51.102
51.118          51.102
51.130          51.115
51.131          51.116
51.132          51.117
51.133          51.118
51.999          51.999
70.01           70.01
70.02           70.02
70.99           70.99
91.01           91.01
90.01           90.01
90.02           90.02
90.03           90.03
90.04           90.04
90.05           90.05
90.06           90.06
90.07           90.07
90.08           90.08
90.09           90.09
90.10           90.10
90.11           90.11
90.12           90.12
90.13           90.13
90.25           90.25
90.26           90.26
90.27           90.27
90.28           90.28
90.99           90.99
91.01           91.01
91.02           91.02
91.03           91.03
91.04           91.03
91.60           91.50
91.61           91.51
91.62           91.52
91.63           91.53
91.64           91.54
91.65           91.55
91.66           91.56
91.99           91.99
92.01           92.01
92.99           92.99
93.01           93.01
93.02           93.02
93.03           93.03
93.04           93.04
93.05           93.05
93.06           93.06
93.07           93.07
93.08           93.08
93.09           93.09
93.10           93.10
93.11           93.11
93.12           93.12
110.01          110.01
112.01          112.01
112.02          112.02
112.03          112.03
112.15          112.15
112.16          112.16
112.17          112.17
112.18          112.18
112.19          112.19
112.20          112.20
112.21          112.21
112.35          112.35
112.36          112.36
112.37          112.37
112.38          112.38
112.39          112.39
112.40          112.40
112.41          112.41
112.42          112.42
112.43          112.43
112.44          112.44
112.45          112.45
112.46          112.46
112.47          112.47 
112.48          112.48
112.49          112.49
112.99          112.99
114.01          114.01
114.03          114.03
114.04          114.04
114.05          114.05
114.06          114.06
114.07          114.07
130.02          130.01
130.03          130.02
130.05          130.03,
                130.99
130.99          130.99
150.01          150.01
150.02          150.02
150.99          150.99
151.01          151.01
151.02          151.02
151.03          151.03
151.04          151.04
151.05          151.05
151.06          151.06
151.07          151.07
151.08          151.08
151.09          151.09
151.10          151.10
151.11          151.11
151.12          151.12
153.01          153.01
153.02          153.02
153.03          153.03
153.04          153.04
153.05          153.05
153.06          153.06
153.07          153.07
153.08          153.08
153.09          153.09
153.10          153.10
153.99          153.99
154.01          154.01
154.01          154.02
154.03          154.03
154.04          154.04
154.05          154.05
154.06          154.06
154.07          154.07
154.08          154.08
154.09          154.09
154.10          154.10
154.11          154.11
154.12          154.12
154.13          154.13
154.14          154.14
154.15          154.15
154.25          154.15
154.26          154.31
154.30          154.45
154.31          154.46
154.32          154.47
154.33          154.48
154.34          154.49
154.50          154.60
154.51          154.61
154.52          154.62
154.53          154.63
154.54          154.64
154.99          154.99
155.01          155.001
155.02          155.002
155.03          155.003
155.04          155.004
155.05          155.005
155.06          155.006
155.07          155.007
155.08          155.008
155.20          155.020
155.21          155.021
155.22          155.022
155.23          155.023
155.24          155.024
155.25          155.025
155.26          155.026
155.27          155.027
155.28          155.028
155.29          155.029
155.30          155.030
155.31          155.031
155.32          155.032
155.33          155.033
155.34          155.034
155.50          155.045
155.51          155.046
155.52          155.047
155.53          155.048
155.54          155.049
155.55          155.050
155.56          155.051
155.70          155.065
155.71          155.066
155.72          155.067
155.73          155.068
155.74          155.069
155.75          155.070
155.76          155.071
155.77          155.072
155.99          155.999
156.01          150.15
156.02          150.16
156.03          150.17
156.04          150.18
156.05          150.19
156.06          150.20
156.07          150.21
156.08          150.22
156.09          150.23
156.10          150.24
156.11          150.25
156.12          150.26
156.99          150.99
Ch. 156, App. A 150.27
                
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Description
9-04     - -2004     TSO Table V
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1        5-13-1895   130.01
8        6-5-1899    130.02
16       7-11-1908   TSO Table II
17       1-2-1909    TSO Table I
20       5-14-1912   TSO Table II
22       7-7-1913    TSO Table II
24       11-20-1914  TSO Table II
25       5-10-1915   TSO Table II
26       9-7-1916    TSO Table II
29       6-12-1919   TSO Table III
45       1-3-1928    TSO Table III
46       - -1928     TSO Table II
51       3-1-1938    TSO Table II
56       9-27-1950   TSO Table II
57       3-2-1954    TSO Table II
503      8-4-1964    36.01
505      3-7-1967    33.20—
                     33.24
508      4-8-1968    TSO Table I
513      5-5-1970    TSO Table I
514      9-2-1970    35.01
515A     12-1-1970   TSO Table I
517      6-6-1972    TSO Table II
526      4-5-1977    93.01—
                     93.09
                     154.01—
                     154.15,
                     154.45,
                     154.46,
-        6-6-1978    154.48,
                     154.49,
                     154.60—
                     154.64,
                     154.99
                     155.001—
                     155.006,
                     155.020—
560      6-6-1978    155.034,
                     155.065,
                     155.068—
                     155.072,
                     155.999
529      10-3-1978   TSO Table II
530      11-6-1979   93.10—
                     93.12
531      8-5-1980    TSO Table I
532      9-2-1980    TSO Table IV
533      11-4-1980   TSO Table I
536      4-7-1981    70.02,
                     70.99
539      8-2-1983    TSO Table IV
540      10-4-1983   TSO Table IV
541      6-5-1984    TSO Table II
544      8-7-1984    TSO Table I
550      5-3-1988    TSO Table I
551      6-7-1988    TSO Table I
552      6-7-1988    TSO Table I
553      12-6-1988   92.01,
                     92.99
554      3-7-1989    TSO Table I
555      3-7-1989    TSO Table IV
556      3-7-1989    TSO Table IV
557      10-3-1989   TSO Table II
561      2-5-1991    155.008,
                     155.027
563      8-6-1991    154.15,
                     155.007
565      9-1-1992    TSO Table I
566      10-5-1993   TSO Table I
568      12-7-1993   153.01
569A     4-5-1994    TSO Table I
569B     4-5-1994    TSO Table I
569C     4-5-1994    TSO Table I
569D     4-5-1994    TSO Table I
569E     5-3-1994    TSO Table I
569F     5-3-1994    TSO Table I
569G     5-3-1994    TSO Table I
569H     6-27-1994   TSO Table I
                     35.15—
571      6-6-1995    35.26,
                     35.99
572      7-5-1995    35.15
573      8-1-1995    TSO Table I
575      3-7-1996    155.027
576      4-2-1996    151.01—
                     151.12
577      4-2-1996    TSO Table I
577A     4-2-1996    TSO Table I
578      5-7-1996    TSO Table I
579      5-7-1996    TSO Table IV
580      6-4-1996    TSO Table IV
581      9-3-1996    130.03,
                     130.99
582      9-3-1996    154.61
                     112.01,
                     112.02,
                     112.15—
583      11-6-1996   112.21,
                     112.35—
                     112.49,
                     112.99
584      11-6-1996   35.26
585      2-4-1997    TSO Table I
586      2-4-1997    TSO Table I
                     154.14,
-        4-1-1997    155.006,
                     155.045—
                     155.051
589      10-7-1997   TSO Table IV
587      11-4-1997   TSO Table IV
588      12-2-1997   TSO Table IV
590      3-4-1998    33.01—
                     33.07
590A     4-7-1998    33.02,
                     33.05
591      7-7-1998    155.008
593      3-2-1999    114.01—
                     114.07
594      3-2-1999    150.01
                     90.01—
                     90.13,
595      6-1-1999    90.25—
                     90.28,
                     90.99
                     90.01—
                     90.13,
595      7-6-1999    90.25—
                     90.28,
                     90.99
596      11-2-1999   TSO Table II
-        4-6-2000    155.021
599      6-6-2000    155.024,
                     155.025
600      6-6-2000    155.066
601      6-6-2000    155.067
                     155.025,
602      6-6-2000    155.026,
                     155.030
603      9-5-2000    110.15—
                     110.20
604      9-5-2000    155.003,
                     155.023
605      12-7-2000   150.02,
                     150.99
598      3-6-2001    TSO Table I
607      3-6-2001    TSO Table IV
608      3-6-2001    TSO Table IV
609      3-6-2001    TSO Table I
                     154.15,
610      8-7-2001    154.31,
                     154.45
611      1-2-2002    TSO Table I
                     155.024—
                     155.027,
613      3-6-2002    155.029—
                     155.032,
                     155.065
614      10-22-2002  30.01
615      1-23-2003   38.01
                     155.028,
                     155.029,
618      5-6-2003    155.049,
                     155.065,
                     155.071
619      7-1-2003    150.01
622      8-5-2003    TSO Table II
621      8-8-2003    TSO Table I
623      9-2-2003    155.032
624      12-2-2003   32.12
624-A    1-6-2004    TSO Table IV
625      2-3-2004    TSO Table I
626      3-18-2004   38.01
627      5-4-2004    TSO Table IV
628      5-4-2004    TSO Table IV
629      8-3-2004    30.01
                     153.01—
                     153.08,
                     153.99,
                     155.024—
630      12-7-2004   155.026,
                     155.028,
                     155.029,
                     155.031,
                     155.032,
                     155.066
631      3-1-2005    33.02
632      8-2-2005    TSO Table IV
633      9-6-2005    150.02,
                     150.99
634      11-1-2005   TSO Table I
635      12-6-2005   TSO Table I
636      1-3-2006    32.12,
                     38.01
637      1-3-2006    38.01
638      2-7-2006    TSO Table I
639      2-7-2006    TSO Table I
                     91.50—
642      7-5-2006    91.56,
                     91.99
643      10-3-2006   30.01
645      12-5-2006   TSO Table I
2-2007   1-1-2007    32.12
1-2007   1-2-2007    38.01
3-2007   2-6-2007    TSO Table IV
5-07     4-3-2007    TSO Table I
6-2007   5-1-2007    50.25
7-2007   7-3-2007    TSO Table IV
                     153.01—
8-2007   7-3-2007    153.10,
                     153.99
                     150.15—
10-2007  10-2-2007   150.27,
                     150.99
1-2008   1-2-2008    38.01
2-08     4-1-2008    TSO Table I
4-2008   11-5-2008   34.02,
                     110.01
1-09     1-6-2009    38.01
3-2009   10-6-2009   TSO Table II
4-2009   12-1-2009   TSO Table I
1-2010   1-5-2010    38.01
5-2011   7-5-2011    32.12
2-2012   2-7-2012    33.21
                     152.001—
                     152.013,
                     152.025—
                     152.028,
                     152.040,
                     152.055—
03-2012  3-6-2012    152.057,
                     152.070—
                     152.072,
                     152.085—
                     152.087,
                     152.100—
                     152.102,
                     152.999
02-2014  3-11-2014   TSO Table I
02-2015  3-10-2015   51.035
03-2015  8-11-2015   TSO Table IV
                     94.01—
01-2016  4-8-2016    94.10,
                     94.99
02-2016  5-3-2016    155.026,
                     TSO Table IV
04-2016  7-12-2016   155.009
2-2017   1-10-2017   38.01
02-2017  2-14-2017   50.49
03-2017  2-14-2017   32.01
05-2017  4-11-2017   92.02
09-2017  8-8-2017    150.40—
                     150.44
1-2018   3-13-2018   38.01
02-2018  4-10-2018   91.10—
                     91.31
04-2018  - -2018     Adopting Ordinance
1-2019   2-1-2019    38.01
2-2019   5-14-2019   153.02,
                     153.06
                     72.01 -
                     72.06,
03-2019  6-11-2019   72.20,
                     72.30 -
                     72.32,
                     72.99
4-2019   6-11-2019   10.99
5-2019   12-10-2019  38.01
01-2021  12-8-2020   38.01
04-2021  12-14-2021  38.01
05-2021  1-11-2022   71.01—
                     71.06
01-2022  1-11-2022   71.01—
                     71.06
02-2022  4-12-2022   10.98
03-2022  5-10-2022   111.31
06-2022  11-15-2016  TSO Table IV
04-2022  8-16-2022   71.03
                     90.01,
05-2022  8-16-2022   90.50—
                     90.53
01-2023  3-14-2023   TSO Table I
03-2023  5-9-2023    50.47,
                     51.101
02-2023  5-10-2023   38.01
05-2023  8-8-2023    38.01
06-2023  9-12-2023   130.04
07-2023  11-14-2023  155.028,
                     155.029
08-2023  - -         38.01
01-2024  - -         38.01
01-2025  5-13-2025   TSO Table IV
02-2025  7-8-2025    TSO Table II
                    
 
