HOYT LAKES, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 218
CITY OF HOYT LAKES
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF HOYT LAKES,
MINNESOTA, AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING
CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE
OF ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES
WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the City of
Hoyt Lakes (City) to cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book;
and
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Hoyt Lakes, Minnesota Ordains:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and complied in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Hoyt Lakes." This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules
of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles: General Provisions, Administration, Public Works, Traffic
Code, General Regulations, Business Regulations, General Offenses, Land Usage,
Special Ordinances, Parallel References.
Section 3. All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the Code
of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part
in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of Ordinances.
All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this Code shall remain in
effect unless amended in this code or until an ordinance adopting a fee
schedule is adopted or amended.
Section 4. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a sufficient
publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously published in the
City's official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause a substantial
quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general distribution to
the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code of Ordinances to
the County Law Library or its designated depository. The official copy of this
Code of Ordinances shall be marked and kept in the office of the City Clerk.
Section 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of the
law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.
Section 6. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the
City's official Newspaper.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HOYT LAKES, MINNESOTA THIS 11TH DAY
OF MARCH 2019.
                           Chris J. Vreeland /s/
                           Chris J. Vreeland
                           Mayor
 
ATTEST: Rebecca J. Burich /s/
    Rebecca J. Burich
    City Clerk-Treasurer
 
Published in the Mesabi Daily Newspaper (legals) on March 15, 2019.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
 
   
10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
   
Appendix A:   Notice of code violation
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Hoyt Lakes City Code”, for which designation “Hoyt Lakes Code of Ordinances”,
“codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and
section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Hoyt Lakes, Minnesota.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The Hoyt Lakes City Code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. St. Louis County, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection. The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a copy
for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting the code
of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk- Treasurer shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk-Treasurer or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions
specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk-Treasurer and any city official or employee designated
by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may
with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or
resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk-Treasurer, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting
the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only
to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Clerk-Treasurer or any other authorized city officer
or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection
of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all
permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given
to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property,
stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Clerk-Treasurer to object to the termination before it occurs,
subject to appeal of the Clerk-Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code
and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a
majority of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
The resolution may not proscribe administrative penalties for traffic offenses
designated by M.S. § 169.999, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on
the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by resolution of
a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk-Treasurer or other
person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, in a
written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to the person
who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request
the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to
the City Clerk-Treasurer within 14 days of the notice of the violation. A
sample notice is contained in the Appendix to this chapter. In the sole
discretion of the person giving the notice of the alleged violation, the time
for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not requested by
the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition to the administrative
penalty, the person giving notice may request in the notice to the alleged
violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation resulting in the
alleged violation and may provide that if the alleged violator corrects the
situation resulting in the alleged violation within the time specified in the
notice, that the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due,
the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may request to
appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the
penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to
withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because
the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no
appeal from the decision of the Council.
   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating
the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its Attorney, may
bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance,
rather than requesting the payment of an administrative penalty, even if a
penalty for the particular violation has been established by Council
resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested
correction of the situation resulting in the violation is completed, no
criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of
this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
APPENDIX A
NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re: Alleged violation of section of the city code, relating to (give title of
section)
Date: (Date of notice)
    I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §                 
of the city code relating to
                                                                .
    The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in
the amount of $         for this violation.
    Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay
it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.
   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due
date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the
administrative penalty.
    As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by
                        (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.
    Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to
institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
    Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to
contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the
Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to
renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.
    If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal
proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any city
official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at
equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
    Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money
order to the City Clerk-Treasurer.
Signed:                                                               
   (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   [RESERVED]
      
33.   ELECTIONS
      
34.   FINANCES AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Salaries of City Council and Mayor
   
30.02   Regarding worker’s compensation coverage for elected officials
§ 30.01 SALARIES OF CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall receive a monthly salary of $350 per month.
   (B)   Each Council member shall receive a monthly salary of $250 per month.
   (C)   In addition, the Mayor and each Council member shall receive the sum
of $30 per properly called adjourned Council meeting or special Council meeting
actually attended by the Mayor or Council member.
   (D)   In addition, the Mayor and each Council member shall receive the sum
of $30 per meeting of any city board, city commission, city committee, training
session or other meetings, relating to city business, actually attended by the
Mayor or Council member.
   (E)   With respect to the additional salary provided by divisions (C) and
(D) above, the Mayor and each Council member shall submit to the City Clerk-
Treasurer, no later than the last business day of each calendar month, a
written statement setting forth the meetings attended during that calendar
month.
(Ord. 217, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 30.02 REGARDING WORKER’S COMPENSATION COVERAGE FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 176.011, subd. 9, clause 6, as it may be amended from
time to time, the members of the City Council, whether elected or appointed to
fill a vacancy, are hereby included in the coverage of the Minnesota Workers’
Compensation Act, being M.S. §§ 176.001 et seq.
(Ord. 107, passed 1-24-1989)
CHAPTER 31: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Golf Commission
   
31.01   Organization and appointment
   
31.02   Duties
   
31.03   Annual report
GOLF COMMISSION
§ 31.01 ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENT.
   The City Golf Commission shall consist of five voting members. The members
will be appointed for three-year terms by the Mayor with the consent and
approval of the City Council. Any vacancies shall be filled immediately for the
unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation and the Commission shall, at its first meeting of each year,
appoint a Chairperson and Secretary from its appointed members. A majority of
the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
Commission will meet no less than six times per year at a time and place
convenient to the members. Meetings will be at the call of its Chairperson who
will notify members, Council Liaison and the Golf Course Superintendent of the
meetings, unless, due to an emergency, a least 48 hours in advance. The
Chairperson will post notice of the meetings at the Municipal Building and will
use other means to inform the public of all meetings. The Secretary will record
minutes of all meetings and will ensure that the City Clerk-Treasurer and
Council Liaison receives a copy of all minutes after approval of the minutes by
the Commission.
(Ord. 170, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 31.02 DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have the authority to:
   (A)   Develop and assist in executing a long- and short-term plans;
   (B)   Promote an increase in the use of the golf course in conjunction with
the Golf Course Superintendent;
   (C)   Submit a recommendation for golf course service charges, i.e., cart
storage rates, green fees, season tickets, trail fees, club house use and the
like;
   (D)   Audit the City of Hoyt Lakes Golf Course Revenue Account and Expense
Account Reports monthly; and
   (E)   Recommend to the City Council candidates for the Golf Course
Superintendent and Club House Coordinator.
(Ord. 170, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 31.03 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Commission, in conjunction with the Golf Course Superintendent and the
Clubhouse Coordinator, shall by February 1 of each year present to the City
Council an annual report on compliance with the long- and short-term plans.
(Ord. 170, passed 10-26-2004)
CHAPTER 32: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 33: ELECTIONS
Section
Elections
   
33.01   Date of election
   
33.02   Extension of terms of Council members
   
33.03   Terms and transition
Voter Registration System
   
33.15   Registration system adopted
   
33.16   Voters must be registered
   
33.17   Clerk-Treasurer is Commissioner of Registration
ELECTIONS
§ 33.01 DATE OF ELECTION.
   The regular city election shall be held biennially on the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in November in every even-numbered year beginning with
the 1974 election.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-27-1974)
§ 33.02 EXTENSION OF TERMS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The terms of the Mayor and the Council member whose current terms will
expire on the first business day of January, 1976, are extended to the first
business day of January, 1977, and those offices shall be filled at the 1976
city election.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-27-1974)
§ 33.03 TERMS AND TRANSITION.
   Two Council members shall be elected for four-year terms at each biennial
election commencing in 1978. One Council member shall be elected for a four-
year term at the 1974 city election. Of the three Council members to be elected
at the 1976 election, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes
shall serve for terms of four years and the one receiving the third highest
number of votes shall serve for a term of two years. The Mayor shall be elected
for a two-year term at each election commencing in 1976.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-27-1974)
VOTER REGISTRATION SYSTEM
§ 33.15 REGISTRATION SYSTEM ADOPTED.
   The system for the permanent registration of voters provided for by M.S.
Chapter 201, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted for the
city. The judges of election in any election district in this city shall not
receive the vote of any person whose name is not registered in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-13-1971)
§ 33.16 VOTERS MUST BE REGISTERED.
   No person shall be permitted to vote at any election in the city unless he
or she is registered as provided by Minnesota Statutes.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-13-1971)
§ 33.17 CLERK-TREASURER IS COMMISSIONER OF REGISTRATION.
   The Clerk-Treasurer of the city is, in addition to his or her other duties,
hereby constituted the Commissioner of Registration of the election districts
located in the city. He or she shall have complete charge of the registration
of all voters in the city, and shall discharge his or her duties in accordance
with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 201, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-13-1971)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCES AND TAXATION
Section
Lodging Tax
   
34.01   Recitals
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Imposition of tax
   
34.04   Collections
   
34.05   Exemptions
   
34.06   Advertising no tax
   
34.07   Payment and returns
   
34.08   Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands
   
34.09   Refunds
   
34.10   Failure to file a return
   
34.11   Administration of tax
   
34.12   Examine records
   
34.13   Violations
   
34.14   Use of proceeds
   
34.15   Appeals
 
   
34.99   Penalty
LODGING TAX
§ 34.01 RECITALS.
   (A)   The Minnesota Legislature has authorized the imposition of a tax upon
lodging at a hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or other use of space
by a transient.
   (B)   The City Council finds that the imposition of a tax would provide
funding for a convention and tourism bureau to promote the city as a tourist
and convention center.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel,
campgrounds or rooming house except where lodging shall be for continuous
period of 30 days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishings of rooms by
religious, educational or non-profit organizations shall not constitute LODGING
for purposes of this subchapter.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Hoyt Lakes.
   OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent or
employee of that person.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or any other
combination of individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision
of this subchapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, association or partnership, shall mean the officers, or partners
thereof as the case may be.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether
paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services
rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge
itself.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The person or entity selected by the City Council to
perform Tax Administrator duties.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator
for providing lodging to any person after the adoption of this subchapter. The
tax shall be stated and charged separately and shall be collected by the
operator from lodger. The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by
the operator to the municipality.
   (B)   In no case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator
exceed the amount of tax which the operator is authorized and required by this
subchapter to collect from a lodger.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.04 COLLECTIONS.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this subchapter at the time
the rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by
the operator for the municipality. The amount of tax shall be separately stated
from the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall
receive a receipt of payment from the operator.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it
is beyond the power of the municipality to tax. No exemption shall be granted
except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and a claim
shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the
Tax Administrator. All claims shall be forwarded to the Tax Administrator when
the returns and collections are submitted as required by this subchapter.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.06 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than $0.01 shall be
considered an additional cent.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.07 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this subchapter shall be paid by the operator to
the Tax Administrator monthly not later than 15 days after the end of the month
in which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall
submit a return upon the forms and containing information as the Tax
Administrator may require.
   (B)   The return shall contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return;
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of his or her
agent duly authorized in writing;
      (4)   The period covered by the return; and
      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging
tax.
   (C)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this subchapter previously
paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for which became
uncollectible during the reporting period, but only in proportion to the
portion of the consideration which became uncollectible.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.08 EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
   The Tax Administrator shall, after return is filed, examine the same and
make any investigation or examination of records and accounts of the person
making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax
computed on the basis of the examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the
tax due is found to be greater than that paid, the excess shall be paid to the
Tax Administrator ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either
personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If
the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be
refunded to the person who paid the tax to the Tax Administrator ten days after
determination of the refund.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.09 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the Tax Administrator for a refund of taxes paid for
a prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period,
provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within
one year after the tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the
return, whichever period is the longer. The Tax Administrator shall examine the
claim and written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in
part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to the person at the
address stated upon the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part,
the Tax Administrator shall credit the amount of the allowance against any
taxes due under this subchapter from the claimant and the balance of the
allowance, if any, shall be paid by the Tax Administrator to the claimant.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.10 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If any operator required by this subchapter to file a return shall
fail to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or
otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon
written notice and demand, file the return or corrected return within five days
of receipt of written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the
basis thereof. If the person shall fail to file the return or corrected return,
the Tax Administrator shall make a return or corrected return, for the person
from the knowledge and information as the Tax Administrator can obtain, and
assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments therefore made
on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by the return) shall be
paid upon within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for the
payment. Any return or assessment made by the Tax Administrator shall be prima
facie correct and valid, and the person shall have the burden of establishing
its incorrectness or invalidity in any action of proceeding in respect thereto.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this subchapter, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid,
the prosecuting attorney for the municipality may institute legal action as may
be necessary to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, the costs and
disbursements of any action.
   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may grant an
operator one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make
payment of taxes as required by this subchapter provided that interest during
the period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per
annum.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.11 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The Tax Administrator shall administer and enforce the assessment and
collection of the taxes imposed by this subchapter. The Tax Administrator shall
cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents required
by this subchapter and shall distribute the same throughout the city and
furnish them on application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not
relieve any person from any obligation required of him or her under this
subchapter.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.12 EXAMINE RECORDS.
   The Tax Administrator and those persons acting on behalf of the Tax
Administrator authorized in writing by the Tax Administrator or the
municipality may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order
to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax as provided in this subchapter. Every operator is directed
and required to give to the person authorized to examine the books, papers and
records, the means, facilities and opportunity for the examinations and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.13 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
subchapter, or who shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment,
or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest
imposed by this subchapter after written demand for the payment or who shall
refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agents or
employees to examine the books, records and papers under his or her control, or
who shall willfully make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.14 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   Five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant
to this subchapter shall be paid to the Tax Administrator for costs of
collection. Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of
taxes pursuant to this subchapter shall be used in accordance with M.S. §
469.190, as the same may be amended from time to time, to provide funding to
Iron Trail Convention and Visitors Bureau, or any other tourist or convention
center as selected by City Council resolution, for the purpose of marketing and
promoting the municipality as a tourist or convention center.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.15 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by
the Tax Administrator under this subchapter may file a petition for review of
the notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the
petitioner, the petitioner’s address and the location of the lodging subject to
the order, notice or determination.
   (B)   The petition shall be filed with the Tax Administrator within ten days
after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has been
mailed or served upon the person requesting review.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition the Tax Administrator shall set a date
and time for a meeting with the petitioner and shall give the petitioner at
least five days’ prior written notice of the date, time and place of the
meeting.
   (D)   At the meeting, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
If the meeting does not result in the matter being resolved to the satisfaction
of the petitioner, the petitioner may appeal to the City Council.
   (E)   A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision to the City Council must
file a written notice of appeal with the City Council, in care of the City
Clerk-Treasurer, within ten days after the Tax Administrator’s decision
following the meeting (referenced in division (D) above) has been mailed to the
petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon
as is practical. At least five days prior to the hearing before the City
Council, the Tax Administrator shall prepare and serve on the petitioner a
memorandum of proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. A copy of the
memorandum shall be presented to the City Council at the time of the appeal
hearing. The Council shall then review the proposed findings of fact and
conclusions to determine whether they are correct. Upon a determination by the
Council that findings and conclusions are incorrect, the Council may modify,
reverse or affirm the decision of the Tax Administrator based upon an
application of the sections of this subchapter and the evidence presented.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   If any tax imposed by §§
34.01 through
34.15 is not paid within the time herein specified for the payment, or any
extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10%
of the amount remaining unpaid.
      (2)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by §§
34.01 through
34.15, unless it is shown that the failure is not due to willful neglect, there
shall be added to the tax in addition to the 10% specific penalty provided in
division (B)(1) above, 10% if the failure is for not more than 30 days with an
additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which the
failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the aggregate. If the penalty as
computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of $10 shall be assessed. The
amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time and the same
manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the
discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added shall be
collected in the same manner as the tax.
      (3)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any
payment required by §§
34.01 through
34.15, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or willfully attempts in
any manner to evade or defeat any tax or payment thereof, there shall also be
imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax (less any amounts paid
on the basis of the false or fraudulent return) found due for the period to
which the return related. The penalty imposed by this division (B)(3) shall be
collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to any other penalties
provided by §§
34.01 through
34.15.
      (4)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to
interest, and then to the tax due.
      (5)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty
provided by this section, shall bear interest at the maximum rate per annum as
prescribed by M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time, from the
time the tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and penalty shall
be added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
(Ord. 122, passed 9-28-1993)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   REFUSE
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   WATER CONSERVATION
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Collection of Fees and Costs
   
50.01   Determination of fees
   
50.02   Application for service
   
50.03   Accounts in name of owner
   
50.04   Payment
   
50.05   Shut off for non-payment
   
50.06   Collection with taxes
COLLECTION OF FEES AND COSTS
§ 50.01 DETERMINATION OF FEES.
   The City Council shall determine, by Council resolution, all charges for
water, sewer and garbage or refuse collection and disposal, including penalty
for non-payment, interest on late payment or prepayment discounts.
(Ord. 193, passed 4-26-2011)
§ 50.02 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Application for water service installation and for water-sewer service shall
be made the City Clerk-Treasurer on forms prescribed by the city. By the
applicant’s signature, the applicant shall agree to conform to this chapter and
to rules and regulations that may be established by the city as conditions for
the use of the water, sewer and garbage or refuse collection and disposal.
(Ord. 193, passed 4-26-2011)
§ 50.03 ACCOUNTS IN NAME OF OWNER.
   All accounts for water, sewer and garbage or refuse disposal shall be
carried in the name of the owner who personally, or by an authorized agent,
shall apply for the service. The owner shall be liable for the water, sewer and
garbage or refuse charges allocated to the owner’s property, whether the owner
is occupying the property or not, and any charges unpaid will be certified
against the property taxes of the owner. Garbage or refuse charges may be
applied to the property whether or not the owner or occupant is utilizing the
garbage and refuse collection and disposal system established by the city.
(Ord. 193, passed 4-26-2011)
§ 50.04 PAYMENT.
   Statements for total water, sewer and garbage or refuse charges for the
preceding period shall be mailed by the City Clerk-Treasurer or designee to
each customer at regular intervals as established by City Council resolution.
The amount listed on the statement shall be due on or before a date prescribed
by City Council resolution, as set forth on the statement. If payment is not
made by that date, there shall be added to the amount due a penalty in an
amount as established by City Council resolution. Further, the City Council may
establish, by resolution, a prepayment discount. All payments for water, sewer
or garbage or refuse shall be applied first to delinquent payments, if any, and
thereafter to current billings. Except where the customer specifically provides
otherwise, all payments shall be applied to that portion of the customer’s
utility charge as determined by the City Clerk-Treasurer or designee.
(Ord. 193, passed 4-26-2011)
§ 50.05 SHUT OFF FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   (A)   Delinquent accounts, generally. The city shall endeavor to collect
delinquent accounts promptly. In any case where satisfactory arrangements for
payment of water and sewer charges have not been made, the City Clerk-Treasurer
or designee may, after the procedural requirements of division (B) below have
been complied with, discontinue service to the delinquent customer by shutting
off the water at the stop box. When water service to any premises has been
discontinued, service shall not be restored except upon the payment of all
delinquent amounts for water and sewer charges due, plus a fee for
disconnection and reconnection as set by City Council resolution.
   (B)   Procedure. Water shall not be shut off under division (A) above until
notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the owner and
the occupant of the premises involved. The notice shall be mailed by first
class mail to the service address, and if different than the service address,
the last known address of the owner. The notice shall state that if payment is
not made before a date stated in the notice but not less than 15 days after the
date on which the notice is given, the water supply to the premises will be
shut off. The notice shall clearly inform the customer of the available
opportunities to present to the city an objection to the bill, and shall
identify the telephone number, address, and officer or employee who will handle
the customer’s complaint and who has the authority to review the facts and
files and to correct any errors in the billing. The notice shall also state
that the occupant or owner may before the date demand a hearing on the matter,
in which case the supply will not be cut off until after the hearing is held.
If the customer requests a hearing before the date specified, a hearing shall
be held on the matter by the City Council or a panel or commission established
by the City Council at least one week after the date on which the request is
made. If, as a result of the hearing, the City Council, or commission or panel,
finds that the amount claimed to be owing is actually due and unpaid and that
there is no legal reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may
not be shut off in accordance with this chapter, the city may shut off the
supply.
(Ord. 193, passed 4-26-2011; Ord. 226, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 50.06 COLLECTION WITH TAXES.
   Delinquent accounts shall be certified to the City Clerk-Treasurer who shall
prepare an assessment roll each year providing for the assessment of the
delinquent amounts against the respective property served. The assessment roll
shall be delivered to the Council for adoption each year in timely fashion, and
upon the adoption, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the assessment roll as
provided by law.
(Ord. 193, passed 4-26-2011)
CHAPTER 51: REFUSE
Section
Refuse
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   General regulations
   
51.03   Disposal required
   
51.04   Containers
   
51.05   City collection systems
   
51.06   Rates and charges
   
51.07   Sanitary landfill
   
51.08   Prohibited disposal
Sanitary Landfill
   
51.20   Establishment
   
51.21   Dumping elsewhere prohibited
   
51.22   Persons permitted to use
   
51.23   Hours for use
   
51.24   Use
   
51.25   Rules
   
51.26   Definitions
 
   
51.99   Penalty
REFUSE
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food.
   RECYCLABLES. Includes paper, plastic, tin cans, aluminum, motor oil, glass
and other metal goods, each separated or otherwise prepared so as to be
acceptable to the recycling center where they are to be deposited.
   RECYCLING CENTER. Premises within the city approved by the Council for
receipt, storage and processing of recyclables, and premises outside the city
approved as a RECYCLING CENTER by the local unit of government having
jurisdiction.
   REFUSE. Garbage and rubbish, but shall not include sewage.
   RUBBISH. Non-garbage solid waste such as tin cans, glass, paper, yard
clippings and sweepings, or litter of any kind, but shall exclude earth and
fill, boulders, rock and other materials normally handled in construction
operations (hereinafter referred to as CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS), and further
shall exclude sewage.
   SANITARY LANDFILL or LANDFILL. A land disposal site established by the city
for the disposal of refuse.
(Ord. 94, passed 3-22-1983)
§ 51.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse,
sewage or construction materials on any premises is a nuisance and prohibited.
   (B)   Refuse in streets. No person shall place any refuse, sewage or
construction materials in any street, alley or public place or upon private
property except in proper containers for collection or lawful disposal. No
person shall throw or deposit any of that material in any stream or other body
of water.
   (C)   Scattering of refuse. No person shall deposit anywhere within the city
any refuse in a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon
any public place or any other premises within the city.
   (D)   Burying of refuse. No person shall bury any refuse, sewage or
construction materials in the city except in an approved sanitary landfill.
This division (D) does not prevent anyone from composting leaves, grass
clippings and other easily biodegradable, nonpoisonous garbage on his or her
own premises. Composting of garbage is allowed so long as the composting is
done in a rodent-proof structure and in an otherwise sanitary manner.
(Ord. 94, passed 3-22-1983) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   Every person shall, in a sanitary manner, store and dispose of refuse,
sewage and construction materials that may accumulate upon property owned or
occupied or used by the person in accordance with the terms of this subchapter.
Refuse shall be collected or otherwise lawfully disposed of at least once every
week. Every householder, occupant and owner of any residence shall use the
refuse collection service provided by the city. Further, every owner or
occupant of a business or commercial establishment within the developed area of
the city shall use the refuse collection service provided by the city. In the
event that an owner or occupant of a residence, or business or commercial
establishment has special circumstances that require or justify a special or
different method of disposal of refuse, sewage or building materials, the owner
or occupant may apply for a variance from this requirement to the City Council.
A variance may be granted, but only upon a showing that the owner or occupant
shall adequately and properly dispose of same in compliance with the
regulations contained within this subchapter, and further, upon payment of
those fees as the City Council determines by resolution for use of the
landfill.
(Ord. 94, passed 3-22-1983) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   General requirement. Every householder, occupant or owner of any
residence and any restaurant, industrial establishment or commercial
establishment shall provide on the premises one or more containers to receive
and contain all refuse which may accumulate between collections or other
disposal. All normal accumulations of refuse shall be deposited in those
containers except that leaves, trimmings from shrubs, grass clippings, shavings
and other rubbish of similar volume and weight shall be stored in separate,
closed containers that are not required to meet the requirements of division
(B) below.
   (B)   Container requirements. Each container shall be water-tight, shall be
impervious to insects and rodents, shall be fire-proof, and shall not exceed 32
gallons in capacity, except that any commercial or business establishment
having refuse volume exceeding two cubic yards per week shall provide bulk or
bosed type refuse storage containers of a type approved by the City Council.
Containers shall be maintained in good and sanitary condition. Any container
not conforming to the requirements of this subchapter or having ragged or sharp
edges or any other defect likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the
contents shall be promptly replaced after notice by the city.
   (C)   Placement. For residences, the containers shall be placed at the front
property line for collection but shall not be so placed before 9:00 p.m. the
night before collection and shall be removed by 9:00 p.m. the day of
collection. The hours for placement and removal may be modified by City Council
resolution. Except when placed at the front property line for collection, the
containers shall be placed in or adjacent to the structures on the premises,
and in a fashion and location so as to be safe, clean and orderly, and to
reduce unsightly appearances. For nonresidences, the containers shall be placed
in a suitable location as to be readily accessible for collection, and in a
location so as to be safe, clean and orderly, and to reduce unsightly
appearances.
   (D)   Use of containers. Refuse shall be drained of liquid and household
garbage shall be wrapped before being deposited in a container. Items that are
highly inflammable, explosive or items not allowed to be stored or disposed of
at the sanitary landfill pursuant to regulations of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency shall not be placed in containers, but rather, shall be stored
and disposed of in accordance with instructions of the City Council or in
accordance with regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(Ord. 94, passed 3-22-1983) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 CITY COLLECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Generally. All refuse accumulated within the developed area of the
city, except as is lawfully composted upon the premises where produced or
lawfully transported to a recycling center, shall be disposed of by the city,
except that owners or occupants may, between collection periods, transport and
dispose of small quantities of same at the city’s sanitary landfill or other
approved sanitary landfill. The city collection system shall consist of
authorized city employees pursuant to rules, regulations and resolutions passed
by the City Council, or in the alternative, the Council shall contract with one
or more private refuse collectors in which the contracting procedure and the
requirements of the contract shall be in accordance with law and in accordance
with those rules, regulations and resolutions of the City Council.
   (B)   Contract collector. No person shall collect refuse within the city
except the person or persons holding a contract with the city to do so or
authorised city personnel. No person shall permit refuse to be picked up from
the person’s premises except by a contractor.
(Ord. 94, passed 3-22-1983) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Rates and charges, generally. The owner or occupant of any premises
served by the city collection system within the city shall pay to the city a
service charge as provided herein. The City Council shall, by resolution,
establish a system of service charges for refuse collection. In the resolution
it shall fix the charges, including any special charges for extra hauling or
collecting from an excessive number of containers and classify users, of the
service according to the type of occupancy and number of collections per week.
   (B)   Billing. The service charge for each premises shall be made to the
owner and occupant. The refuse collection charge may be separately billed by
the City Clerk-Treasurer or may be billed as a separate entry on the water or
sewer bill.
   (C)   Payment. Service charges shall be payable at the same time as bills
for water service and subject to the same conditions of payment. If any charge
is unpaid on September 1 of any year, the Council may levy an assessment equal
to the unpaid charges as of that date plus interest at the rate of 10% from
that date, or any other interest rate as provided by Council resolution. The
City Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the assessment to the County Auditor for
collection in the same manner as assessments for local improvements.
   (D)   Fund. All service charges shall be deposited in a separate account in
the General Fund.
   (E)   Adjustments. The City Council may, by Council resolution, determine
and issue rules and regulations providing for a waiver or reduction in the
payment of the service charges in the event premises are unoccupied or other
equitable circumstances, and may, in connection therewith, provide reasonable
requirements in connection with same.
(Ord. 94, passed 3-22-1983)
§ 51.07 SANITARY LANDFILL.
   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, set aside certain property owned
or otherwise controlled by the city for use as a sanitary landfill to provide
for the disposal of refuse by the city refuse collectors or by individuals.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council, by resolution, shall issue rules and
regulations for the use of the landfill, including the hours that it is open,
restrictions on disposal, and fees to be levied and to be assessed for the use
of same.
      (2)   The resolutions may provide that the rates and charges for refuse
collection shall constitute payment of the fees for use of the landfill, and
further, the resolutions may provide a separate fee or charge for users of the
city’s refuse collection system and non-users.
   (C)   (1)   Persons shall not dispose of any garbage, rubbish, refuse,
sewage or construction materials at the landfill in violation of regulations of
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and a violation of same shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
      (2)   No person shall violate any of the rules or regulations provided by
Council resolution in connection with the use of the landfill.
   (D)   All service charges connected herewith shall be deposited in the
General Fund or in a separate account in the General Fund for the landfill or
for the landfill and refuse collection.
(Ord. 94, passed 3-22-1983) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 PROHIBITED DISPOSAL.
   No person shall place or cause to be placed any rubbish, garbage, other
refuse, construction materials or anything he or she intends to dispose of or
abandon within or next to a garbage can or dumpster or anywhere else unless he
or she owns or leases the receptacle, or have the permission of the property
owner or tenant. This does not prohibit the placement of recyclables within the
approved recycling center.
(Ord. 120, passed 4-13-1993) Penalty, see §
51.99
SANITARY LANDFILL
§ 51.20 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A municipal sanitary landfill to be known as the city sanitary landfill, be
and the same is hereby established on the following described real estate in
the City of Hoyt Lakes, County of St. Louis, State of Minnesota, which premises
are leased for the use by the city:
A 40-acre tract in the center of the south one-half of the northeast quarter (S
l/2 of NE 1/4) and the north one-half of the southeast quarter, (N l/2 of SE 1/
4), Section Four, Township 58, North Range 14.
(Ord. 55, passed 3-9-1971)
§ 51.21 DUMPING ELSEWHERE PROHIBITED.
   The dumping of any waste refuse, garbage, rubbish, material or materials of
any kind whatsoever by any person, persons or corporation within the city,
except as may be permitted by this subchapter, is prohibited and unlawful.
(Ord. 55, passed 3-9-1971) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.22 PERSONS PERMITTED TO USE.
   (A)   No person who is not a resident of the city shall deposit on the city
sanitary landfill refuse, garbage, rubbish or other materials of any character
whatsoever, excepting under the supervision and direction of the caretaker of
the sanitary landfill. No person shall deposit on the sanitary landfill refuse,
garbage, rubbish or other material of any character, which refuse or garbage,
rubbish or material did not originate in the city.
   (B)   Persons who are nonresidents of the city, but who are occupying
campsites in the city camping grounds, shall be considered residents of the
city during the occupancy.
(Ord. 55, passed 3-9-1971) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.23 HOURS FOR USE.
   (A)   The City Council shall, by resolution, determine the days and hours of
the week when, the sanitary landfill shall be open to the public for the
depositing of refuse, rubbish, garbage or other material of any character.
   (B)   No person shall deposit refuse, garbage, rubbish or any other
materials on the sanitary landfill at any other time or times.
   (C)   Notice of the days and hours of the week during which the sanitary
landfill will be open for public use shall be posted at the sanitary landfill,
and shall be published in the official city newspaper.
(Ord. 55, passed 3-9-1971)
§ 51.24 USE.
   Every person using the sanitary landfill shall deposit refuse in areas
designated and shall not deposit any refuse, garbage, rubbish or any other
materials in any area posted for “no dumping” and shall only deposit refuse,
garbage, rubbish or any other materials as directed by the caretakers, and in
accordance with posted signs stating rules and regulations for the dumping and
depositing of waste.
(Ord. 55, passed 3-9-1971) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.25 RULES.
   The following rules and regulations are to be enforced relative to the use
of the sanitary landfill.
   (A)   Toxic and hazardous waste shall only be deposited in the area
designated for toxic and hazardous waste and no toxic and hazardous waste shall
be deposited unless the same has been neutralized and treated according to the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s Regulations and Standards for treatment of
toxic anc hazardous waste.
   (B)   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited on the sanitary
landfill any loose paper or other loose material which can be, or is liable to
be, carried by the wind outside of the sanitary landfill area.
   (C)   No person shall loiter on or around the sanitary landfill, pick over
the refuse, garbage, rubbish or any other materials deposited there or
interfere with the operation thereof.
   (D)   No person shall set any fire to the refuse, rubbish or garbage or any
other material in the sanitary landfill or deposit any hot ashes or materials
which would be liable to cause a fire to start.
   (E)   No person shall deposit any automobile body or parts of automobile
bodies on the sanitary landfill.
   (F)   No person shall deposit automobile tires or other rubber tires, unless
the same shall have been quartered or shredded.
   (G)   No tree exceeding six inches in diameter shall be deposited on the
sanitary landfill unless it has been limbed and cut into lengths not exceeding
three feet.
   (H)   No person shall discharge any firearm, air gun, bow and arrow or
similar weapon on or around the sanitary landfill.
   (I)   No person shall tear down or damage or deface any signs posted upon
the grounds by the city or its agents.
   (J)   No person shall dump or deposit any refuse, garbage, rubbish or other
materials of any character within 200 feet of the entrance to the sanitary
landfill, nor upon the roadways leading to the sanitary landfill, nor on any
land adjoining the sanitary landfill.
(Ord. 55, passed 3-9-1971) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food.
   OPEN BURNING. Burning any matter whereby the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through an adequate
stack, duct or chimney.
   PERSON. Any human being, any municipality or other governmental or political
subdivision or other public agency, any public or private corporation, any
partnership, firm, association or other organization; any receiver, trustee,
assignee, agent or other legal representative of any of the foregoing, or any
other legal entity, but does not include the Pollution Control Agency.
   REFUSE. Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue; street cleanings and
market and industrial solid wastes, and including sewage treatment wastes,
which are in dry form.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes, including ashes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials, except
animal waste used as fertilizer, including solid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from community
activities. SOLID WASTE does not include earthen fill, boulders, rock and other
materials normally handled in construction operations, solids or dissolved
material in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources,
such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water
effluents, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or other common water
pollutants.
   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES. Waste materials, including but not limited to,
poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological wastes,
radioactive materials, flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful
chemicals and wastes which require special handling and must be disposed of in
a manner to conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.
(Ord. 55, passed 3-9-1971)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Except for any provisions of §§
51.01 through
51.07 providing for a separate penalty, any person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of §§
51.01 through
51.07 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $100. However, in the event of a third violation within any 12
months, the violation shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
51.20 through
51.26 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, or and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 or imprisonment in the county jail
not to exceed 90 days. Each day that the violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 55, passed 3-9-1971; Ord. 94, passed 3-22-1983)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
Sewer Use
   
52.01   Use of public sewers required
   
52.02   Private sewage disposal
   
52.03   Building sewers and connections
   
52.04   Use of the public sewers
   
52.05   Protection of sewage works from damage
   
52.06   Waste water back-ups
Waste Water Service Charges and Industrial Waste Cost Recovery
   
52.20   Waste water service charges
   
52.21   General provisions
Powers and Authority
   
52.35   Powers and authority
Definitions
   
52.50   Definitions
 
   
52.99   Penalty
SEWER USE
§ 52.01 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the NPDES permit.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage, unless approval is received in writing from the City Council.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city is
hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that a public sewer main is available to his
or her property. A sewer main will be considered available to a property if it
lies within an abutting street or alley right-of-way or an easement. A letter
from the City Clerk-Treasurer to the property owner shall be considered to be
official notice. The installation of sewer mains within the city shall be the
responsibility of the city and the cost of constructing sewer mains may be
financed by a special assessment levied against the benefitting property. The
cost of installing lot service connections to the sewer mains shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.02 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   Private sewage collection and disposal systems will not be permitted within
the city corporate limits except individual disposal systems which may be
permitted by special permit in outlying rural areas not served by the city
sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city or its authorized
representative.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. and more
stringent state and local standards.
   (C)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the City Council. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City Council. The
industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information
describing its waste water constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and waste water treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (E)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   (H)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the rules and regulations of the City Council. In the absence of code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, the City
Engineer’s Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Minnesota
shall apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor, in all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with division (H) above, and discharged to the building
sewer.
   (J)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements and applicable rules and regulations of the City
Council, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9 and City Engineer’s Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Minnesota. All connections shall be made gas-tight and
water-tight.
   (L)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
the sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; and
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the city that the wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming the opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city will give consideration to the factors as the quantities of subject wastes
in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant
and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies.
      (2)   The substances prohibited are:
         (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F
(65°C);
         (b)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150°F (0
and 65°C);
         (c)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the city;
         (d)   Any waters or wastes containing strong, acid, iron pickling
wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
         (e)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to the degree that any material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city
for the materials;
         (f)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city BPA as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;
         (g)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
         (h)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
         (i)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as
Hg at any time except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
         (j)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as
permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations;
         (k)   Materials which exert or cause:
            1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
            2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
            3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
            4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined in §
52.50.
         (l)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in division (D) above, and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pre-treatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules
and Regulations, Subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 Pretreatment Standards,
Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973 and any
amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the City may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of division (K) below.
      (2)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (H)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with the plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or
her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory
analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but
no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the waste water discharge to assure that compliance with the
federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at those times and
in a manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At those times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   (J)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Waste Water, published by the American Public Health Association and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property, the particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.
   (K)   No statement contained in this section be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, in accordance with §
52.20, by the industrial concern, provided the payments are in accordance with
federal and state guidelines for user charge system.
   (L)   Each residential household, commercial complex, commercial business or
industry shall pay to the city the established amount set forth by EPA user
charge system for the proper operation of the sewage treatment plant. Any
building which is privately owned, whether occupied or not, shall be subject to
this payment. Any established multi-dwelling shall make payments in the amount
established by the user charge system. The payment shall be made unless the
water service is discontinued and the service valve closed.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall break, damage, destroy, modify or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 WASTE WATER BACK-UPS.
   All building drains which have back-up problems shall have a back water
valve installed at the owner’s expense and it shall be the owner’s
responsibility to see that the back water valve is kept clean and workable. The
city will assume no liability for any damages resulting from back-up.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981) Penalty, see §
52.99
WASTE WATER SERVICE CHARGES AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY
§ 52.20 WASTE WATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   The City Council shall, by resolution, determine the waste water
service charges for all users of the facility. The charges shall be determined
and established upon examination of actual and projected expenses in operating
the system, including the debt service, if any, any changes in operations, and
maintenance costs including replacement costs. The charges shall be determined
by the Council’s sole discretion, to ensure that the city will have adequate
funds to operate the system including payment of debt services, if any, changes
in operations, and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, and to
ensure that the users of the system pay directly an appropriate share of the
costs. The waste water service charge for the use of and for service supplied
by the waste water facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge
for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge, if
applicable, and a surcharge, if applicable.
   (B)   The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt
service of all outstanding loans by the number of users. Through further
divisions, the monthly debt service charges can be computed.
   (C)   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
      (1)   A five-day 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/l; and
      (2)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l.
   (D)   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement
and shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the waste water facilities including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories;
      (2)   Proportion the estimated costs to waste water facility categories
by volume, suspended solids and BOD, if possible;
      (3)   Estimate waste water volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated;
      (4)   Proportion the estimated costs to nonindustrial and industrial
users by volume, suspended solids and BOD;
      (5)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal sewage strength; and
      (6)   Compute surcharge costs per 1,000 gallons per mg/l in excess of
normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
   (E)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal
concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be
based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all
wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 250 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS
respectively. Division (F) below specifies the procedure to compute a
surcharge.
   (F)   The adequacy of the waste water service charge shall be reviewed
periodically, and at least annually by the City Clerk-Treasurer for the city in
its annual audit report. The waste water service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation and
maintenance costs including replacement costs.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981)
§ 52.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Owner, occupant and user liable. The owner of the premises, the
occupant, thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for the service to the premises and the service is furnished to
the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable
therefore to the city.
   (B)   Waste water service charges. Waste water service charges shall be
payable monthly or at other intervals as determined by the City Council by
resolution, and the charges are due and payable within 30 days after bills for
the charges have been sent to the premises by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The
City Council may, by resolution, determine and establish a penalty or interest
for late payment, and establish appropriate remedies and penalties for non-
payment, including discontinuance of service, filing and foreclosing of a lien
against the premises, or initiating proceedings against the property or the
users of the system in any court having jurisdiction over those matters.
   (C)   Revenues.
      (1)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All
revenues and moneys shall be held by the City Clerk-Treasurer separate and
apart from their private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of
the city.
      (2)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall receive all revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of the
system as the same may be delivered to them and deposit the same in the amount
of the fund designated as the Sewerage Fund of the city. The Clerk-Treasurer
shall administer the Fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute.
   (D)   Accounts.
      (1)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage
system, and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system; and
      (2)   (a)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
waste water facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer
service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts
required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact
meet these regulations.
         (b)   In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:
            1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the waste water
plant for the current fiscal year;
            2.   Billing data to show total amount billed;
            3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
            4.   Number of users connected to the system;
            5.   Number of non-metered users; and
            6.   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial
users) and volume of waste discharged.
   (E)   Access to records. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or its
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges or
industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts
and transactions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and
general conditions to any federal grant.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981)
POWERS AND AUTHORITY
§ 52.35 POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The city and its agents and employees shall be permitted to gain
access to those properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions
of these regulations.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation, found to be violating any provision
of this chapter, excepting §
52.04, shall be served by the city with written notice by mail stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in the notice, make the necessary correction and permanently cease all
violations. In the event the violations are not corrected within the time
period stated, the city may revoke any permit for sewage disposal and may
summarily disconnect the offender from the sanitary sewer and/or water service.
The disconnection and reconnection would be at the total expense of the
customer.
   (C)   Where acids and chemicals damaging sewer lines or treatment processes
are released to the sewer which may cause deterioration of the facilities or
which may interfere with the proper treatment of sewage, the city is authorized
to immediately terminate services by those measures as are necessary or
appropriate to protect the facilities.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981)
DEFINITIONS
§ 52.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORITY. The City of Hoyt Lakes, Minnesota.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l,
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures in five days at 20°C.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning
three feet outside the building wall.
      (1)   BUILDING DRAIN - SANITARY. A building drain which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING DRAIN - STORM. A building drain which conveys storm water
or other clearwater drainage but no waste water.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal (also called HOUSE CONNECTION).
      (1)   BUILDING SEWER - SANITARY. A building sewer which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING SEWER - STORM. A building sewer which conveys storm water
or other clearwater drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage.
   CLASSES OF USERS. The division of waste water treatment customers by waste
characteristics, and process or discharge similarities.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL. Includes transient lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise for personal, household
or industrial consumption and/or rendering services to others.
      (2)   GOVERNMENTAL. Includes legislative, judicial, administrative and
regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments, such as
courthouses, police and fire stations, city halls and similar governmental
users.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL. Includes manufacturing activities involving the
mechanical or chemical transformations of materials or substances into other
products. These activities occur in establishments usually described as plants,
factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and
material handling equipment.
      (4)   INSTITUTIONAL. Includes social, charitable, religious and
educational activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes,
penal institutions and similar institutional users.
      (5)   RESIDENTIAL. Includes all dwelling units such as detached,
semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, garden and standard apartments,
permanent multi-family dwellings. (Transient lodging, considered commercial in
nature, is not included.)
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.
      (1)   Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform
bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the
treatment works was designed to treat the pollutants, and in fact does remove
the pollutants to a substantial degree.
      (2)   The term substantial degree is not subject to precise definition,
but generally contemplates removals in the order of 80% or greater. Minor
incidental removals in the order of 10 to 30% are not considered substantial.
      (3)   Examples of the additional pollutants which may be considered
compatible include:
         (a)   Chemical oxygen demand;
         (b)   Total organic carbon;
         (c)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;
         (d)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and
         (e)   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin (except as
prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation of the
treatment works).
   DEPRECIATION. An annual operating cost reflecting capital consumption and
obsolescence (reduction of future service potential) of the treatment works.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract
of humans and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, so that will separate
by gravity from waste water by treatment in a pretreatment facility approved by
the authority.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of
produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. Recovery from the industrial users of a treatment
works of the grant amount allocable to treatment of wastes from the users
pursuant to § 204(b) of PL 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1284(b).
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through means such as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. (INFILTRATION does
not include and is distinguished from inflow.)
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The water discharge into a sewer system, including
building drains and sewers, from those sources such as, but not limited to,
roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted
cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers,
cross-connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm
waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. (INFLOW does not
include, and is distinguished from, INFILTRATION.)
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industry that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of PL 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a); or
      (4)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on a treatment works or on the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
groundwater.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. As defined for the purposes of determining
surcharge, shall mean waste water or sewage having an average daily suspended
solids concentration of not more than 250 mg/l, and average daily BOD of not
more than 200 mg/l (an average daily phosphorus concentration of 11 mg/l and
containing not more than 2.5 mg/l of hexane soluble matter (grease and oil)).
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System for discharge of waste waters to the navigable waters of the
United States pursuant to § 402 of PL 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, direct and indirect (other than
debt service), necessary to ensure adequate waste water treatment on a
continuing basis, conform with at related federal, state and local
requirements, and assure optimal long-term facility management. (These costs
include depreciation and replacement.)
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group discharging any waste water to WWTW.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned
industrial sources prior to introduction into a public treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than three-eighths inch in any dimension.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any governmental agency having jurisdiction by law over
construction and use of a waste water collection or treatment facility.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public authority
and will consist of the following increments.
      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect waste
waters from individual point source discharges.
      (2)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which waste water is carried under pressure.
      (3)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
waste water from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      (4)   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer service
at which waste water is pumped to a higher level.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works
were designed and constructed.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes, and to
which storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including
polluted cooling water). The two most common types of SEWAGE are as follows.
      (1)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment. (This shall include the
wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.)
   SHALL. Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY. Any industry that will contribute greater than 10% of
the design flow or design pollutant loading of the treatment works.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or waste water which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Waste Water prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer for conveying water, groundwater or unpolluted water
from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants,
which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse
effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological manifestations, as
defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of PL 92-500, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317(a).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and waste water treatment facilities provided.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a waste water treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance of the works pursuant to § 204(b) of PL
92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1284(b).
   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to
gases or vapors when heated at 550°C for 15 to 20 minutes.
   WASTE WATER TREATMENT WORKS. The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids.
   WATER WORKS. All facilities for water supply, filtration plant, storage
reservoir, water lines and services, and booster stations for obtaining,
treating and distributing potable water.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation, continuing to violate any
provision of this chapter beyond the time limit provided in §
52.35(B), or violating any of the other provisions of this chapter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500, and/or 90 days in jail. Each day of each violation shall be
deemed a separate offense. This division (B)(1) shall not apply to the portions
of this chapter relating solely to required payments for waste water service
charges.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable to the city or to any other persons for any
damages, losses or expenses sustained by the city of any other persons as a
result of the violations, and shall be responsible for reasonable attorney fees
incurred as a result of the violation.
(Ord. 88, passed 4-28-1981)
CHAPTER 53: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
53.01   Regulation and restriction on lawn and garden watering and other
nonessential water use
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 REGULATION AND RESTRICTION ON LAWN AND GARDEN WATERING AND OTHER
NONESSENTIAL WATER USE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that there is rising concern about conserving
valuable resources. The City Council further finds that sprinkling lawns during
the middle of the day is wasteful and may be harmful. Accordingly, it is in the
public interest to prohibit lawn sprinkling during midday hours, and to
regulate and restrict lawn sprinkling and other nonessential water use.
   (B)   The following mandatory water conservation measure is hereby
established on a year-round basis. Lawn watering and garden watering is limited
between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., with
watering on even-numbered days at those residences with even- numbered
addresses, and on odd-numbered days at those residences with odd-numbered
addresses. Watering exceptions shall be allowed by the Public Utilities
Supervisor, or his or her designee, for newly seeded lawns, new sod and where
necessary to keep other plants alive.
   (C)   Whenever water production reaches 574,000 gallons per day for three
consecutive days, the city shall implement additional mandatory water
conservation measures which shall include the following: nonessential water
uses such as washing motor vehicles, boats, trailers or other vehicles,
exteriors of dwellings, buildings or other structures; and washing of
sidewalks, driveways and other hard-paved areas, shall be limited to odd-
numbered addresses on odd-numbered days, and even-numbered addresses on even-
numbered days. The Public Utilities Supervisor, or his or her designee, shall
publish notice of the mandatory water conservation requirements in the legal
newspaper, and those other publications as determined by City Council
resolution, and the mandatory water conservation measures shall take place
immediately upon the publication.
   (D)   Whenever water production reaches 826,000 gallons per day for three
consecutive days, the city shall implement a mandatory water conservation
measure, which shall include the following: watering of lawns and gardens shall
be prohibited; all other nonessential water uses, such as washing motor
vehicles, boats, trailers, or other vehicles, exteriors of dwellings, buildings
or other structures; and washing of sidewalks, driveways, and other hard-paved
areas, shall be prohibited. Watering exceptions shall be allowed by the Public
Utilities Supervisor, or his or her designee, for newly seeded lawns, new sod
and where necessary to keep other plants alive. The Public Utilities
Supervisor, or his or her designee, shall publish notice of the mandatory water
conservation requirements in the legal newspaper, and those other publications
as determined by City Council resolution and the mandatory water conservation
measures shall take place immediately upon the publication.
   (E)   In addition to the above requirements, whenever the City Council
determines that a shortage of water supply threatens the city of otherwise
determines it is in the public interest to restrict the nonessential water use,
the City Council may, by resolution, impose the mandatory water conservation
measures as set forth above. The Public Utilities Supervisor, or his or her
designee, shall publish notice of the mandatory water conservation requirements
in the legal newspaper, and those other publications as determined by City
Council resolution and the mandatory water conservation measures shall take
place immediately upon the publication. In addition, if the emergency requires
immediate compliance with the terms of the resolution, the City Council may
provide for a delivery of a copy of the resolution to the premises of water
customers, in which case the regulations shall be effective immediately
following the delivery.
(Ord. 165, passed 8-26-2003) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of the mandatory water conservation measures described in
this chapter shall constitute a petty misdemeanor, except that a violation
which is proceeded within the previous 12 months by two or more violations of
this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. The punishment for a petty
misdemeanor may be a fine of up to $100. The punishment for a misdemeanor may
be a fine of up to $700, or imprisonment up to 90 days, or both. Each day a
violation exists constitutes a separate offense. Further, continued violation
shall be cause for discontinuance of water service.
(Ord. 165, passed 8-26-2003)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
Highway Traffic Regulation Act
   
70.15   Highway Traffic Regulation Act incorporated by reference
   
70.16   Through streets
Traffic Regulations
   
70.30   Engine retarder brakes and transmission brakes
   
70.31   Idling
   
70.32   Exhibition of speed
   
70.33   Traffic regulation in public and private places
   
70.34   Unreasonable acceleration, unreasonable braking and unreasonable fast
turning
   
70.35   Motorized vehicles on the Hoyt lakes golf course greens
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as defined in §§
70.30 and
70.31, all words and phrases used in this title shall be defined according to
their common usage and meaning, or as defined in Minnesota Statutes, including
specifically M.S. Chapters 168 and 169, as they may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 146, passed 5-13-1997)
HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT
§ 70.15 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time,
are hereby adopted as a Traffic Code regulating the use of highways, streets
and alleys within the city and are hereby incorporated and made part of this
title as completely as if set out here in full.
(Ord. 44, passed 8-26-1969) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 THROUGH STREETS.
   The Chief of Police, after receiving the consent of Council, may designate
any street as a through street and any intersection as a stop intersection
where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic and to prevent accidents;
and he or she shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to those streets and
intersections; but no trunk highway shall be designated as a through street and
no intersection on a trunk highway shall be designated as a stop intersection
unless the consent of the Commissioner of Highways to that designation is first
secured. Every driver of a vehicle shall bring his or her vehicle to a full
stop before entering any stop street or intersection properly designated and
posted as such by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 44, passed 8-26-1969)
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 70.30 ENGINE RETARDER BRAKES AND TRANSMISSION BRAKES.
   Use of engine retarder brakes and/or transmission brakes is prohibited
within any area of the city that is zoned as a residential district or as a
business district, or which abuts a residential district or business district,
except in an emergency.
(Ord. 146, passed 5-13-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 IDLING.
   No person shall leave a motor vehicle running or idling while unattended,
whether on private property or public property including a public street or
highway, except that a person may warm up a motor vehicle during cold weather
for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. 146, passed 5-13-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.32 EXHIBITION OF SPEED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any motor vehicle
exhibition of speed upon a street or highway within the limits of the city.
   (B)   EXHIBITION OF SPEED shall be defined as a willful act of showing off
or displaying a dangerous and imprudent speed where the presence of another
person is known to the driver or operator of a motor vehicle or may be
reasonably anticipated by him or her.
(Ord. 63, passed 6-11-1974) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.33 TRAFFIC REGULATION IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PLACES.
   (A)   Private shopping center parking lots conducted for commercial purposes
or in conjunction with any business enterprise, all other public or private
parking lots, and all other public and private properties used by the public
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic and parking, are hereby declared to be
affected with a public interest. These properties affected with a public
interest, to the extent allowable by law, shall be subject to the following
traffic and parking regulations.
   (B)   (1)   All traffic regulations, applicable to drivers of vehicles or
bicycles or to pedestrians, enumerated in M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, as of the date of enactment of this section,
(hereafter referred to as Minnesota Traffic Code), are hereby made applicable
to the properties affected with a public interest as enumerated in division (A)
above within the city, and violation of the statutes which are hereby
incorporated by reference into this section shall be a violation of this
section. All regulations enumerated in the Minnesota Traffic Code shall be
applicable herein whether the statutes, by their terms, apply solely to public
streets and highways, or apply to private property. Any person violating any
statutory regulation which applies to the properties affected with a public
interest as enumerated in division (A) above may be charged with either
violation of the statute or with violation of this section.
      (2)   The traffic regulations herein established shall be in addition to
all state statutes or city ordinances applying to those properties affected
with a public interest as enumerated in division (A) above. This section shall
not be construed so as to amend or revoke any other regulations clearly
applicable to the properties affected with a public interest as enumerated in
division (A) above. If any traffic regulations contained in this section shall
be adjudged void or of no affect, for any reason whatsoever, the decision shall
not affect the validity of any of the other traffic regulations contained
herein, or contained in other ordinances or state statutes.
   (C)   The Police Department, with the approval of the City Council, and with
the written consent of the owner where private property is concerned, may
establish the maximum speeds at which vehicles and bicycles may be driven in
private or public parking lots and may establish the location of, and the
direction of travel, of driving lanes within the parking lots. The speed limits
and driving lanes shall be based on the requirements of safety in the parking
areas affected. Each speed limit and driving lane regulation shall be
established in writing, filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer, published once in
the official newspaper, and shall become effective thereafter as an absolute
speed limit and driving lane regulation on being sign posted at each entrance
to the shopping center parking lot and along the driving lanes. No person shall
drive a vehicle or bicycle on the parking lot at a speed in excess of the
limits established, or in violation of any driving lane regulation.
   (D)   (1)   Emergency vehicle lane. The Police Department with the approval
of the City Council, and with the written consent of the owner where private
property is concerned, may designate an area on a public or private parking lot
as an emergency vehicle lane. Signs shall be posted at any entrance to the area
to identify the area as an emergency vehicle lane and to prohibit parking or
stopping of vehicles therein. The emergency vehicle lane designation shall be
established in writing, filed with the City Clerk- Treasurer, published once in
the official newspaper, and shall become effective as an absolute parking
regulation on being sign posted at each entrance thereof. No person shall stop
or park his or her vehicle on any area designated as an emergency vehicle lane
except ambulances, Police Department vehicles, Fire Department vehicles and
other emergency vehicles.
      (2)   Loading zone. The Police Department with the approval of the City
Council, and with the written consent of the owner where private property is
concerned, may designate areas of the parking lots as a loading zone, and
prohibit parking during specified hours, except for purposes of loading and
unloading goods and merchandise to or from places of business or storage. The
loading zone designation shall be established in writing, filed with the City
Clerk-Treasurer, published once in the official newspaper, and shall become
effective thereafter as an absolute parking regulation on being sign posted at
each end of the area. No person shall stop or park his or her vehicle in the
areas during the specified hours except for the sole purposes of loading and
unloading.
      (3)   General parking regulations. Stopping or parking of vehicles in
parking lots shall be limited to those areas designated as parking areas by
signs, lines painted on the surface of the parking lots, or in even horizontal
lines of vehicles which allow free access to enter or leave the parking areas.
Parking or stopping of vehicles is prohibited in any driving lane or in any
area which is used for the flow of traffic entering and leaving the parking
lots, or in any area which unduly obstructs the flow of traffic therein.
(Ord. 76, passed 8-26-1977) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.34 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION, UNREASONABLE BRAKING AND UNREASONABLE FAST
TURNING.
   (A)   Nuisance. Any unreasonable acceleration, unreasonable braking or
unreasonably fast turning of any motor vehicle on any street, road, public or
private parking lot, public or private driveway, or any other public or private
right-of-way within the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is
prohibited.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE. An acceleration which spins
a tire or tires resulting in the breaking of traction between a tire or tires
and the street surface, and accomplished in a manner as to cause squealing or
screeching sounds by the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires
of the vehicle or both. Prima facie evidence of unreasonable acceleration shall
be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires, or the throwing of sand
or gravel by the tires, or both.
      UNREASONABLE BRAKING OF A MOTOR VEHICLE. Braking or stopping a motor
vehicle in a short distance in a manner as to cause the breaking of traction
between tire or tires and the street surface, and accomplished in a manner as
to cause squealing or screeching sounds by the tires or the throwing of sand or
gravel by the tires, or to cause the rear end of the motor vehicle to swerve or
fishtail, or any or all of the above. Prima facie evidence of unreasonable
braking shall be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires, throwing
of sand or gravel by the tires, or causing the rear end of the motor vehicle to
swerve or fishtail, or any or all of the above.
      UNREASONABLY FAST TURNING. Turning a motor vehicle at a speed or at an
angle which results in the breaking of traction between a tire or tires and the
street surface, and accomplished in a manner as to cause a loss of control of
the vehicle, the swerving or fishtailing of the vehicle, squealing or
screeching sounds by the tires, throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the
vehicle, or any or all of the above. Prima facie evidence of unreasonably fast
turning shall be swerving or fishtailing of the vehicle, squealing or
screeching sounds emitted by the tires, the throwing of sand or gravel by the
tires, or any or all of the above.
   (C)   Exception. Any action taken to avoid an accident, or in the course of
an emergency situation, which necessitates rapid acceleration, braking or
turning of a motor vehicle, shall not be construed to be a violation of this
section.
(Ord. 74, passed 3-8-1977) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.35 MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON THE HOYT LAKES GOLF COURSE GREENS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any motorized vehicles on the city golf
course greens.
(Ord. 67, passed 9-23-1975) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in §
70.15 is a violation of that section when it occurs within the city. Any person
violating §
70.15 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not
to exceed $300, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to
exceed 90 days; but if a minimum fine or imprisonment is prescribed by the
State Highway Traffic Act for an offense, that penalty shall apply to a person
convicted of the same offense under §
70.15.
   (B)   Any person violating of any provision of §§
70.30 and
70.31 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be
fined a sum not to exceed $200.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.32, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $300
or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days.
   (D)   Violation of any of the provisions incorporated by reference in §
70.33 so as to be made applicable to the properties affected with a public
interest as enumerated in §
70.33(A) shall constitute a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor, depending upon
whether violation of the incorporated statute or ordinance constitute a
misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. Violation of regulations constituting a
misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300 or imprisonment
for no longer than 90 days, or both. Violation of any regulation constituting a
petty misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
   (E)   Violation of §
70.33(C) shall constitute a petty misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $100.
   (F)   Violation of §
70.33(D) shall constitute a petty misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $100.
   (G)   Violation of §
70.34 shall constitute a petty misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $100.
   (H)   Any person violating the terms of §
70.35 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined a sum not to exceed $300 or
shall be imprisoned not to exceed 90 days.
(Ord. 44, passed 8-26-1969; Ord. 67, passed 9-23-1975; Ord. 74, passed 3-8-
1977; Ord. 76, passed 8-26-1977; Ord. 146, passed 5-13-1997; Ord. 63, passed 6-
11-1974)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Vehicle parking and weight restriction
   
71.02   Parking of recreational equipment
Parking of Vehicles on Any Roadway
   
71.15   Definitions
   
71.16   Boulevard parking prohibited
   
71.17   Hindering snowplow
   
71.18   Roadway parking
   
71.19   Regulations
   
71.20   Police Department action
   
71.21   Violation of subchapter
 
   
71.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 VEHICLE PARKING AND WEIGHT RESTRICTION.
   No person shall park a motor vehicle with a rated gross weight capacity in
excess of 26,000 pounds within an area of the city zoned residential, on any
public or private property, including a public or private street or highway and
also including private property owned by the person parking the motor vehicle,
except that parking of the vehicle for a period of not more than 120 minutes
shall be permitted when necessary or reasonable for loading or unloading
purposes. In addition, the highest ranking police officer on duty within the
city may grant additional time when necessary or reasonable for loading or
unloading purposes, when it does not create a hazardous or dangerous condition.
(Ord. 146, passed 5-13-1997) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 PARKING OF RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall park recreational equipment as defined in M.S. § 168.002,
subd. 27, as it may be amended from time to time, upon a public street or
highway, including the boulevard, for more than 120 minutes, without the prior
approval of the City Police Department. The highest ranking police officer on
duty within the city may grant additional time when necessary or reasonable, so
long as the parking does not create a hazardous or dangerous condition.
(Ord. 146, passed 5-13-1997) Penalty, see §
71.99
PARKING OF VEHICLES ON ANY ROADWAY
§ 71.15 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as defined herein, all words and phrases used in this subchapter
shall be defined according to their common usage and meaning, or as defined in
M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time.
   BOULEVARD. The area lying adjacent to a roadway which lies between the
roadway and the sidewalk. BOULEVARD shall exclude the roadway, but shall
include the sidewalk. In the event there is no sidewalk located near to and
parallel to a roadway, the outer boundary of the BOULEVARD away from the
roadway shall be the boundary line of the easement, license or other conveyance
authorizing the placement of the roadway.
   PARK. To stop a vehicle and leave it unattended, or to stop a vehicle while
attended, and fail to move the vehicle when requested by a police officer.
   ROADWAY. The entire width between boundary lines, excluding the boulevard
thereto, of any street, highway, alley or any way or place when any part
thereof is open to use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purposes of
vehicular traffic. Where the roadway is bordered on both sides by curbs, the
roadway shall be limited to the area lying between and including the curbs.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a roadway, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, all other motor vehicles,
bicycles, trailers, campers and all other devices without motive power or
propelled solely by human power.
(Ord. 90, passed 5-26-1981)
§ 71.16 BOULEVARD PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall park his, her or its vehicle, or
any portion of his, her or its vehicle, on any boulevard within the city.
   (B)   This prohibition shall apply to any portion of a driveway located
within the boundary lines of a boulevard.
(Ord. 90, passed 5-26-1981) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17 HINDERING SNOWPLOW.
   No person, firm or corporation shall stop or park his or her vehicle on any
roadway so as to obstruct or hinder the plowing of snow or removal of snow from
any public roadway within the city.
(Ord. 90, passed 5-26-1981) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.18 ROADWAY PARKING.
   No person, firm or corporation shall park his, her or its vehicle on any
roadway within the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day
from November 1 to April 1, inclusive, of each year.
(Ord. 90, passed 5-26-1981) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.19 REGULATIONS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall park his, her or its vehicle on any
roadway within the city at any time of the year, in violation of the parking
regulations contained herein.
   (A)   Beginning on 9:00 p.m. on the first Sunday of every calendar year and
until the end of the week, and during every second week thereafter until 9:00
p.m. of the first Sunday of the following calendar year, vehicles shall be
parked on that side of the roadway, whether improved or unimproved, that are or
may be identified with reference to odd-numbered United States Post Office
addresses. Beginning at 9:00 p.m. on the second Sunday of every calendar year
and until the end of the week, and during every second week thereafter until 9:
00 p.m. of the first Sunday of the following calendar year, vehicles shall be
parked on that side of the roadway, whether improved or unimproved, that are or
may be identified with reference to even-numbered United States Post Office
addresses. Every Sunday between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight shall
be a changeover-period and the provisions of this division (A) shall not be in
force during that time. For purposes of this section, the term WEEK shall
designate a period beginning and ending at 9:00 p.m. Sunday.
   (B)   The alternate side parking provisions contained in division (A) above
shall not apply to the roadways lying adjacent to the block wherein is located
the building presently known as the “Gertrude Boase Elementary School”, namely
as follows: Fairfax Road, lying between Canterbury Drive and Brandon Road;
Brandon Road lying between Fairfax Road and Hampshire Drive; Hampshire Drive,
lying between Brandon Road and Canterbury Drive; and Canterbury Drive, lying
between Hampshire Drive and Fairfax Road. Further, with respect to the roadways
designated within this division (B), vehicles shall be parked on that side of
the roadway which lies opposite from the above named school.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to allow parking of vehicles where
parking is otherwise prohibited by this subchapter, other ordinances or
statutes, or otherwise posted or metered.
(Ord. 90, passed 5-26-1981) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.20 POLICE DEPARTMENT ACTION.
   The City Police Department shall have the right to suspend the operation of
this subchapter for any roadway for any given time or times upon posting notice
thereof on or near the roadway.
(Ord. 90, passed 5-26-1981)
§ 71.21 VIOLATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   If any vehicle is found up on a roadway in violation of any provisions
of this subchapter regulating the stopping or parking of vehicles, and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.
   (B)   Any vehicle found stopped or parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter may be immediately removed and impounded by any
police officer or any duly authorized person and shall be surrendered to the
duly identified owner thereof, only upon payment of the impounding and storage
fees assessed against the vehicle.
(Ord. 90, passed 5-26-1981) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating of any provision of §§
71.01 and
71.02 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be
fined a sum not to exceed $200.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of §§
71.15 through
71.21 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100.
(Ord. 90, passed 5-26-1981; Ord. 146, passed 5-13-1997)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Motorcycles/All-Terrain Vehicles
   
72.001   Definitions
   
72.002   Area of operation
   
72.003   Operation
   
72.004   Rate of speed
   
72.005   Equipment required
   
72.006   Crossing of street or highway
   
72.007   Age requirements
   
72.008   Operation during emergency
   
72.009   Highway Traffic Regulations Act
   
72.010   Operation by minor
Snowmobiles
   
72.025   Definitions
   
72.026   Area of operation
   
72.027   Regulations
   
72.028   Equipment required
   
72.029   Highway operation requirements
   
72.030   Age requirements
   
72.031   Operation during emergency
   
72.032   Highway Traffic Regulations Act
   
72.033   Parking on snowmobile trail prohibited
   
72.034   Operation by minor
Motor Bicycles
   
72.045   Definitions
   
72.046   Muffler
   
72.047   Regulations
Registration of Bicycles, Motor Bicycles and Motor Scooters
   
72.060   Licensing and registration required
   
72.061   Registration information
   
72.062   License plate and registration card
   
72.063   Destruction of license number
   
72.064   License fees
   
72.065   Unlicensed vehicles; impounding
   
72.066   License expiration date
   
72.067   Conditions of license
   
72.068   Application to unlicensed vehicles
   
72.069   Definition
Bicycle and Hiking Trail
   
72.080   Bicycle and hiking trail
Golf Carts
   
72.095   Golf carts
 
   
72.999   Penalty
MOTORCYCLES/ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 72.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATV (ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE). A motorized flotation-tire vehicle of not less
than three low- pressure tires, but not more than six tires, that is limited in
engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters, and total dry weight
less than 600 pounds.
   BOULEVARD. The area of the public roadway lying between the sidewalk and
that portion of the right-of-way of any roadway used for motor vehicle traffic.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels on contact with the
ground, including motor scooters, bicycles with motor attached and minibikes,
but expressly excluding a tractor, or any vehicle of a type propelled solely by
human power.
   MOTORCYCLE/ATV TRAILS. The property designated and posted for use by
motorcycle/ATVs which approximately surrounds the platted portion of the city.
Specific boundaries and a map of the trails are available for inspection at the
City Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a motorcycle and/or
ATV.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
motorcycle and/or ATV.
   OWNER. A person, other than a person with a security interest, having a
property interest in or title to a motorcycle and/or ATV, and entitled to the
use and possession of the vehicle.
   PUBLIC ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire right-of-way of a public road,
including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders and medians of a
roadway, that is not privately owned.
   REGISTER. The act of assigning a registration number to an ATV and/or
license to a motorcycle.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996)
§ 72.002 AREA OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle and/or ATV
within the boundaries of the city, except as herein permitted:
   (A)   On a roadway, if the operator has a valid standard driver’s license,
or a driver’s license with a two-wheeled vehicle endorsement as provided by
law, or a valid two-wheeled vehicle instruction permit, or a special motorcycle
permit as issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety;
   (B)   On private property of another with the express permission to do so by
the owner or occupant of the property;
   (C)   On the posted motorcycle/ATV trail; and
   (D)   Those areas outside of the motorcycle/ATV trail, that is, the area on
the side of the trail furthest away from the inhabited portion of the city.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.003 OPERATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle or ATV under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of the property;
   (B)   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, winter
recreational areas, golf courses, cemetery, or any other public places, except
where posted trails exist, unless the operator has the express permission by
the proper public authority;
   (C)   No motorcycle and/or ATV shall be operated on public sidewalks or
boulevards;
   (D)   On the portion of any public road right-of-way used for motor vehicle
travel, or on the roadway of a state, trunk, county state aid or county
highway, except where permitted by Minnesota State Statutes;
   (E)   Operate a motorcycle and/or ATV at any place, while under the
influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in M.S.§ 169A.03, as it may be amended
from time to time, which is hereby incorporated herein by reference;
   (F)   Operate or park a motorcycle and/or ATV in a careless, reckless or
negligent manner, or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others,
or in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, or to cause or be
likely to cause injury or damages to any person or property;
   (G)   Operate a motorcycle and/or ATV in a manner or location so as to
create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with
the peace and quiet of other persons;
   (H)   Operate a motorcycle and/or ATV, unless there is full compliance with
the provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, and
ATV sections M.S. §§ 84.92 to 84.928, as they may be amended from time to time,
and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, which statutes and rules
and regulations are hereby incorporated herein by reference;
   (I)   So as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway except
through use of a rigid tow-bar attached to the rear of the motorcycle and/or
ATV;
   (J)   Unless the motorcycle and/or ATV have been registered as provided by
law;
   (K)   Operate a motorcycle and/or ATV with more persons on the vehicle than
it was designed for;
   (L)   Operate a motorcycle and/or ATV under the age of 18 years without an
approved safety helmet;
   (M)   Perform any stunts, acrobatics, racing or games of any sort, while
operating a motorcycle and/or ATV on any motorcycle and/or ATV trails; and
   (N)   No motorcycle or ATV shall enter any intersection without yielding the
right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to
the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.004 RATE OF SPEED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a dirt bike, mini-bike or other
motorcycle that is not “street legal” (licensed by the state to allow operation
on public streets) or an ATV, on city streets at a rate of speed greater than
ten mph.
(Ord. 174, passed 8-24-2005) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.005 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   No motorcycle or ATV shall be operated within the city unless it shall have
the following equipment:
   (A)   Mufflers which are properly attached, and which are in good working
order, and which blends the exhaust noise into the overall motorcycle/ATV
noise, and is in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise as is
required by law, and the rules and regulations of the Commissioner of
Conservation pertaining thereto, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-
pass, straight pipe or any similar device on a motorcycle/ATV motor;
   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
motorcycle/ATV under any condition of operation; and
   (C)   A safety or so-called “dead-man” throttle (kill switch) in operating
condition; a SAFETY OR “DEAD-MAN” THROTTLE (KILL SWITCH) is defined as a device
which, when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the
motor to be disengaged from the driving track.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.006 CROSSING OF STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   A motorcycle/ATV may make a direct crossing of a street or highway at any
hour of the day provided:
   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway, and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
   (B)   The motorcycle/ATV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway;
   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
   (D)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on; and
   (E)   The operator of a motorcycle or ATV shall make every effort to be
visible to on-coming traffic from any direction.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996)
§ 72.007 AGE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall operate an ATV/motorcycle in violation of the age
requirements established by Minnesota State Statutes. It is unlawful for the
owner of a motorcycle/ATV to permit the motorcycle and/or ATV to be operated
contrary to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.008 OPERATION DURING EMERGENCY.
   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this subchapter, a motorcycle/ATV may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the periods of time
when, and at locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by
automobile impractical.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.009 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ACT.
   All provisions of the Highway Traffic Regulations Act, M.S. Chapter 169, as
it may be amended from time to time, and all ordinances of the city regulating
traffic, shall apply to the operation of motorcycles/ATVs upon streets and
highways, except those which by their nature have no applications.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.010 OPERATION BY MINOR.
   Parents or guardians shall be held responsible for all damages or wrongful
acts conducted by a minor operating a motorcycle and/or ATV within the city.
(Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   OWNER. A person, other than a person with a security interest, having a
property interest in or title to a snowmobile, and entitled to the use and
possession of the vehicle.
   PUBLIC ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire right-of-way of a public road,
including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders and medians of a
roadway, that is not privately owned.
   REGISTER. The act of assigning a registration number to a snowmobile.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or a
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
   SNOWMOBILE TRAILS. The property designated and posted for use by snowmobiles
which approximately surrounds the platted portion of the city. Specific
boundaries and a map of the trails are available for inspection at the City
Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996)
§ 72.026 AREA OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the
boundaries of the city, except as herein permitted:
   (A)   On private property of another with the express permission to do so by
the owner or occupant of the property;
   (B)   On the posted snowmobile trail; and
   (C)   Those areas outside of the snowmobile trail, that is the area on the
side of the trail furthest away from the inhabited portion of the city.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.027 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile in the
city under the following circumstances:
      (1)   On private property of another without the express permission to do
so by the owner or occupant of the property;
      (2)   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, winter
recreational areas, golf courses, cemetery or any other public places, except
where posted trails exist, unless the operator has the express permission by
the proper public authority;
      (3)   No snowmobile shall be operated on public sidewalks or boulevards.
A BOULEVARD is defined as that area of the public roadway lying between the
sidewalks and that portion of the right-of- way of any public street or road
used for motor vehicle traffic;
      (4)   On the portion of any public road right-of-way used for motor
vehicle travel, or on the roadway of a state, trunk, county state aid or county
highway, except that a city street may be used only to gain access to and from
those areas not restricted by this subchapter. Except where prohibited by state
statutes, or other provisions of this subchapter, snowmobiles may also be
operated upon the ditch bottom or outside of trunk, county state aid and county
highways where the highways lie within the corporate limits of the city; and
      (5)   No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without yielding the
right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to
the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile:
      (1)   At any place, while under the influence of alcohol or of a
controlled substance, as defined in or referred to in M.S. § 169A.03, as may be
amended from time to time, which statutes are hereby incorporated herein by
reference;
      (2)   At a rate of speed greater than ten mph on city streets;
      (3)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly in
disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger,
or be likely to endanger, or cause injury or damage to any person or property;
      (4)   So as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway
except through use of a rigid tow-bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile;
      (5)   Except on posted trails, within 200 feet of:
         (a)   The outer perimeter property line of the platted portion of the
city, except that the area may be crossed at an angle of approximately 90
degrees to the outer perimeter property line for the purpose of gaining access
to and from those areas not restricted by this subchapter;
         (b)   Established outer property lines of any established residence,
except to gain access or egress to those areas not restricted by this
subchapter;
         (c)   The established property line of any winter recreation area or
church property; and
         (d)   Where the operation would conflict with the use of property or
endanger persons or property.
      (6)   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so
as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons;
      (7)   Unless the snowmobile has been registered as provided by law; and
      (8)   Without fully complying with the provisions of M.S. §§ 84.81 to
84.915, inclusive, and as they may be amended from time to time, and all rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder, and all other state statutes regulating
the activities, which statutes and rules and regulations are hereby adopted and
made a part hereof.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.028 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   No snowmobile shall be operated within the city unless it shall have the
following equipment:
   (A)   Mufflers which are properly attached, and which are in good working
order, and which blends the exhaust noise into the overall snowmobile noise,
and is in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise as is
required by law, and the rules and regulations of the Commissioner of
Conservation pertaining thereto, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-
pass, straight pipe, or any similar device on a snowmobile motor;
   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
snowmobile under any condition of operation; and
   (C)   A safety or so-called “dead-man” throttle (kill switch) in operating
condition; a SAFETY OR “DEAD-MAN” THROTTLE (KILL SWITCH) is defined as a device
which, when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the
motor to be disengaged from the driving track.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.029 HIGHWAY OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a snowmobile upon the roadway, shoulder or
inside bank or slope of any trunk, county state aid or county highway in the
city.
   (B)   A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway at any
hour of the day provided:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway, and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway;
      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
      (4)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on; and
      (5)   The operator of a snowmobile shall make every effort to be visible
to on-coming traffic from any direction.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.030 AGE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall operate an snowmobile in violation of the age requirements
established by Minnesota State Statutes. It is unlawful for the owner of a
snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions
of this section.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.031 OPERATION DURING EMERGENCY.
   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this subchapter, a snowmobile may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the periods of time
when, and at locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by
automobile impractical, or in other emergency situations where necessary or
reasonable.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996)
§ 72.032 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ACT.
   All provisions of the Highway Traffic Regulations Act, M.S. Chapter 169, as
it may be amended from time to time, and all ordinances of the city regulating
traffic, shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon streets and highways,
except those which by their nature have no application.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996)
§ 72.033 PARKING ON SNOWMOBILE TRAIL PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a motor vehicle on
the snowmobile trail, excepting snowmobiles and emergency vehicles in an
emergency situation.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.034 OPERATION BY MINOR.
   Parents or guardians shall be held responsible for all damages or wrongful
acts conducted by a minor operating a snowmobile within the city.
(Ord. 134, passed 5-14-1996)
MOTOR BICYCLES
§ 72.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HIGHWAYS. Includes any street, avenue, alley or public way used for or open
to public travel within the city.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every self-propelled motor vehicle having a saddle for use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground. The term includes motor scooters, bicycles with motors attached and
motorcycles, but does not include tractors.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-27-1966)
§ 72.046 MUFFLER.
   (A)   Every motorcycle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good
working order which blends the exhaust noise into the overall vehicle noise and
is in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. No person shall
use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motorcycle on a street,
highway or public way. The exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp
popping or cracking sound.
   (B)   No person shall have for sale, sell or offer for use or sale on any
motorcycle any muffler that fails to comply with the specifications as required
by the Commissioner of Highways of the state.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-27-1966) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.047 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Only one motor bicycle shall occupy a single traffic lane at one time.
It is unlawful for two or more motor bicycles to be operated abreast of one
another in the same traffic lane.
   (B)   No motor bicycle shall be operated or parked upon any public sidewalk
within the city.
   (C)   Motor bicycles shall be subject to the same traffic laws and
regulations of the city and state as are other motor vehicles except where
motor bicycles are expressly exempted therefrom.
   (D)   No stunts, drills, acrobatics, racing or games of any sort on motor
bicycles are permitted on any city highway, street, alley or public way within
the city without the prior approval of the City Chief of Police.
   (E)   Motor bicycles shall be operated in a manner as to minimize any
disturbances to the public and shall not unreasonably annoy or disturb the
comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public by engine
noise, horns, noisy acceleration and any other audible disturbance resulting
from motor bicycle operation.
   (F)   No motor bicycle shall be driven, across or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of occupant thereof, express or implied.
   (G)   No passenger shall be permitted on the handle bars and it shall be
unlawful for more than the number of persons to ride the saddles including the
driver, than the number of persons for which the saddle has been designed.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-27-1966) Penalty, see §
72.999
REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES, MOTOR BICYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS
§ 72.060 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall ride or use a bicycle, motor bicycle or motor scooter upon
any public street, highway or boulevard, the bicycle or scooter being owned by
a resident of the city or customarily kept or stored at a place within the
city, unless the same shall be licensed and registered as herein provided.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.061 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   Every owner of a bicycle, motor bicycle or motor scooter referred to in §
72.060 shall list and register with the City Clerk-Treasurer his or her name
and address, the name of the manufacturer of the vehicle, its serial number,
style and general description.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.062 LICENSE PLATE AND REGISTRATION CARD.
   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall provide each year metallic license plates
having numbers stamped thereon in numerical order, beginning with the number 1.
These metallic license plates shall be suitable for attachment upon the frames
of the vehicles, and shall remain attached during the existence of the license.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the metallic license plate, which shall be
attached to the frame of each vehicle, to the licensee, upon the payment of the
license fee herein provided for. The Clerk- Treasurer shall also keep a record
of the date of issue of each license, to whom issued, and the number thereof.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.063 DESTRUCTION OF LICENSE NUMBER.
   No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, during
the time in which the license plate is operative.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.064 LICENSE FEES.
   The license fee to be paid for each vehicle shall be $0.50 a year and shall
be paid in advance. Upon the loss of any tag or duplicate and upon application
and satisfactory evidence of the loss, a new tag or a new duplicate shall be
issued upon the payment of a fee of $0.50.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956)
§ 72.065 UNLICENSED VEHICLES; IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   If any vehicle is found in any street or alley of the city without a
license identification tag it shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is
being operated on the streets of the city without having been registered.
   (B)   The vehicle shall be immediately impounded and shall be surrendered to
the owner thereof only upon proof of ownership satisfactory to the Chief of
Police, payment of the license registration fee herein above provided, and
payment of the following fees:
 
Impounding                                                  $0.50
For each additional day of storage after the first 24 hours $0.10
 
   (C)   (1)   At the expiration of 60 days after the impounding, each vehicle
which has not been claimed shall be sold at public auction.
      (2)   Notice containing the description of the vehicle to be sold shall
be published in the official newspaper of the city, at least two weeks prior to
the sale.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956)
§ 72.066 LICENSE EXPIRATION DATE.
   All licenses shall expire December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956)
§ 72.067 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   Every license issued hereunder shall be deemed to be granted subject to the
following conditions.
   (A)   No person shall ride or propel any vehicle licensed hereunder upon any
sidewalk in a manner as to interfere with any pedestrian thereon.
   (B)   No person shall ride or propel the vehicle upon a public street,
highway or sidewalk except in a prudent and careful manner and unless the
person shall be capable of efficient control and operation of the vehicle; nor
shall any person propelling or operating the vehicle upon a public street,
highway or sidewalk carry or permit to be carried any other person upon the
saddle.
   (C)   No vehicle licensed hereunder shall be ridden faster than is
reasonable and proper, but shall be operated with reasonable regard to the
safety of the operator and other persons upon the streets and other public
highways.
   (D)   Persons riding the vehicle shall observe all traffic signs and stop at
all stop signs.
   (E)   No vehicle licensed hereunder shall be permitted on any street or
other public highway between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before
sunrise without a headlight visible from the front for not less than 500 feet;
indicating the approach or presence of the vehicle, firmly attached to the
vehicle and properly lighted, nor without a red tail light or in lieu thereof,
a reflector attached to and visible from the rear of the vehicle for a distance
of not less than 200 feet.
   (F)   No person under the age of 15 years shall ride or propel the vehicle
upon any street, highway or sidewalk at night after the hour of 9:00 p.m.
   (G)   No person shall ride or propel a vehicle licensed hereunder upon any
public street, highway or sidewalk abreast of other person or riding or
propelling a vehicle.
   (H)   Every person riding or propelling a vehicle licensed hereunder upon
any street, highway or sidewalk shall observe all traffic rules and regulations
applicable thereto and shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns,
ride at the right-hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left when
passing and overtaking vehicles that are slower moving, and pass to the right
when meeting.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956)
§ 72.068 APPLICATION TO UNLICENSED VEHICLES.
   The conditions and regulations prescribed in §
72.067 shall apply to all bicycles, motor bicycles or motor scooters operated
upon any public street, highway or sidewalk, of this city whether or not
licensed hereunder.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956)
§ 72.069 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE, MOTOR BICYCLE AND MOTOR SCOOTER. Shall have their usual and
accepted meaning, but shall not include any motorcycle or other vehicle to
which a license is issued under the laws of the state.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956)
BICYCLE AND HIKING TRAIL
§ 72.080 BICYCLE AND HIKING TRAIL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle, motorcycle,
motorized bicycle or any other motorized vehicle upon any public bicycle trail
or public hiking trail within the limits of the city. The bicycle trail or
public hiking trail shall mean the property designated and posted for use for
bicycling and/or hiking, as determined by resolution of the City Council.
Specific boundaries and a map of the trail shall be available for inspection at
the City Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any snowmobile on any public bicycle
trail or public hiking trail, or any portion thereof, excepting any trail or
portion thereof which has been designated for use by snowmobiles by resolution
of the City Council and which has been posted by signs permitting the use of
snowmobiles. Operation of snowmobiles upon the bicycle trail or public hiking
trail, or any portion thereof, shall be unlawful unless the trail or portion
thereof is posted by a sign or signs permitting the use of snowmobiles on the
trail or portion thereof.
   (C)   All provisions of the Highway Traffic Regulation Act, M.S. Chapter
169, as it may be amended from time to time, and all ordinances of the city
regulating traffic shall apply to the operation of bicycles on the trails.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all trails within the
city designated and posted for use for cross-country skiing, as determined by
resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 92, passed 11-10-1981) Penalty, see §
72.999
GOLF CARTS
§ 72.095 GOLF CARTS.
   (A)   Registration requirements.
      (1)   Golf carts to be driven on the city streets shall be registered
with the City Clerk’s office.
      (2)   The following information is required to register a golf cart:
         (a)   Complete a registration form for each newly purchased or
obtained golf cart.
         (b)   Pay a $50 registration fee, which is valid for the duration of
ownership.
         (c)   Registration is not transferable except when the golf cart in
question is transferred to a different resident within the city.
   (B)   Rules of operation. Registered golf carts shall be operated on City of
Hoyt Lakes streets under the following conditions:
      (1)   Proof of registration. Display, at all times, the city permit
sticker on the back bumper of the golf cart.
      (2)   Proper licensure. Those persons who possess a valid motor vehicle
operator's license issued by a state licensing authority shall operate a golf
cart. With exception, a driver's permit is acceptable as long as a licensed
adult driver is present at all times. (ADULT DRIVER is defined as a person 18
years of age and over.)
      (3)   Owner liability. The owner and operator of a golf cart are liable
for any injury or damage caused by the negligent operation of the golf cart.
The owner of a golf cart shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if
the owner was the operator of the golf cart at the time of injury or damage or
if the operator had the owner's consent to drive the cart.
      (4)   Use of operation. Golf carts shall be operated on city streets from
sunrise to sunset, unless the golf cart is equipped with both head and tail
lights.
      (5)   Roadway operation.
         (a)   No person shall ride on, and no operator shall allow a person to
ride on, a golf cart, or any portion thereof, not designed or intended for the
conveyance of passengers. OR Golf carts, or any portion thereof, shall be rode
and operated as designed and intended for the conveyance of passengers.
         (b)   Golf carts are restricted to city streets. Golf carts shall not
be operated in any park, playground or upon any other city-owned property,
unless the property is used for ATV, snowmobile operation.
         (c)   Golf carts shall be driven as close as practical to the right-
hand edge of any city street, except when executing a left turn.
         (d)   Golf carts shall yield the right-of-way to other motor vehicles
and pedestrians at all uncontrolled intersections regardless of M.S. §§ 169.20
and 169.21.
         (e)   Golf carts shall be driven in single file.
         (f)   Golf carts may be parked upon any city street within the City of
Hoyt Lakes, subject to the same terms and conditions applicable to the parking
of automobiles and other motor vehicles.
         (g)   Golf carts are not allowed to operate on city sidewalks or any
marked asphalt hiking and biking trails in and around the city proper.
         (h)   Any golf cart traveling to and from Fisherman's Point or to the
golf course shall use the roadway to gain access.
         (i)   Fisherman's Point campers. Seasonal campers using a golf cart as
transportation shall register their golf cart with the City of Hoyt Lakes for
the summer. All weekend and non-seasonal campers will be provided a copy of
this section upon registration and will be exempt from registration, but must
have proof of camping and follow the section.
(Ord. 219, passed 4-22-2019; Ord. 228, passed 11-8-2021)
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the terms of §§
72.001 through
72.010 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, be
fined a sum not to exceed $200. A second offense within 12 calendar months
shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the person shall
be fined a sum not to exceed $700 or shall be imprisoned not to exceed 90 days,
or both.
   (B)   Any person violating the terms of §§
72.025 through
72.034 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, be
fined a sum not to exceed $200. A second offense within 12 calendar months
shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the person shall
be fined a sum not to exceed $700 or shall be imprisoned not to exceed 90 days,
or both.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
72.045 through
72.047, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100
or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days.
   (D)   Any person who shall violate §§
72.060 through
72.069 shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, or by revocation for a period of
up to 90 days of the license authorized in §§
72.060 through
72.069 and theretofore issued with respect to the vehicle in the violation.
   (E)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
72.080 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100.
   (F)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
72.095 shall be punished by a fine as follows:
      (1)   First offense: $50.
      (2)   Second offense: $100.
      (3)   Third offense: Impoundment of the golf cart and mandatory
attendance at next Planning and Zoning meeting. Owner will also be responsible
for all towing and/or storage fees applied.
(Ord. 16, passed 10-10-1956; Ord. 92, passed 11-10-1981; Ord. 134, passed 5-14-
1996; Ord. 135, passed 5-14-1996; Ord. 219, passed 4-22-2019)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   CEMETERY
      
94.   LIBRARY
      
95.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
96.   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
      
97.   PROHIBITION OF DEER FEEDING
      
98.   EVENT PERMITS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   License required
   
90.03   Requirements for license
   
90.04   Restraint
   
90.05   Obligation to prevent nuisances
   
90.06   Impoundment
   
90.07   Notice of impoundment
   
90.08   Redemption
   
90.09   Disposition of unclaimed dogs or cats
   
90.10   Records
   
90.11   Permissible return of unrestrained dog or cat
   
90.12   Confinement of certain cats or dogs
   
90.13   Owner obligation for proper care
   
90.14   Quarantine of certain dogs or cats
   
90.15   Muzzling proclamation
   
90.16   Removal of excrement
   
90.17   Summary destruction of certain dogs and cats
   
90.18   Appointment of officers
   
90.19   Nonresidents
   
90.20   Vaccination
   
90.21   Animals prohibited
   
90.22   Dog or cat bite; attack by an animal
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by the City Council for the purpose
of impounding and caring for dogs, cats, other domesticated animals or non-
domesticated animals, held under the authority of this chapter or state
statutes.
   KENNEL. Any premises where more than three of any type of domestic animals
over six months of age are present as owners’ pets, or accepted for boarding,
breeding, training or sale, except when located in a pet shop or veterinary
clinic.
   OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer of the city, Animal Control Officer and
any persons designated by the city to assist in the enforcement of this
chapter.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, owning,
harboring or keeping one or more dogs, cats, other domesticated animals or non-
domesticated animals.
   RESTRAINT. A dog or cat shall be deemed to be under restraint if it is on
the residential premises of its owner, or if accompanied by a responsible
person and under that person’s effective control. UNDER THAT PERSON’S EFFECTIVE
CONTROL shall mean effectively restrained by:
      (1)   A chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length (hereinafter
referred to as LEASH RESTRAINT);
      (2)   A chain or leash capable of extending leash lengths greater than
six feet if the leash is retracted so it does not exceed six feet in length
when the dog or cat is being approached or approaching within ten feet of other
persons and/or other animals (hereinafter referred to as LEASH RESTRAINT);
      (3)   Accompanied by and under the control and direction of the owner or
other responsible person by voice control so as to be as effectively restrained
by command as by a leash (hereinafter referred to as VERBAL RESTRAINT); or
      (4)   Accompanied by and under the control and direction of the owner or
other responsible person by electronic collar so as to be as effectively
restrained by command as by a leash (hereinafter referred to as ELECTRONIC
RESTRAINT).
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any dog or cat
over six months of age without first obtaining a license therefore from the
City Clerk-Treasurer or his or her agent.
   (B)   Applications for license shall be made on forms prescribed by the City
Clerk-Treasurer, which forms shall set forth:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner;
      (2)   The name and address of the person making application, if other
than the owner; and
      (3)   The breed, sex and age of the dog or cat for which license is
sought, and whether or not neutered. No license shall be issued to any person
other than the owner except upon the written request of the owner.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Owners have the option of two types of licenses - a lifetime license
or an annual license. An annual license shall be valid for a period of one
year. A lifetime license is valid for the lifetime of the animal, no matter the
duration. The annual and lifetime licenses shall be issued only upon payment to
the City Clerk-Treasurer of the fees as determined by City Council resolution.
   (B)   No license shall be issued for an altered (neutered or spayed) dog or
cat for a reduced license fee unless there shall be filed with the application
for a license a written statement of a licensed veterinarian to the effect that
the dog or cat has been altered.
   (C)   Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a written
statement or certificate from a qualified veterinarian showing that the cat or
dog to be licensed has been given a vaccination against rabies within the time
hereinafter specified. No license shall be granted for any dog which has not
been vaccinated against rabies within three years prior to the application. No
license shall be granted for any cat which has not been vaccinated against
rabies within two years prior to the application. The owner must file written
proof thereof in the City Clerk-Treasurer's office, or the license shall
automatically be invalidated. Vaccinations shall be performed only by a doctor
qualified to practice veterinarian medicine in the state in which the dog or
cat is vaccinated. If a qualified veterinarian certifies that a rabies shot
will be dangerous to the health of a dog or cat, as a result of that animal's
advanced age or health, the requirement of vaccination shall be waived upon
filing the written certificate.
   (D)   (1)   Each dog and cat shall be licensed within one month after a
valid license is required by this chapter.
      (2)   To specify:
         (a)   Upon expiration of a prior license;
         (b)   When a dog or cat is first purchased by, transferred to, or
possessed by, an owner, within 30 days after the purchase, transfer or
possession; and
         (c)   When a dog or cat attains the age of six months, within 30 days
thereafter.
   (E)   Valid license tags shall be securely affixed to animals as required
herein at all times. In the event a tag is lost or destroyed, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner to obtain a duplicate immediately (no one-month
delay). Duplicate tags shall be issued by the city at cost. In the event a
valid license is not obtained within the time period stated herein, a penalty
in the amount determined by City Council resolution shall be assessed to the
owner with this penalty to be in addition to all other license fees,
impoundment fees or fines. Valid licenses are not transferable except when the
specific dog or cat in question is transferred to a different resident within
the city. License fees, and late payment fees, may be amended by resolution of
the City Council at any time.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 229, passed 11-8-2021)
§ 90.04 RESTRAINT.
   All dogs and cats shall be kept under restraint, as provided in this
section.
   (A)   (1)   In the following areas of the city, all cats and dogs must be
under leash restraint and accompanied by a responsible person:
         (a)   Beach;
         (b)   Playgrounds;
         (c)   Business areas with buildings intended for business or other
commercial purposes;
         (d)   Residential areas with buildings intended for residential
purposes;
         (e)   Recreational areas including softball fields, Water Carnival
midway and golf course, while a recreational event is in progress;
         (f)   Designated walking trail located in Fisherman’s Point Campground
or Whitewater Lake back bay; and
         (g)   Fisherman’s Point Campground during the season that the
campground is open, except as provided in division (B)(3) below.
      (2)   In the areas described above, verbal restraint or electronic
restraint is not sufficient and shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   In the following areas of the city, all cats and dogs must be under
leash restraint, vocal restraint or electronic restraint, and accompanied by a
responsible person:
      (1)   All designated walking trails other than as described in division
(A) above;
      (2)   All areas within the city zoned residential, business or
commercial, except as set forth in division (A) above; and
      (3)   In Fisherman’s Point Campground, within the boundary of a specific
campsite rented by the owner of the cat or dog.
   (C)   Within the city limits, dogs or cats are not required to be under
restraint, as defined by this chapter, except as set forth in divisions (A) or
(B) above.
   (D)   The provisions of this section require all dogs and cats to be under
the effective control of a responsible person. It is a violation of this
chapter if a dog or cat is not under a responsible person’s effective control,
even if the dog or cat is connected to a leash, wearing an electronic collar or
in the vicinity of the person, and not under the person’s effective control.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 OBLIGATION TO PREVENT NUISANCES.
   It shall be the obligation and responsibility of the owner or custodian of
any animal in the city, whether permanently or temporarily located therein, to
prevent the animal from committing any act which constitutes a nuisance. It
shall be considered a nuisance for any animal to habitually or frequently bark
or cry, to frequent school grounds, parks, public beaches or other public
places unaccompanied by a responsible person, to chase vehicles, to molest or
annoy any person if the person is not on the property of the owner or custodian
of the animal, or to molest, or destroy any property, public or private.
Failure on the part of the owner or custodian to prevent his or her animal from
committing an act of nuisance is hereby declared to be unlawful.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Unrestrained dogs and cats may be taken by any officer as hereinbefore
defined and impounded in an animal shelter and confined in a humane manner.
Impoundment of cats and dogs shall be kept for not less than five regular
business days unless reclaimed prior to that by their owners provided
hereafter.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.07 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Upon taking up and impounding a dog or cat, the Animal Control Officer
or his or her designee shall within two days thereafter post in three or more
conspicuous places in the city a notice of impounding in substantially the
following form:
NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING DOG OR CAT
Date: ____________________________
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:
I have this day taken up and impounded in the animal shelter of the City of
Hoyt Lakes, a dog or cat answering the following description:
Dog or cat _____________________________         Sex
_______________________________
Breed _________________________________         Approximate Age
____________________
Name of Owner
______________________________________________________________________
Location where found
_________________________________________________________________
Other features
_______________________________________________________________________
Notice is hereby given that unless the dog or cat is claimed or redeemed on or
before ____________________, on the ____________________ day of
____________________, 20____ , the same will be sold or destroyed as provided
by ordinance.
Signed: ___________________________________
Animal Control Officer
 
   (B)   If the owner of the dog or cat be known, written notice of impounding,
in lieu of posted notice, shall be given the owner thereof, either by mail or
personal service. The date of sale or destruction of the dog or cat shall be on
or after the fifth day after the posting or giving of the notice unless that
date falls on a Sunday or holiday, in which it shall be the following day or
thereafter.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.08 REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Any dog or cat may be reclaimed from the animal shelter by its owner
within the time specified in the notice by the payment to the Clerk-Treasurer
of the license fee (if not paid for the current year, plus penalty, if any),
with an impoundment fee, plus the cost of boarding fee, which the fees shall be
determined by City Council resolution.
   (B)   The redemption fee as set forth herein, including impounding fee and
boarding fee, shall be paid, in full, when the owner reclaims the dog or cat
from the animal shelter. In addition, if the owner does not reclaim the dog or
cat, and the dog or cat is disposed of in accordance with other provisions of
this chapter, the owner of the dog or cat shall be liable to the city for all
accrued impounding fee, boarding fee and disposition costs, if any. For
purposes of this chapter, the owner as shown the on the license and license
application shall be conclusively presumed to be the current owner of the dog
or cat, unless the listed owner documents to the satisfaction of the City
Clerk-Treasurer or his or her agent the identity of the current owner.
Notwithstanding this section, the owner shall remain subject to all penalties
contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS OR CATS.
   Any dog or cat which is not claimed in timely fashion as provided in this
chapter, may be sold to anyone desiring to purchase the dog or cat if not
requested by licensed educational or scientific institutions under state law.
All sums received in excess of the costs and redemption fee shall be held by
the City Clerk-Treasurer for the benefit of owner and if not claimed in one
year, the funds shall be placed in the General Fund of the city. Any dog or cat
which is not claimed by the owner or sold shall be given away to a suitable
home. In the event the dog or cat is not claimed by owner, sold or given away
to a suitable home, the dog or cat shall be humanely disposed of and buried by
the Animal Control Officer or his or her designee.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.10 RECORDS.
   The Animal Control Officer shall keep suitable records, available for review
by the public, of all complaints concerning dogs or cats, the impoundment if
any, the notice provided and the ultimate disposition of the dog or cat.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.11 PERMISSIBLE RETURN OF UNRESTRAINED DOG OR CAT.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, if an animal is found
unrestrained and its owner can be identified and located, the animal need not
be impounded, but may, in the discretion of the Officer, be taken to the owner.
In that case, however, proceedings may be taken against the owner for violation
of this chapter.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.12 CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN CATS OR DOGS.
   Every female animal in heat shall be confined in a building or other secure
enclosure in a manner that the female animal cannot come into contact with
another animal, except for planned breeding.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 OWNER OBLIGATION FOR PROPER CARE.
   No owner shall fail to provide any animal with sufficient good and wholesome
food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and treatment. No person
shall beat, treat cruelly, torment or otherwise abuse any animal, or cause or
permit any dog fight. No owner of a dog or cat shall abandon the animal.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 QUARANTINE OF CERTAIN DOGS OR CATS.
   Any dog or cat which bites a person shall be quarantined for that time as
may be directed by the Animal Control Officer. During quarantine, the animal
shall be securely confined, and kept from contact with any other animal. At the
discretion of the Animal Control Officer, the quarantine may be on the premises
of the owner; however, if the Animal Control Officer requires other
confinement, the owner shall surrender the animal for the quarantine, to an
animal shelter or shall at his or her own expense, place it in a veterinary
hospital.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.15 MUZZLING PROCLAMATION.
   Whenever the prevalence of rabies renders the action necessary to protect
the public health and safety, the City Council shall issue a proclamation
ordering every person owning or keeping a dog or cat to muzzle it securely so
that it cannot bite. No person shall violate the proclamation and any unmuzzled
dog or cat unrestrained during the time fixed in the proclamation shall be
subject to impoundment as heretofore provided and the owner of the dog shall be
subject to the penalties as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner, or any other person in control, of any
dog or cat on public property or private property not owned by the owner or
person in control, to fail to immediately remove excrement left by the dog or
cat to a proper receptacle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the ownership or use of seeing eye dogs by blind persons, dogs when used in
police activities by the city, or tracking dogs when used by or with the
permission of the city.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to remove excrement left
by the dog or cat on the private property of the owner or person in control at
reasonable intervals so as to not constitute a nuisance. For purposes of this
division (B), a NUISANCE shall be defined as causing a health hazard to the
animal, causing a health hazard to any persons in the vicinity or any animals
in the vicinity, causing an unsightly appearance or smell, or causing flies and
other insects to frequent the area. If the area constitutes a nuisance in the
opinion of an officer or any other person, and the officer or person notifies
the owner of the nuisance, the owner shall remove the excrement within 24 hours
after receiving the notice. It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person
to allow a nuisance or to fail to remove a nuisance as provided herein.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 SUMMARY DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS AND CATS.
   Whenever an officer has reasonable cause to believe that a particular dog or
cat presents a clear and immediate danger to residents of the city because it
is infected with rabies (hydrophobia) or because of a clearly demonstrated
vicious nature, the officer, after making reasonable attempts to impound the
dog or cat, may summarily destroy the dog or cat. In the event of the
destruction of the dog or cat, the officer shall use all precautions necessary
to preserve the brain of the animal for examination of rabies.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.18 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   The City Council may from time to time appoint those persons as may be
necessary to assist the police officers of the city and the Animal Control
Officer in the enforcement of this chapter. The person shall have police powers
insofar as is necessary to enforce this chapter, and no person shall interfere
with, hinder or molest them in the exercise of the powers.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.19 NONRESIDENTS.
   The sections of this chapter requiring a license shall not apply to
nonresidents of the city, provided that dogs or cats of the owners shall not be
kept in the city longer than 30 days without a license and shall be under
restraint.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 90.20 VACCINATION.
   All dogs found to be within the city shall be vaccinated against rabies at
least every 36 months. All cats found to be within the city shall be vaccinated
against rabies at least every 24 months. In addition, the owner or custodian of
any animal in the city must, within two days of request by an officer, provide
the officer with a written statement or certificate of a licensed veterinarian
to the effect that the dog or cat has been properly vaccinated according to the
regulations contained herein prior to the request. It shall be unlawful for any
owner or custodian of a dog or cat to fail to vaccinate the dog or cat as
provided herein, or to fail to provide proof thereof as provided herein.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FARM ANIMALS. Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine (including pot-
bellied pigs), ponies, all other hoofed animals, honeybees and other animals
that are typically or customarily kept for purposes of agriculture and farm
animal-husbandry, and poultry.
      NON-DOMESTICATED ANIMAL. Any animal, reptile or fowl, which is not
naturally tame or gentle but normally is wild in nature or disposition and
which, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would
constitute a danger to human life or property; and any farm animals.
      POULTRY. Includes chickens, ducks, geese, pigeons, guinea hens and
turkeys.
   (B)   No person shall keep, maintain, or harbor within the city any of the
following animals:
      (1)   Any animal or species prohibited by state or federal law; and/or
      (2)   Any non-domesticated animal or species, including, but not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Any skunk, whether captured in the wild, domestically raised,
de-scented or not de-scented, vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated
against rabies;
         (b)   Any large cat of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers,
jaguars, leopards, cougars and ocelots, except commonly accepted domesticated
house cats;
         (c)   Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, foxes,
coyotes, dingoes and jackals, except domesticated dogs that are not a cross
breed with or hybrid with another member of the family Canidae;
         (d)   Any poisonous viper; and
         (e)   Any other animal which is not listed explicitly above, but which
can be reasonably defined by the terms in division (B)(1) above, including but
not limited to, bears and badgers.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Any person desiring to keep animals prohibited under division (B)
(2) above shall obtain a temporary permit from the city. A permit may be issued
for a period not to exceed 30 days and shall specify further conditions under
which the animals shall be kept; provided, however, that no permit may be
issued unless the prohibited animal is brought into the city for entertainment,
exhibition, show or promotional purposes only. A public zoo or other
institution engaged in a permanent display of animals may be issued a special
use permit provided applicable zoning requirements are met.
      (2)   Fish in bowls, non-poisonous snakes, birds kept indoors, hamsters,
mice, rabbits, gerbils, white rats, guinea pigs, chinchillas, lizards, ferrets
and similar small animals capable of being maintained continuously in aquariums
or cages, are also exempt and do not require a permit so long as the keeping of
the animals does not constitute a nuisance or a danger.
      (3)   Handicapped persons keeping monkeys trained as household helpers
are exempt from the permit requirement.
      (4)   Animals classified as farm animals in division (A) above may be
kept in a specific zoning district if permitted by the city zoning regulations
or if allowed by a conditional use permit granted by the City Planning
Commission.
   (D)   Any animal kept in violation of this chapter may be impounded by the
city, and after it being so impounded for ten days or more following notice to
the owner without being reclaimed by the owner, may be destroyed, sold or
otherwise disposed of. Any person reclaiming any impounded animal shall pay the
costs of impounding and keeping the same.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 DOG OR CAT BITE; ATTACK BY AN ANIMAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dog or cat to fail to restrain
the dog or cat from inflicting or attempting to inflict bodily injury to any
person or other animal, whether or not the animal is in the presence of the
owner. The term BODILY INJURY includes any dog or cat bite that breaks the skin
of the person or other animal bitten.
   (B)   Violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor, except that a
violation shall be a misdemeanor if:
      (1)   The same animal had previously bitten any person or other animal;
or
      (2)   The animal was known by its owner as having a propensity, tendency
or disposition to attack persons or other animals unprovoked, or otherwise
threatening the safety of any persons or domestic animals, or when unprovoked,
the animal chases or approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack.
This section shall not apply to an attack by a dog under the control of an on-
duty law enforcement officer, or to an attack upon an uninvited intruder who
has entered the owner’s home with criminal intent.
   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation under this section
if the owner proves that the owner had no previous knowledge or reason to know
of a previous bite or previous aggressive behavior by the animal, or that the
animal was provoked to an extent that the bite was justified.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, any person, firm,
corporation or other entity found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity, which violates any
provision of §
90.21 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as defined by state law.
      (3)   Failure to obtain a valid license within seven days following
commencement of prosecution for violation of the licensing regulation contained
herein shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   All petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor penalties provided for herein
shall be in addition to any license fees, late penalties or late fees,
impoundment fees, boarding fees, leash/restraint violation fees, barking/
nuisance fees, disposition fees and any other administrative fees that the City
Council is hereby authorized to and may establish and impose for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions and requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 192, passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 223, passed 6-7-2021)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
Abandoned, Junked or Inoperative Motor Vehicles
   
91.01   Declaration of public nuisance
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Parking and storage of abandoned, junked, dismantled and inoperative
vehicles prohibited
   
91.04   Failure to remove abandoned or inoperative vehicle
   
91.05   Removal by city
   
91.06   Immediate sale
   
91.07   Notice
   
91.08   Right to reclaim
   
91.09   Public sale
   
91.10   Entry upon private property for removal or abatement
   
91.11   Prohibition on city streets
Weeds and Grasses and Accumulation of Garbage, Refuse and Other Materials
   
91.25   Declaration
   
91.26   Weeds and grasses
   
91.27   Accumulation of garbage, refuse and other materials
   
91.28   Notice; abatement
Synthetic Detergents
   
91.40   Preamble
   
91.41   Definitions
   
91.42   Sale of synthetic detergents
   
91.43   City’s responsibility
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Chapter 90
   Parks and Recreation, see
Chapter 92
ABANDONED, JUNKED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 91.01 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The accumulation or storage of abandoned, wrecked, junked, partially
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city is hereby found to create an
unsightly condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to attract vermin and to constitute an
attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of the public.
The accumulation and outside storage of the vehicles is determined to be in the
nature of rubbish, litter and unsightly debris, which adversely affect the
health, safety and general welfare of the community. Therefore, the
accumulation and storage of the vehicles on public or private property is
hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as provided
herein or as provided under any other ordinance of the city or by the laws of
the state.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle to which the last registered owner of record
thereof has relinquished dominion, or that has remained for a period of more
than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or
that has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property
without the consent of the person in control of the property, or that has been
in an inoperable condition for more than 48 hours, so that it has no
substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual functions,
whether it is located on private or public property unless it is kept in an
enclosed garage or storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle
voluntarily surrendered by its owner to and accepted by the city. Appropriately
licensed but inoperative pioneer, classic or collector vehicles as defined by
M.S. § 168.10, as it may be amended from time to time, may be stored on the
owner’s property, provided that the vehicles are screened from public view by
means of a six-foot high opaque fence.
   INOPERATIVE OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES. Any motor vehicle which cannot be driven
or propelled under its own power in its existing condition or which cannot be
driven or propelled under its own power in a safe manner because of its
wrecked, junked or partially dismantled condition. A vehicle which does not
have a current vehicle license shall be considered INOPERATIVE. A vehicle
parked in a yard and not moved for 30 consecutive days shall be considered
INOPERATIVE.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
   VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle as defined under M.S. § 169.011, subd. 1, as it
may be amended from time to time, including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles,
tractors, snowmobiles, ATVs, boats and other self-propelled machinery. The
definition of “vehicle” shall also include campers, including motorized self-
propelled campers, pull-behind campers or camper trailers, pop-up campers and
pick-up (truck bed) campers.
   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to
the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the
motor, drive train and wheels.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991; Ord. 207, passed 7-28-2014; Ord. 222, passed 2-8-
2021)
§ 91.03 PARKING AND STORAGE OF ABANDONED, JUNKED, DISMANTLED AND INOPERATIVE
VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park, store or leave, or permit the parking, storing
or leaving of any abandoned vehicle or any vehicle which is in a wrecked,
junked, partially dismantled, or inoperative condition upon any property,
including private property within the city for a period in excess of 48 hours
unless:
      (1)   The vehicle is completely enclosed within a building;
      (2)   The vehicle is under control of the city or its agent;
      (3)   The vehicle is stored or parked on private property in connection
with a business or commercial enterprise, operated and conducted in a lawful
manner and when parking or storing of vehicles is necessary to the operation of
the business or commercial enterprise; and
      (4)   The vehicle is stored or parked on private property of the owner
thereof, or a member of his or her family, for the purpose of making repairs
thereto, or for the purpose of evaluating and inspecting damages or necessary
repairs, provided that at all times while the vehicle is so stored at least
one-half of the total number of wheels of the vehicle are in contact with the
ground and only one vehicle be so stored or parked at any one time.
   (B)   In the event of a vehicle stored as provided in division (A)(4) above,
the vehicle may be so stored for a period not to exceed 14 days, after which
time the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 FAILURE TO REMOVE ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE.
   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private property
without the consent of the person in control of the property, or any person who
fails, neglects or refuses to remove an abandoned, wrecked, junked, partially
dismantled or inoperative vehicle or to house the vehicle and abate the
nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter shall be in
violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991; Ord. 207, passed 7-28-2014) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 REMOVAL BY CITY.
   If the registered owner of any vehicle which is in violation of this
subchapter or if the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the
property upon which the vehicle is located shall fail, neglect or refuse to
remove or house the vehicle in accordance with this subchapter, the City Clerk-
Treasurer, or the Police Department, may remove and dispose of the vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of §
91.09.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991)
§ 91.06 IMMEDIATE SALE.
   When an abandoned vehicle is more than seven model years of age, is lacking
vital component parts and does not display a license plate currently valid in
Minnesota or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be
eligible for sale at public auction and shall not be subject to the
notification or reclamation provisions of §§
91.07 and
91.08.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991)
§ 91.07 NOTICE.
   (A)   When an abandoned vehicle does not fall within the provisions of §
91.08, the City Clerk-Treasurer or the Police Department shall give, or cause
to be given, within ten days of the taking, written notice setting forth the
date and place of taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the
abandoned vehicle, if the information can be reasonably obtained, and the place
where the vehicle is being held; shall inform the owner and any lienholders of
their right to reclaim the vehicle under §
91.08 and shall state that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed a waiver by them of all
right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the
vehicle at a public auction pursuant to §
91.09.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, or
person in lawful possession or control of the property upon which the vehicle
was abandoned and all readily identifiable lienholders of record. If it is
impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of
the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was
abandoned. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and
economy.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991)
§ 91.08 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
   (A)   The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned vehicle or any person in
lawful possession or control of the property upon which the vehicle was
abandoned shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city upon payment
of all towing and storage charges and an administrative fee of $25 resulting
from the taking of the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the date of
the notice required by §
91.07.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to impair any lien of a
garagekeeper under the laws of this state, or the right of a lienholder to
foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGEKEEPER is an operator of a
motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of a motor vehicle for vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991)
§ 91.09 PUBLIC SALE.
   (A)   An abandoned vehicle and its contents taken into custody and not
reclaimed under §
91.08 shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale following
ten days’ published notice thereof in the legal newspaper of the city. The
purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The
receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a
certificate of title, free and clear, of all liens and claims of ownership.
Before a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor
vehicle safety check.
   (B)   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned vehicle, the city shall
reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing of the vehicle,
and all notice, publication and administrative costs incurred pursuant to this
subchapter. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for a period of 90 days and if not
claimed shall thereafter be deposited in the city treasury.
   (C)   The city shall have the right, under this subchapter, to bid on any
abandoned or inoperative vehicle and contents sold at public auction or, in the
event that no bids are received, to claim title to any vehicle and contents.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991)
§ 91.10 ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR REMOVAL OR ABATEMENT.
   In the event that a vehicle is located on private property in violation of
this subchapter, the City Clerk-Treasurer, or the Police Department, or its
designee, may give ten days’ written notice, either by certified mail/return
receipt requested, or by personal service, to the registered owner of the
vehicle, or the owner or occupant of the real estate, which directs the
abatement of the violation within ten days, and in the event that the violation
is not abated within ten days, the City Clerk-Treasurer or Police Department,
or its designee, may and is hereby expressly authorized to enter upon the
private property for the purpose of abating the violation and removing the
vehicle, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances. The cost of the removal and storage shall be
billed to the owner of the vehicle and/or owner or occupant of the real estate,
and if not paid, may be certified to the real estate as a special assessment.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991; Ord. 207, passed 7-28-2014)
§ 91.11 PROHIBITION ON CITY STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to abandon a vehicle in the right-of-way of
highways, roads and streets within the city. No person shall park or leave any
vehicle in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperative condition in
a right-of-way of any street, provided that a reasonable time, not to exceed 24
hours from the time of disability is permitted for the removal or servicing of
a disabled vehicle in an emergency caused by an accident or sudden break-down
of the vehicle. However, this shall not prohibit the city or Police Department
from removing a vehicle which is blocking or otherwise endangering traffic.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991) Penalty, see §
91.99
WEEDS AND GRASSES AND ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE, REFUSE
AND OTHER MATERIALS
§ 91.25 DECLARATION.
   It is hereby determined that it is in the best interest of the citizens of
the city, in order to protect their health, safety and welfare, for the city to
control the growth of weeds and grasses and the accumulation of garbage, refuse
and other materials on yards located within the city.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-9-1998)
§ 91.26 WEEDS AND GRASSES.
   (A)   Any weeds or grasses growing upon any lot or parcel of land, or
boulevard abutting the land, within an area of the city zoned as a residential
district, R-1 through R-6, or zoned as a business district, B-1 or B-2, in
which the weeds or grasses grow to a height greater than eight inches, or which
have gone or about to go to seed, are a nuisance.
   (B)   The owner or occupant shall abate or prevent the nuisance on the
property, or on the boulevard abutting the property.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-9-1998) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.27 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE, REFUSE AND OTHER MATERIALS.
   The accumulation of garbage, refuse or other materials upon any lot or
parcel of land within the city, exclusive of garbage, refuse or other materials
placed in any containers for the purpose of garbage disposal, is a nuisance.
The owner or occupant of the property shall abate or prevent the nuisance upon
the property and upon the boulevard abutting the property.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-9-1998) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.28 NOTICE; ABATEMENT.
   The City Clerk-Treasurer or the Police Department, or its designee, or any
other person designated by City Council motion, may give written notice to the
owner or occupant of the property requiring that the nuisance be abated within
48 hours. Notice shall be personally served upon the owner or occupant of the
property. If the nuisance is not abated within the 48-hour time period, unless
good cause is shown by the owner or occupant for an additional period of time,
the city or its designee may enter onto the property and abate the nuisance by
causing the weeds and grasses to be cut and removed at the expense of the
owner, and may remove any garbage, refuse or other materials accumulated on the
property at the expense of the owner, and if not paid, the cost for the work
shall be certified to the real estate as a special assessment, in accordance
with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-9-1998; Ord. 207, passed 7-28-2014)
SYNTHETIC DETERGENTS
§ 91.40 PREAMBLE.
   (A)   The City Council, in the exercise of its police powers, does hereby
find, based upon substantial scientific evidence produced by the Federal Water
Quality Administration of the United States, that the presence of excessive
phosphorus content in present lakes and streams encourages uncontrolled growth
of algae and other aquatic plants, and that as algae and other aquatic plants
die and decay, they use up the oxygen in the water, thus causing fish to
suffocate, and also, as the growth of algae and other aquatic plants continues,
eventually this decayed vegetation fills in the body of water and ends its
existence.
   (B)   The City Council further finds that in the exercise of its police
power for the benefit of the citizens of the city it is essential to the
welfare of the city that lakes and aquatic fish life be preserved, not only
within Whitewater Lake contained within the corporate limits of the city, but
in the Lake Superior Basin, into which the Whitewater Lake eventually flows;
and to that end, that the household consumer of synthetic detergents purchased
within the city should be informed of the phosphorus content of the detergents
at the place of purchase within the city, so as to help the consumer choose
washing products containing the minimum amounts of potentially polluting
ingredients.
(Ord. 53, passed 1-26-1971)
§ 91.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, partner, officer, director, firm,
partnership, joint venture, association, cooperative or private corporation,
organized for profit. As used in the preceding sentence, the term PERSON
includes, but is not limited to, directors and officers of corporations, or
members of partnerships, or sole proprietors, who either individually or
jointly with others, have the responsibility of complying with the requirements
of this subchapter.
   PHOSPHORUS CONTENT. The amount of the element phosphorus expressed as
percent sodium tripolyphospate.
Phosphorus Contents of Detergents, Expressed as
Percent Sodium Tripolyphosphate
Brand Phosphorus Content
Phosphorus Contents of Detergents, Expressed as
Percent Sodium Tripolyphosphate
Brand                      Phosphorus Content
Addit (Liquid)             2.2
Ajax Laundry               44.6
All                        54.0
Amway                      60.0
Amway Dish Drops           Less than 1.0
Amway Sa - 8               49.3
Amway Trizyme              71.2
Axion                      63.2
Bestline B-7               38.0
Biz                        73.9
Blue Rain Drops            63.2
Bold                       45.4
Bonus                      37.5
Borateem                   Less than 1.0
Breeze                     37.2
Calgonite                  49.4
Cascade                    54.5
Cheer                      36.3
Cold Power                 44.6
Cold Water All (Liquid)    Less than 1.0
Cold Water All (Powder)    45.4
Coldwater Sure             48.2
Downy                      Less than 1.0
Dreft                      41.9
Drive                      47.4
Duz                        38.3
Electrosol                 34.8
Enzyme Brion               71.4
Fab                        34.8
Gain                       39.5
Instant Fels Soap          16.6
Ivory Liquid               1.9
Lux Liquid                 1.9
Oxydol                     46.6
Par plus                   4.3
Punch                      44.2
Rinso with Chlorine Bleach 41.0
Royalite                   21.7
Salvo                      56.6
Snowy Bleach               36.4
Tide                       49.8
White King (With Borax)    34.7
White King Soap            Less than 1.0
Wisk (Liquid)              14.2
 
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any location within the city where synthetic
detergents, as that term is hereafter defined, are sold or offered for sale at
retail.
   RETAIL SALE or SALE AT RETAIL. A sale for any purpose other than resale in
the regular course of business.
   SYNTHETIC DETERGENT. For the purposes of this subchapter, any manufactured
laundry or dishwashing product which contains the element phosphorus in
quantities greater than 1% when expressed as sodium tripolyphosphate.
(Ord. 53, passed 1-26-1971)
§ 91.42 SALE OF SYNTHETIC DETERGENTS.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, or to offer for sale, at any retail
establishment within the corporate limits of the city, any synthetic detergent
unless he or she shall have posted in his or her retail establishment an
alphabetical list of all synthetic detergents offered for sale at retail
establishments and shall have indicated on that list the phosphorus content of
each synthetic detergent based on the most current information supplied to him
or her by the city. The list shall be printed or typed on paper, cardboard or
other suitable paper product so that it will be plainly legible to purchasers
in the retail establishment and the list shall have the phosphorus content of
each product indicated directly across from the product. The list shall be
conspicuously displayed at the location within the retail establishment where
the products are sold.
   (B)   The following title and words shall be indicated at the top of the
list:
 
Phosphorus Contents of Detergents, Expressed as Percent Sodium
Tripolyphosphate
Brand Phosphorus Content
 
(Ord. 53, passed 1-26-1971) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.43 CITY’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the responsibility of the city to secure information regarding
the phosphorus content of each synthetic detergent on the retail market from
the Federal Water Quality Administration, Department of the Interior,
Washington, D.C., 20402, and to deliver or mail the information to each retail
merchant selling synthetic detergents in the city. The city shall send updated
information to retail merchants regarding the phosphorus contents of synthetic
detergents as it becomes available from the Federal Water Quality
Administration.
(Ord. 53, passed 1-26-1971)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of §§
91.01 through
91.11 shall be subject to an administrative penalty, and in addition, the
violation shall constitute a petty misdemeanor. Every day that the offense
occurs shall be deemed a separate violation of §§
91.01 through
91.11. A second offense occurring within 12 months after a conviction of a
violation of §§
91.01 through
91.11 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Failure by an owner or an occupant of property to comply with the
notice served upon the owner or occupant as provided by §§
91.25 through
91.28 within the time allowed therein shall constitute a violation of §§
91.25 through
91.28, and shall be subject to an administrative penalty, and in addition,
shall constitute a petty misdemeanor. A second offense occurring within 12
months after a conviction of a violation of §§
91.25 through
91.28 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Administrative penalty and administrative remedies for §§
91.01 through
91.11 and
91.25 through
91.28.
      (1)   Generally. A violation of a city ordinance which constitutes an
administrative offense shall be subject to the administrative penalties set
forth in divisions (B) and (C) above. A first offense shall be subject to an
administrative penalty in the amount of $100. A second offense within a 12-
month time period shall be subject to an administrative penalty in the amount
of $250. Any further violations within a 12-month time period shall be subject
to $500 administrative penalties.
      (2)   Administrative remedy. Should the owner or occupant not comply with
the requirements set forth in the notice and abate the violation, the city may
enter onto the property to cure the violation, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances, at the expense of the property owner, and if
not paid, the cost for the work shall be certified to the real estate as a
special assessment.
      (3)   Payment of administrative penalty. In the event of a violation of
an ordinance and failure to cure in timely fashion, the city may issue a notice
which establishes an administrative penalty as provided herein. Once notice is
given, the alleged violator shall, within seven days of the issuance of the
notice, pay the amount set forth in the notice, or may request a hearing in
writing, as is provided for hereafter. If a hearing is not requested or the
administrative fine is not paid within the seven-day time period, the city may
assess the cost of abatement and the amount of the administrative fine as a
special assessment against the property, and may also prosecute the violation
as a criminal offense.
      (4)   Hearing. Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant
to this division (D) may, within seven days of the time of issuance of the
notice, request a hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall have
authority to dismiss the violation, or reduce or waive the penalty, or sustain
the violation. If the violation is sustained, the violator shall pay the
penalty within seven days.
(Ord. 115, passed 9-23-1991; Ord. 106, passed 11-9-1998; Ord. 180, passed 5-8-
2007; Ord. 207, passed 7-28-2014)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Camping, Picnic and Recreational Facilities
   
92.01   Establishment
   
92.02   Rules and regulations governing the use
Birch Cove Beach Area
   
92.15   Area regulated
   
92.16   Use of intoxicating liquor
   
92.17   Glass
   
92.18   Parking lot regulations
Steven Chambers Scout Camp
   
92.30   Establishment
   
92.31   Rules and regulations
 
   
92.99   Penalty
CAMPING, PICNIC AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 92.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established campsites, recreation areas and picnic grounds
on lands leased by the city, and known as Fisherman’s Point, and described as
follows:
Lot 13, Section Seven, Lots Three, Four, Five, Six and the northeast quarter of
the southeast quarter (NE 1/4 - SE 1/4) of Section 18, and all that part of the
northeast quarter of the northeast quarter (NE 1/4 - NE 1/4), Section 18, lying
south of the Allen Junction Road, all in Township 58 North, Range 14 West, St.
Louis County, Minnesota.
(Ord. 98, passed - -1985)
§ 92.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE.
   All persons using the campsites, picnic grounds or recreation areas of
Fisherman’s Point, or otherwise present on Fisherman’s Point, shall comply with
the following rules and regulations, and any violations of this subchapter:
   (A)   Maintain the campsites, picnic grounds and recreational area in a
clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times, and shall deposit all
garbage, refuse and debris in the containers located in the area as provided
for by the city;
   (B)   No animals, except household pets, shall be permitted in any of the
areas and dogs, cats or other animals or pets shall not be permitted to run
loose;
   (C)   No fires of any kind shall be permitted in any area except in the
grills provided for in the camping and picnic areas;
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to destroy, mutilate or deface any property
within Fisherman’s Point. It shall be unlawful to remove any object or property
from any area, or to cut any tree or peel the bark of any tree in any area, or
to make any excavations, without the prior consent of the City Council, its
designee or the caretaker;
   (E)   No firearms shall be discharged within any area of Fisherman’s Point
except with the written permission of the Chief of Police;
   (F)   No fishing shall be permitted from the boat docks and no fish shall be
cleaned in any of the areas of Fisherman’s Point, except in the fish cleaning
house;
   (G)   No person shall create any disturbances, engage in brawling or
fighting; disturb any meeting or persons using the premises; engage in
offensive, obscene or abusive language or conduct himself or herself in a
boisterous or noisy manner tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or
resentment in others;
   (H)   No group or organization of ten or more persons shall use any of the
facilities of Fisherman’s Point as a group or organization without first having
received the permission of the City Council, its designee or caretaker;
   (I)   No vehicle shall be driven on any roadway or path in Fisherman’s Point
in excess of the posted speed limits for which the roadway or path is posted.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct any roadway or path by the parking of any
vehicles, trailer or other object, and all automobiles and vehicles shall be
parked only in designated parking areas;
   (J)   No person shall camp in a tent, or park a trailer, or park a boat
trailer or motor vehicle in a campsite for overnight purposes without first
having registered and paid the required fees; however, late arrivals shall
register no later than 9:00 a.m. the following morning;
   (K)   It shall be unlawful to anchor any boat, canoe or vessel on the
shorelines of Fisherman’s Point, unless the person owning the boat, canoe or
vessel, or having control thereof, is actually camping or fishing or using the
area and has anchored the boat, canoe or vessel for temporary purposes;
   (L)   No person, family, organization, group of persons or camping unit
shall use the same campsite or a trailer site for a period of more than 14
consecutive days; longer stays must move to a different campsite, with the
different campsite designation being subject to reasonable guidelines and
restrictions by the City Council, its designee or the caretaker;
   (M)   Fees for the use of the campsite, trailer sites or recreation areas
shall be fees as may be determined by resolution of the City Council;
   (N)   No motor vehicle travel into or around the camping area is allowed
after 10:30 p.m. unless a registered camper is returning to his or her
campsite, or an emergency exists;
   (O)   No one under the age of 18 years will be allowed to camp overnight
unless accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian, or adult supervised
groups (Scouts and the like);
   (P)   No one shall loiter in the point area after 10:30 p.m.;
   (Q)   Only one camping unit is allowed per campsite, without the prior
consent of the caretaker; if more than one unit is allowed, each unit shall pay
the required daily fee;
   (R)   Camping in the field will be restricted to marked campsites, unless
prior approval is given by the City Council, its designee or the caretaker; and
   (S)   All persons shall comply with the reasonable requests or directives
made by the City Council, its designee, the caretaker or the police officer.
(Ord. 98, passed - -1985) Penalty, see §
92.99
BIRCH COVE BEACH AREA
§ 92.15 AREA REGULATED.
   Except as further described in this subchapter, the provisions of this
subchapter shall apply to the area located in the city which is known as Birch
Cove Beach, and shall include the swimming beach, the parking lot, the picnic
areas, the beach change house and the areas immediately adjacent thereto.
(Ord. 84, passed 4-22-1980)
§ 92.16 USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR.
   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in the Birch
Cove Beach area. No person shall have in his or her possession any bottle or a
receptacle containing any beverage having an alcoholic content which has been
opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed, within the Birch Cove Beach area. For purposes of this section, the
term POSSESSION shall include the location of any bottle or receptacle within a
motor vehicle which is owned by or which was driven by any person which is
located within the Birch Cove Beach area, excepting any bottle or receptacle
which is located within a locked trunk of a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 84, passed 4-22-1980) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 GLASS.
   No person shall possess any container which is made exclusively of glass, or
exclusively of glass except for the lid or stopper, within the Birch Cove Beach
area. For purposes of this section, the term POSSESSION shall include the
location of any container within a motor vehicle which is owned by or which was
driven by any person which is located within the Birch Cove Beach area,
excepting any container which is located within a locked trunk of a motor
vehicle.
(Ord. 84, passed 4-22-1980) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 PARKING LOT REGULATIONS.
   No person shall use the parking lot located within the Birch Cove Beach area
except for the purpose of launching boats, driving to or from the parking lot
or lawfully parking motor vehicles. The term PARKING as used in this section
shall be defined as stopping a motor vehicle and leaving same unattended, but
shall not include stopping a motor vehicle with the occupant(s) remaining
therein, except temporarily in traveling to and from the parking area or in
parking the vehicle. No person shall remain on the parking lot or within a
motor vehicle on the parking lot except where necessary in traveling to or from
the Birch Cove Beach area or a motor vehicle parked on the parking lot, or by
authorized officials in repairing, improving, constructing or securing the
parking lot or its adjacent area, or in the event of an emergency.
(Ord. 84, passed 4-22-1980) Penalty, see §
92.99
STEVEN CHAMBERS SCOUT CAMP
§ 92.30 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established recreation areas and picnic grounds on
lands leased by the city and known as Steven Chambers Scout Camp.
   (B)   This area is designated solely for Scout organizations unless prior
approval is obtained from City Council.
(Ord. 70, passed 4-13-1976)
§ 92.31 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   All persons using the picnic grounds or recreation areas of Steven Chambers
Scout Camp shall comply with the following rules and regulations and any
violations thereof shall be considered a violation of this subchapter:
   (A)   Maintain the picnic grounds and recreational area in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition at all times, and shall deposit all garbage, refuse and
debris in the containers located in the area as provided for by the city;
   (B)   No animals, except household pets, shall be permitted in any of the
areas and dogs, cats or other animals or pets shall not be permitted to run
loose;
   (C)   No fires of any kind shall be permitted in any area except in the
grills provided for in the picnic areas for which permits have been granted by
the U.S. Forestry Service or the Fire Chief of the city;
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to remove any object or property from any area;
or to destroy, mutilate or deface any property within Steven Chambers Scout
Camp; or to cut any tree or peel the bark of any tree in the area; or to make
any excavations without the consent of the city;
   (E)   No firearms shall be discharged within any area of the Steven Chambers
Scout Camp except with the written permission of the Chief of Police;
   (F)   No person shall create any disturbance, engage in brawling or
fighting; disturb any meeting or persons using the premises; engage in
offensive, obscene or abusive language or conduct himself or herself in a
boisterous or noisy manner tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or
resentment in others;
   (G)   No motor vehicle travel into or around the Steven Chambers Scout Camp
area after 10:30 p.m.;
   (H)   No one under the age of 18 years will be allowed overnight unless
accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian, or adult supervised groups
(Scouts and the like); and
   (I)   No one shall loiter in the area after 10:30 p.m.
(Ord. 70, passed 4-13-1976) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of §§
91.01 and
91.02 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed $100.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
92.15 through
92.18 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $100.
   (D)   Any person violating any provisions of §§
92.30 and
92.31 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than
$300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, plus, in either case, the
cost of prosecution. The term PERSON as used throughout this division (D) and
§§
92.30 and
92.31 includes firms and corporations.
(Ord. 70, passed 4-13-1976; Ord. 84, passed 4-22-1980; Ord. 98, passed - -1985)
CHAPTER 93: CEMETERY
Section
   
93.01   Establishment; location; plat
   
93.02   Prohibition of other cemeteries
   
93.03   Sale of lots
   
93.04   Handling of funds
   
93.05   Burial permits
   
93.06   Cemetery administration; City Clerk-Treasurer
   
93.07   Cemetery maintenance; caretaker
   
93.08   Fee for excavation
   
93.09   Hours
   
93.10   Rules and regulations
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 ESTABLISHMENT; LOCATION; PLAT.
   (A)   A cemetery has been established and is continued upon land owned by
the city, and described as follows:
7.8 acres lying in the southerly part of the NW-SW Sec. 9-58-14 and 1.9 acres
lying in the SE corner of the NE-SE Sec. 8-58-14.
   (B)   The plat of the cemetery, as drawn by George Watts, surveyor, and
placed on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, showing all
boundaries, sections, lots, divisions, roads, drives and paths, is hereby
adopted as the official plat of the cemetery which shall be called the Hoyt
Lakes Memorial Cemetery.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
§ 93.02 PROHIBITION OF OTHER CEMETERIES.
   No person shall lay out or establish any cemetery or use any lot of land
within the city for the burial of the dead except in the Hoyt Lakes Memorial
Cemetery, or some other tract of land duly designated as a cemetery by an
ordinance of the City Council.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 SALE OF LOTS.
   The prices of lots in the Hoyt Lakes Memorial Cemetery as the Council shall
deem advisable to offer for sale and for other services shall be as determined
by resolution of the Council and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. Any
person paying the price thus fixed for any lot shall be entitled to a deed
conveying the same executed by the Mayor and Clerk-Treasurer. The deed shall
forbid the use of the lot for any purpose other than the burial of human bodies
and the purchaser shall expressly agree in the deed to observe the restriction,
and shall agree also that the placing of markers shall be subject to the rules
and regulations as adopted by the City Council or its duly appointed
commission, and that his or her rights shall be subject to reasonable rules and
regulations as the Council shall adopt from time to time relative to the use of
the cemetery. No cemetery lot or fractional lot may be resold or otherwise
disposed of, except by will, without the approval of the City Council, and the
city retains the first option to repurchase the cemetery lot or fractional lot
at the original sale price.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
§ 93.04 HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   All money received for the sale of lots, digging of graves and other
services about the cemetery shall be paid direct to the Clerk-Treasurer, who
shall give proper receipts therefor. No deed to any cemetery lot shall be
issued nor shall any services be performed in or about the cemetery until a
receipt showing payment to the Clerk-Treasurer of the cost thereof shall be
exhibited to the person whose duty it is to give the deed or perform the
services. All money received from the sale of lots and for the performance of
any service in or about the cemetery shall be placed in the Cemetery Fund,
which Fund shall be used for the payment of the purchase price of grounds, or
for maintenance and improvements and for no other purpose whatsoever. The
Clerk-Treasurer shall keep an account of all receipts and disbursements of
money belonging to the Cemetery Fund and shall pay money out of the Fund only
on orders signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk-Treasurer, which
orders shall specify that the money shall be paid from the Cemetery Fund.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
§ 93.05 BURIAL PERMITS.
   Before any interment shall be made in any cemetery in this city, a burial
permit shall be obtained therefor from the County Health Officer within 36
hours after the death of any person, and before the body is removed for burial,
the undertaker or person having charge of the interment shall apply for the
burial permit to the Health Officer. This application shall be accompanied by a
death certificate showing the name and age of the deceased, the date, place and
cause of death, together with any other information as may be required by the
State Board of Health. No burial permit shall be issued by the Health Officer
until the application and death certificate shall have been properly filled out
and presented. The body of no deceased person shall be brought into the city
for burial unless accompanied by a certificate and permit for removal from the
Health Officer of the locality wherein the death occurred.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
§ 93.06 CEMETERY ADMINISTRATION; CITY CLERK-TREASURER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk-Treasurer to keep a complete
record of the ownership of all lots in the cemetery; and for this purpose it
shall be the duty of every purchaser of the lot, either from the city direct or
from a person who has previously bought from the city, to prove ownership by
which he or she claims title to the lot to the City Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   He or she shall keep a record of all interments in the cemetery,
showing the exact location of every grave; the name, sex and age of the person
buried therein, as well as the time and place of death and the date of burial.
   (C)   He or she shall prevent any burial in any lot until the city shall
have been paid for the lot; and he or she shall also prevent the interment of
any body in any lot without the consent of the person recorded as owner of the
lot in his or her records, and may require the consent to be in writing.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
§ 93.07 CEMETERY MAINTENANCE; CARETAKER.
   The City Council shall appoint a caretaker who shall have control of the
maintenance and improvement of the grounds as follows.
   (A)   He or she shall keep the grounds, walks and streets in order and free
from obstructions.
   (B)   He or she shall have charge of all interments made in the cemetery and
shall supervise all labor.
   (C)   He or she shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and of all
regulations adopted by the Council for the government of the cemetery and for
that purpose shall be qualified to act in the capacity of a peace officer and
to make arrests for violations of any ordinance or regulations in the cemetery.
   (D)   He or she shall verify the existence of a properly executed burial
permit in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer before allowing any interment
to take place in the cemetery.
   (E)   He or she shall have charge of the digging of all graves in the
cemetery; every grave for an adult shall be at least five feet deep and for a
child at least four feet deep.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
§ 93.08 FEE FOR EXCAVATION.
   The fee for digging graves shall be as determined by resolution of the City
Council and filed in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
§ 93.09 HOURS.
   The cemetery shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. seven days per week.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
§ 93.10 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Markers; foundations. Markers placed in the cemetery shall be level
with the ground and shall be of bronze, granite, marble or taconite, except
that all veterans markers furnished by the Veterans Administration shall be
granite, and no vertical joints therein will be permitted. All foundations for
markers must be of sufficient depth and stability to support the proposed
structure; and to this end no structure may be erected until the foundation
therefor has been approved by the caretaker of the cemetery (or, when any
marker or other structure to be erected in the cemetery required, in the
opinion of the caretaker, foundations to support it properly, the foundation
shall be installed by employees of the caretaker of the cemetery at a proper
depth and strength to support the proposed structure).
   (B)   Cemetery layout development. The initial phase of the cemetery is
divided into Block, with Block 5 and 6 designated for Catholic burials; Block 1
and 2 designated for Protestant burials; and Block 9 designated for United
States war veterans burials. Each Block is divided into a variable number of
lots containing four graves in each lot. The sale of lots or graves in the
above Blocks shall be in accordance with and limited by the cemetery
development plan approved by the City Council. Landscaping cultivation of
trees, shrubs and plants, of individual lots or graves not in accordance with
the cemetery development plan, shall be prohibited. The caretaker of the
cemetery shall have the right to enter upon any lot and cut down or remove any
tree, shrub or plant not in accordance with the cemetery development plan; and
he or she shall also be authorized to enter upon any lot to make any
improvement deemed for the advantage of the grounds. Lot owners shall not
change the grade of any lot nor interfere in any way with the general plan of
the cemetery. No fences shall be permitted within the cemetery. Decorating of
individual graves shall be confined to decorations of a temporary nature.
   (C)   General.
      (1)   No person shall discharge any firearm or have possession of any
firearm within the cemetery grounds, except in case of military funerals or
special memorials, without the written permission of the caretaker.
      (2)   No grave shall be opened except by order of the husband, wife,
father, mother, son or daughter of the deceased, and then only for good cause,
and the City Council reserves the right to refuse any request. This provision
does not apply when disinterment is ordered by a duly authorized public
official.
      (3)   No person shall remove any object from any place in the cemetery or
make any excavation without the consent of the caretaker.
      (4)   All rubbish, unsightly material or debris accumulating from any
work or any cause, must be removed at once by the person or persons causing its
accumulation, and the grounds restored to their original condition.
      (5)   No person shall obstruct any drive or path in the cemetery or in
any way injures deface or destroy any stone structure grave, flower, shrub,
vine or any other thing in the cemetery.
      (6)   If any object or structure, or any part of any structure within the
cemetery shall be deemed to be objectionable or to have become objectionable or
unsightly, the caretaker shall have the right to remove the same.
      (7)   No person shall drive any vehicle faster than ten mph within the
cemetery; nor drive over any path or roadway prohibited by the caretaker.
      (8)   No person shall disturb the quiet of the cemetery by noise of any
kind or by improper conduct.
      (9)   No person shall enter or leave the cemetery except at the gates
thereof.
      (10)   No child shall be permitted within the cemetery unless accompanied
by an adult.
      (11)   No dogs shall be allowed in the cemetery.
      (12)   No person shall loiter in or on the walks, drives or on any lot in
the cemetery, and any person found within the cemetery, who fails to give a
good and sufficient reason for his or her presence there, shall be guilty of
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100, or by imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, plus, in either case, the cost of prosecution. The term
PERSON as used throughout this chapter includes firms and corporations.
(Ord. 36, passed 8-3-1965)
CHAPTER 94: LIBRARY
Section
   
94.01   Establishment
   
94.02   Powers of the Board
   
94.03   Finances of the Board
§ 94.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a public library and public reading room for the
use of the inhabitants of the city, pursuant to M.S. §§ 134.07 through 134.15,
as they may be amended from time to time. The Library Board shall consist of
five members, to be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council.
Each member shall serve for a term of three years, except that of the members
first appointed, two shall serve for a term of one year, two for a term of two
years and one for a term of three years. All terms shall expire with the fiscal
year of the last year of the appointment and annually thereafter, the Mayor
shall appoint for the term of three years. Members of the Board shall serve
without compensation and shall not be personally interested in any contracts of
the Board. They shall, at their first annual meeting of each year, appoint a
President and Secretary from their members, and a majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. The Secretary, before
entering his or her duties, shall give bond to the municipality in an amount
fixed by the Library Board, conditioned for the faithful performance of his or
her official duties.
(Ord. 22, passed 4-21-1958)
§ 94.02 POWERS OF THE BOARD.
   The Board shall have the following powers:
   (A)   To operate a library and reading room and to make use of public
property assigned to it, or of private property leased or otherwise made
available for library purposes;
   (B)   To establish charges and fees for the use of any facilities under its
care and management;
   (C)   To adopt those by-laws and regulations for the government of library
and reading room and for the conduct of business as may be expedient and
conformable to law;
   (D)   With the consent of the City Council, expressed by ordinance or
resolutions, to accept any gift, grant, devise or bequest made or offered by
any person for library purposes, or for the establishment, enlargement or
maintenance of an art gallery or museum in connection with its library, and may
carry out its condition of the donation;
   (E)   All property given, conveyed, donated, devised or otherwise acquired
for a library or reading room shall vest in and be held in the name of the city
and any conveyance, grant, donation, devise, bequest or gift made to the
library or Library Board, shall be deemed to have been made directly to the
city. The use of the library and reading room by the inhabitants of this city
shall be forever free, subject to reasonable regulations as the Board may
adopt;
   (F)   To maintain and care for all property used for library and reading
room purposes;
   (G)   To employ and fix the compensation of its employees and remove any of
them at pleasure;
   (H)   To lease rooms for library use and with the approval of the Council,
purchase any ground and erect a library building thereon; and
   (I)   To perform all other acts reasonable and necessary and proper for the
conduct of the library and reading room.
(Ord. 22, passed 4-21-1958)
§ 94.03 FINANCES OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   For the purpose of financing the Library Board, there shall be
established in the city treasury, under the jurisdiction of the Board, a
separate fund to be called the Library Fund. Into this Fund shall be placed the
revenues of the Board, including the annual tax levy for library purposes,
gifts, bequests, contributions, earnings or charges of the Board for use of its
facilities, and other miscellaneous revenues. The Board shall have exclusive
control of the expenditure of all money collected, or placed to the credit of
the Fund, and from the Fund shall be paid all charges, claims and disbursements
attributable to the library and reading room expense.
   (B)   The Board shall, in the manner as the Council, according to M.S. §
412.271, as it may be amended from time to time, and to the same extent, audit
claims to be paid from the Library Fund, which claims shall be presented to the
City Council for audit and payment.
   (C)   At the first regular meeting of the Board, following the end of the
fiscal year, the Board shall report to the governing body of the city, all
amounts received during the preceding year and the source thereof, the amounts
expended and for what purposes, the number of books on hand, the number
purchased and loaned and any other information as it deems advisable. A copy of
the report shall be filed with the Library Division, State Department of
Education.
(Ord. 22, passed 4-21-1958)
CHAPTER 95: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
95.01   Findings, purpose and intent
   
95.02   Election to manage the public rights-of-way
   
95.03   Definitions
   
95.04   Reporting obligations
   
95.05   Permit requirement
   
95.06   Permit fees
   
95.07   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
95.08   Joint applications
   
95.09   Supplementary applications
   
95.10   Other obligations
   
95.11   Denial or revocation of permit
   
95.12   Installation requirements
   
95.13   Inspection
   
95.14   Work done without a permit
   
95.15   Supplementary notification
   
95.16   Revocation of permits
   
95.17   Mapping data
   
95.18   Location and relocation of facilities
   
95.19   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
95.20   Damage to other facilities
   
95.21   Right-of-way vacation
   
95.22   Indemnification and liability
   
95.23   Abandoned and usable facilities
   
95.24   Appeal
   
95.25   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
§ 95.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and well-being of its citizens, and
to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-
of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair
and free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code
relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter imposes
reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and
equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this
chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons
using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws,
Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and 2017 Session Laws, Chapter 94, as
they may be amended from time to time, amending the Act and the other laws
governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This
chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050
through 7819.9950 and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560, as they be amended from
time to time, where possible. To the extent any provision of this chapter
cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that
interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and
case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the
regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 95.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant M.S.
§ 237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
§ 95.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The City of Hoyt Lakes, Minnesota. For purposes of §
95.22, CITY means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the
city or other governmental unit.
   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two years.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
(M.S. § 237.162, subd. 12)
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision
of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a
small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures,
wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly
associated with a specific antenna.
§ 95.04 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December
1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for facilities
with the city. The plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the
Director and shall contain the information determined by the city to be
necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of
excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of
all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
“next-year project”); and
         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five- year project”).
      (3)   The term PROJECT in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      (4)   By January 1 of each year the city will have available for
inspection in the city’s offices a composite list of all projects of which the
city has been informed in the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for
keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all changes in the list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant
listed by the other registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
§ 95.05 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   Except as otherwise provided in the chapter, no person may obstruct or
excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in the right-of-way,
without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city
to do so.
   (A)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to
excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
   (B)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a
person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
   (C)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless facility permit is
required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to
collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless
facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified
therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of
time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
§ 95.06 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose an excavation permit fee
in an amount sufficient to recover:
      (1)   Management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover management costs.
   (C)   Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
      (1)   Management costs; and
      (2)   City engineering, make-ready and construction costs associated with
collocation of small wireless facilities.
   (D)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow the applicant to pay the fees within 30 days of billing.
   (E)   Nonrefundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
95.16 are not refundable.
   (F)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
§ 95.07 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under §
95.10.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch its own work. The
city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, during the
36 months following the restoration, the pavement settles due to the
permittee’s improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within
30 days of billing, all costs associated with having to correct the defective
work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rule 7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. The work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under §
95.10.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do the work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
§ 95.08 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the Director, whether or not it is a joint application
by two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a permit would
still be required.
§ 95.09 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area.
      (1)   A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-
way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area
specified in the permit, except as provided herein.
      (2)   Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that
specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in
that greater area:
         (a)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional
fees required thereby; and
         (b)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be done before the permit
end date.
§ 95.10 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws, including M.S. § 216D.01-.09 (“Gopher One-Call
Excavation Notice System”) and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7460, as they may be
amended from time to time. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance
with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is
responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit,
regardless of who does the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited, or when conditions are unreasonable for the work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited
to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Chapter 216D and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560, as they may be amended from
time to time, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing
underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the city.
§ 95.11 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary
to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be
made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days
of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied, the
right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and
resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of
receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30
days after submission.
§ 95.12 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules
7819.1100 and 7819.5000, as they may be amended from time to time, and other
applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with
Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560, as it may be amended from time to time, and these
ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those
requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits
and/or agreements referenced in §
95.17.
§ 95.13 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
with Minnesota Rule 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site available to
the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of Director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the city may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The city may issue an order to the permittee for any work which
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the city that the
violation has been corrected. If proof has not been presented within the
required time, the city may revoke the permit pursuant to §
95.16.
§ 95.14 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the city of any event
regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency
situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with the chapter for the
actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant’s
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event,
the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by this
chapter, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the
right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 95.15 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
§ 95.16 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach.
      (1)    The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any
right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of
the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any
material condition of the permit.
      (2)   A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
         (a)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way
permit;
         (b)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or
deceit upon the city or its citizens;
         (c)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
         (d)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or
         (e)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
95.13.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at his or her
discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate
and remedy the breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan,
or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, the permittee’s failure
to so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked and
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred in connection with the revocation.
§ 95.17 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant shall provide mapping
information required by the city in accordance with Minnesota Rules 78189.4000
and 7819.4100, as they may be amended from time to time. Within 90 days
following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall
provide the city accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built” location
of all equipment installed, owed and maintained by the permittee. The maps and
drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities
and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s electronic
mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the city. Failure
to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this division (A) shall be grounds for
revoking the permit holder’s registration.
   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules
7560.0150, subpart 2, as it may be amended from time to time, shall require the
permittee’s use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations
of installed service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in
those cases where the city reasonably requires it. Permittees or their
subcontractors shall submit to the city evidence satisfactory to the city of
the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this division (B) and
with applicable Gopher State One Call Law and Minnesota Rules governing service
laterals installed after December 31, 2005 shall be a condition of any city
approval necessary for:
      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project
including those under M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time;
and
      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other subdivision or
site plan approval under M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to
time. The city shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing
such information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate
information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of
the permit issued for the work or future permits to the offending permittee or
its subcontractors.
§ 95.18 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Generally. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must
comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules
7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time,
to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Undergrounding. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise or other
agreement between the applicable right-of-way user and the city, facilities in
the right-of-way must be located or relocated and maintained underground in
accordance city regulations.
   (C)   Corridors.
      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position
at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at
the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the
registrant.
   (D)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   (E)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
§ 95.19 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. § 216D.01-.09
(“Gopher One-Call Excavation Notice System”), as it may be amended from time to
time, before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who
has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the
horizontal and vertical placement of all the facilities. Any registrant whose
facilities is less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact
location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
§ 95.20 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   (A)   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing.
   (B)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each
registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
facilities of another registrant caused during the city’s response to an
emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
§ 95.21 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minnesota Rules 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 95.22 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minnesota Rules 7819.1250, as it may be amended from
time to time.
§ 95.23 ABANDONED AND USABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.
§ 95.24 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration, has been denied a
permit, has had a permit revoked, believes that the fees imposed are not in
conformity with M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time, or disputes a determination of the city regarding §
95.16(B) may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed,
upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a
timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided the
right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the
appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the City Council affirming the
denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
§ 95.25 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
CHAPTER 96: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
96.01   Purpose
   
96.02   Effective date
   
96.03   Petition cut-off date
   
96.04   Classification of projects
   
96.05   Financing Class B and C improvements
   
96.06   Unit assessment method
   
96.07   Assessment regulations for Class B improvements
   
96.08   Class C improvements
   
96.09   Federal, state and county aid
   
96.10   Partial pre-payment
   
96.11   Certification of assessments
   
96.12   Assessment manual
   
96.13   Modifications and alterations to assessment proceedings
   
96.14   Senior citizen deferment from assessment
§ 96.01 PURPOSE.
   The city is hereby authorized to light, grade, pave, re-pave, curb, gutter,
wall, bridge, gravel, construct, improve or maintain any street, avenue, alley
or highways; to construct, improve and ornament any public parkways and grass
plant and protect shade or ornamental trees along its streets and avenues; to
construct, lay, re-lay and repair sidewalks, retaining walls, gutters, sewers
and drains, in, over, near or under any street, alley or highway; to abate
nuisances; to drain marshes, swamps and low grounds within the city when they
constitute a nuisance; and to make all other improvements authorized by
Minnesota Statutes; and the whole or part of the expenses of any improvements
shall be, subject to the provisions hereafter contained, defrayed by an
assessment upon the real estate benefitted thereby, in proportion to those
benefits, to be determined and levied in the manner hereafter provided.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.02 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and
publication. This chapter shall only be applied prospectively and shall not be
applied to local improvements in the city which have been constructed before
the effective date for this chapter.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.03 PETITION CUT-OFF DATE.
   No petition for construction of public improvement projects by the city
shall be accepted or acted upon by the Council unless it is filed with the City
Clerk-Treasurer on or before October 1 of the year preceding construction.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.04 CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS.
   (A)   In general. Public improvements are divided into three classes
specified in the following divisions according to their respective benefit to
the whole city and to property specially served by the improvement and taking
into account past city practice,
   (B)   Class A.
      (1)   Class A improvements are those which are of general benefit to the
city at large and not of special benefit to abutting or nearby property,
including:
         (a)   Public buildings, except a building which is part of an
improvement described in one of the following divisions;
         (b)   Any public park, playground or recreational facility;
         (c)   The installation and maintenance of street lighting systems; and
         (d)   Any improvement not described in M.S. § 429.021, subd. 1, as it
may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any improvement shall be financed from general city funds and not
from special assessments.
   (C)   Class B.
      (1)   Class B improvements are those which are of both general benefit
and special benefit to abutting or nearby property.
      (2)   Class B improvements include:
         (a)   Trunk water mains;
         (b)   Trunk sanitary sewer mains;
         (c)   Storm sewers and lift stations;
         (d)   Collector streets;
         (e)   Abatement of nuisances and draining of swamps, marshes and
ponds; and
         (f)   Trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and diseased
trees along streets, roads or drives.
   (D)   Class C. Class C improvements are those which are primarily, if not
exclusively of benefit to property abutting or in the area of the improvement,
including:
      (1)   Lateral water mains;
      (2)   Lateral sewer mains;
      (3)   Sidewalks;
      (4)   Curbs and gutters; and
      (5)   Residential streets.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.05 FINANCING CLASS B AND C IMPROVEMENTS.
   It is the policy of the city to finance Class B and C improvements by the
methods prescribed in the following sections of this chapter. The apportionment
of the cost between benefitted property and the city at large and the method of
levying assessments prescribed in this chapter shall be followed in each case
unless the Council, by resolution, finds that because of special circumstances
stated in the resolution, a different policy is necessary in the particular
case. Any local improvements described in M.S. § 429.021, as it may be amended
from time to time, and not placed in §§
96.07 or
96.08 shall be financed as the Council determines to be most feasible and
equitable in each case.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.06 UNIT ASSESSMENT METHOD.
   (A)   Generally. The cost of any improvements authorized by this chapter
shall be assessed upon the real estate benefitting thereby, to be levied by the
unit assessment method as described herein, except where alternate methods are
provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings, including mobile homes.
      (1)   Each structure shall be treated as one unit if located within one
lot and there is no potential for subdivision of the property. If the Council
determines that the potential exists to divide the property, the average
residential lot size in the assessments project divided by the lot size of that
property will determine the equivalent number of units. If any structure is
located on more than one lot as shown on the plat, the following rules apply:
 
1 to 1-1/2 lots  1-1/2 units
1-1/2 to 2 lots  2 units
More than 2 lots 1 unit for each lot or portion of lot
 
      (2)   Special circumstances may exist with respect to corner lots when
the improvement is of a nature as to abut and benefit both the front and side
of the property, like curbs and gutters, sidewalks and streets. For each
improvement, the Council shall, with respect to corner lots, make an adjustment
when necessary to maintain fairness in the assessment.
   (C)   Multiple-family dwellings. Each parcel containing a structure or
structures designed for multi-family residential dwellings shall be treated as
two units, plus one-half unit for the number of additional dwellings more than
two.
   (D)   Commercial and industrial. For purposes of this division (D), the term
MINIMUM LOT SIZE shall refer to the minimum lot size as required by zoning
regulations in effect within the city at the time of any special assessment.
Each lot used for commercial or industrial purposes, or classified for zoning
for those purposes, shall be treated as one unit, for each lot that is equal to
or less than the minimum lot size. For any lot greater in size than the minimum
lot size, the number of units, including fractions, allocated to the lot shall
be determined by dividing the minimum lot size into the size of that lot. These
regulations shall apply to developed and undeveloped lots.
   (E)   Public, political subdivision, religious and other tax exempt
property. Each lot used for one of the above mentioned purposes shall be
treated as one unit. However, in the event of an improvement that also includes
residential lots, the average residential lot size in the assessments project
divided into that parcel will determine the equivalent number of units.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.07 ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS FOR CLASS B IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Trunk water mains and trunk sewer mains. Trunk water mains and trunk
sewer mains are defined as mains having diameters of greater than eight inches,
it being the intent to refer to pipes serving as feeder lines into later as
mains. The cost of constructing new and replacement trunk lines shall be
assessed by the unit method against abutting and non-abutting property which
benefits from the improvement. The cost of repairs, maintenance and the like
shall not be financed by special assessment, and to specify, replacement of
trunk lines of less than one full city block in length shall be deemed repairs
and not financed by special assessment. When a trunk water line or trunk sewer
line is laid across or adjacent to unplatted property, the city shall not defer
the assessment against the unplatted property if the assessment would be made
for an improvement if the unplatted property was platted property. In that
event, the city shall make the assessment at the time the assessment against
other property is made and apportion the assessment against the unplatted
property by the unit method and determine the number of units by dividing the
average residential lot size in the assessment project into that unplatted
parcel. Other property benefitted by the trunk water or trunk sewer main, but
unable to utilize it until a lateral main has been built to serve the property
shall not be assessed for its share of the cost of the trunk water or trunk
sewer main until the lateral main is built. The assessment for the lateral
shall then include the property’s share of the trunk water or sewer main. When
a trunk sewer main or trunk water main is constructed and is to serve also as a
lateral sewer or water main for abutting property, the abutting property shall
be assessed for the cost of a lateral water main or lateral sewer main, with
the size of the majority of the laterals connecting into the trunk. The cost of
the excess capacity, namely the cost between the trunk and of a lateral as
determined above, shall be specially assessed against the abutting and non-
abutting property benefitting, by the unit method.
   (B)   Storm sewers and lift stations. The cost of constructing new storm
sewers shall be assessed by the unit method against that property actually
benefitted by the improvement. Maintenance, repairs and replacements of storm
sewers shall not be financed by special assessment. The cost of constructing
new or replacement lift stations shall be assessed by the unit method against
that property actually benefitted by the improvement. General repairs and
maintenance shall not be financed by special assessment.
   (C)   Collector streets. The following are collector streets: Suffolk Drive;
Dorchester Drive; Hampshire Drive; Kennedy Memorial Drive; and Kennsington
Drive. When a collector street is paved with concrete, bituminous mat or other
permanent surface, or some other improvement is undertaken in the nature of new
construction or replacement, the cost of the improvement shall be assessed by
the unit method against abutting property which benefits from the improvement.
General repairs, maintenance and similar expenditures shall be financed without
special assessment, and to further specify, any improvement to a collector
street involving less than the length of a block or the application of non-
permanent surfacing shall be deemed to constitute maintenance and repair and
shall not be financed by special assessment. The cost to be assessed to
abutting properties shall be 80% of the cost of the improvement, and the
remaining 20% shall be paid by the city from its general funds.
   (D)   Nuisances, swamps and trees. The cost of abating nuisances, draining
of swamps, marshes and ponds on public or private property and filling the
same, and the trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and diseased
trees on residential streets, roads or drives shall be assessed in a manner
determined by the Council in each case to measure most equitably the benefit
received by property to be assessed. The assessment in any case may be made
against non-abutting property to the extent the property is benefitted by the
improvement.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.08 CLASS C IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Sidewalks. The cost of the construction of new sidewalks or the
replacement of sidewalks shall be assessed by the unit method against the
abutting property. Repairs, maintenance and other expenditures in the nature of
repair shall not be financed by special assessment, and to specify, replacement
of a portion of a sidewalk of less than one full block in length shall
constitute repairs and not be financed by special assessment,
   (B)   Lateral water mains and lateral sewer mains. LATERAL WATER MAINS and
LATERAL SEWER MAINS shall be defined as lines having diameters of eight inches
or less, the intent being to describe the lines running from the trunk mains to
the connecting lines. For purposes of this division (B), CONNECTING SEWER LINES
and CONNECTING WATER LINES shall be defined as the lines running from the
lateral mains to the improvements on each lot, the connecting water line being
approximately two inches in diameter and the connecting sewer lines being
approximately four inches in diameter. The cost of constructing new and
replacement lateral mains shall be assessed by the unit method against abutting
and non-abutting property which benefits from the improvement. The cost of
repairs, maintenance and the like shall not be financed by special assessment,
and to specify, replacement of lateral mains of less than one full city block
in length shall be deemed repairs and not financed by special assessment. When
a lateral water line or lateral sewer line is laid across or adjacent to
unplatted property, the city shall not defer the assessment against the
unplatted property if the assessment would be made for an improvement if the
unplatted property was platted property. In such an event, the city shall make
the assessment at the time the assessment against other property is made, and
apportion the assessment against the unplatted property by the unit method and
determine the number of units by dividing the average residential lot size in
the assessment project into that unplatted parcel. Other property benefitted by
the latera1 water or latera1 sewer main, but unable to utilize it until an
additional latera1 line has been built to serve the property shall not be
assessed for its share of the cost of the lateral water or lateral sewer main
until the additional line is built. The assessment for the additional lateral
line shall then include the property’s share of the lateral water or sewer
main. The provisions contained herein for financing of trunk and lateral server
and water mains shall not limit the authority of the city regarding the
construction and financing of connecting lines. The instruction, replacement
and repairs of the connecting lines shall be undertaken by the city and
financed in an equitable and uniform manner.
   (C)   Residential streets. When a non-collector street is paved with
concrete, bituminous mat or other permanent surface, or some other improvement
is undertaken in the nature of new construction or replacement, the cost of the
improvement shall be assessed by the unit method against abutting property
which benefits from the improvement. General repairs, maintenance and similar
expenditures shall be financed without special assessment, and to further
specify, any improvement to a non-collector street involving less than the
length of a block or the application of non-permanent surfacing shall be deemed
to constitute maintenance and repair and shall be financed by special
assessment.
   (D)   Curbs and gutters. The cost of construction of new curbs and gutters
or the replacement of same shall be assessed by the unit method against the
abutting property. Repairs, maintenance and other expenditures in the nature of
repair shall not be financed by special assessment, and to specify replacement
of a portion of a curb or gutter of less than one full block in length shall
constitute repairs and not be financed by special assessment.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.09 FEDERAL, STATE AND COUNTY AID.
   If the city receives financial assistance from the federal government, state
or county, to defray a portion of the cost of an improvement project, the aid
shall be used first to reduce the share of the project cost, which would be met
from general city funds. If the aid is more than the amount of the improvement
cost to be borne by the city, the remainder of the aid so received shall be
used to reduce each individual assessment proportionately.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.10 PARTIAL PRE-PAYMENT.
   After the adoption by the City Council of the assessment roll in any local
improvement proceeding, the owner of any property specially assessed in the
proceeding, may, prior to the certification of assessment or the first
installment thereof to the County Auditor, pay to the City Clerk-Treasurer the
portion of the assessment, but not less than $100. The remaining unpaid balance
shall be spread over the period of time established by Council for installment
payments of the assessment.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.11 CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   After the adoption of any special assessment by the Council, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall transmit a certified duplicate of the assessment roll with each
installment, including interest, set forth separately to the County Auditor to
be extended on the proper tax lists of the county.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.12 ASSESSMENT MANUAL.
   The City Clerk-Treasurer, and other city personnel at the City Clerk-
Treasurer’s direction, shall prepare an administrative manual specifying more
detailed procedures for the conduct of local improvements and the levy of
special assessments in supplementation of this chapter and consistent
therewith. Upon approval of the Council by resolution, the manual shall be used
with this chapter in the conduct of all local improvement proceedings to which
they apply by their terms.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.13 MODIFICATIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO ASSESSMENT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the city shall comply
with all minimum requirements as provided in Minnesota Statutes in determining
and levying assessments. In addition, if any procedure specified herein is
determined to be violative of existing law, the procedures shall be modified in
each case to comply fully with the law.
   (B)   In no event shall the amount of a special assessment levied against
any property exceed the benefit to the property by the improvement, measured by
the increase in market value of the property resulting from the improvement. If
the City Council determines that in a proposed assessment roll that the amount
of the assessment exceeds the benefit to any property, the Council shall reduce
the assessment against the property, and shall either pay the excess from
general city funds or issue an amended assessment roll, as the Council
determines equitable.
   (C)   In order to ensure that the assessment procedure and the assessments
as levied will comply fully with state law and constitutional safeguards in
each proposed project, the Council may require additional procedures,
determinations or hearings. The additional procedures, determinations and
hearings may be specified in the assessment manual or may be determined by
resolution for each proposed project. It is the intent of this division (C) to
authorize the Council to require additional safeguards in the assessment
process in light of constantly changing statutes and constitutional
requirements.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
§ 96.14 SENIOR CITIZEN DEFERMENT FROM ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   The City Council, in its discretion, may defer the payment of a
special assessment against property owned and occupied by a person 65 years of
age or older, when the total amount of the assessment exceeds $300 and the
payment thereof would create a hardship upon the property owner.
   (B)   Application for deferred payment of special assessments shall be made
on the form prescribed by the County Assessor supplemented by the City Clerk-
Treasurer, to establish the qualification of the owner of the deferment. The
application shall be made within 30 days after the adoption of the assessment
roll by the Council, and if granted, shall be automatically renewed each
following year on September 30 of each year, unless the applicant’s situation
changes so that a hardship as defined in division (C) below no longer exists or
the deferment terminates pursuant to the provisions of division (D) below. It
shall be a misdemeanor for any person to file an erroneous application for a
deferral or for any person to fail to notify the City Clerk-Treasurer of a
change in circumstances that would terminate the deferral, which the notice
must be given promptly and no later than September 30, following the change in
circumstances.
   (C)   A hardship shall be deemed to prima facie exist if the applicant’s
total gross income, including public assistance, pension and other tax exempt
income, from the most recent taxable year is less than $6,000. In addition, the
City Council may determine that a hardship exists in the event that the
applicant proves to the Council that as a result of exceptional and unusual
circumstances, a hardship does exist.
   (D)   The deferment of payment of special assessments shall cease and all
amounts accumulated on unpaid installments plus applicable interest shall there
upon become due and payable upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
      (1)   The death of the owner if the spouse is unable to qualify under the
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   The sale, transfer or subdivision of the property, or any part
thereof;
      (3)   If the property loses its homestead status; and
      (4)   If the circumstances of the applicant change so that the applicant
would no longer qualify for the deferment in accordance with the guidelines
specified above.
   (E)   The deferred special assessments shall accrue interest at the same
rate charged to the non- deferred assessments, and the Council shall by
majority vote determine with each deferment whether interest payments are
deferred or must be paid annually. At the time of the termination of any
deferral, the Council may, at its discretion, and by majority vote, provide for
payment of the deferred sum in equal installments over the time remaining on
the original assessments rather than to require immediate payment of the
deferred amount.
   (F)   If the Council grants a deferment, the Clerk-Treasurer shall notify
the County Auditor and the County Assessor, who shall, in accordance with M.S.
§ 435.194, as it may be amended from time to time, record a notice of the
deferment with the Register of Deeds, setting forth the amount of the
assessment, the interest rate and whether interest payments are required. Upon
termination of any deferment, the Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the County
Auditor and the County Assessor of the termination and the payment terms of the
deferred amount. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall include in the notice of
hearing of proposed assessments, a notice specifying the availability and
procedure for obtaining a deferral.
(Ord. 82, passed 7-24-1979)
CHAPTER 97: PROHIBITION OF DEER FEEDING
Section
   
97.01   Findings
   
97.02   Purpose and intent
   
97.03   Prohibition
   
97.04   Exceptions
   
97.05   Investigation and enforcement
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Recreational feeding of deer often causes deer concentrations which
develop into depredation and other public safety problems.
   (B)   Depredation of garden crops and landscaping plants is increasing as
deer habitat decreases and deer populations increase within particular areas
and neighborhoods in the city.
   (C)   High deer populations can result in increased car/deer crashes within
the community, causing public safety concerns and negative economic impacts
such as increased car insurance premium costs.
   (D)   High deer densities also contribute to the possible spread of chronic
diseases among deer populations and chronic wasting disease.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-22-2014)
§ 97.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The intent of the City Council is not to unreasonably infringe upon the
recreational enjoyment of city residents who observe wildlife and enhance
wildlife habitat on their property. The purpose of this feeding ban is to
eliminate these deer attractions which, when combined with other management
strategies, should reduce over time the depredation impacts to adjacent
residents, as well as assure the safety of the traveling public on city streets
and thoroughfares.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-22-2014)
§ 97.03 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group to place or permit to be
placed on the ground, or within five feet of the ground surface, either on
property owned or controlled by a person or on property owned by others, any
grain, fodder, fruit, vegetables, nuts, hay or other edible materials, which
may reasonably be expected to intentionally result in deer feeding, unless the
items are screened or protected in a manner that prevents deer from feeding on
them. Also prohibited are salt licks and powder or liquid deer attractants,
unless legally used for deer management control purposes. Living fruit trees
and other live vegetation shall not be considered as deer feeding.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the following areas
within the city: Sections Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten, Fifteen, Sixteen, Seventeen
and Eighteen, Township 58, Range 14 West.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-22-2014) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 97.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   This prohibition shall not apply to:
   (A)   Veterinarians, police officers, or county, state or federal game
officials, who are in the course of their duties, have deer in custody or under
their management;
   (B)   Persons authorized by the city to implement the deer management
program approved by the City Council;
   (C)   Any food placed upon the property for purposes of trapping or
otherwise taking deer or the trapping or taking is pursuant to a permit issued
by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources;
   (D)   Persons feeding birds using self-enclosed feeding devices or
containers; and
   (E)   The use of straw, hay or straw-related materials for erosion control,
mulching, gardening or other landscape purposes.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-22-2014)
§ 97.05 INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this subchapter and to
enforce its provisions, any East Range Police Department officer, other law
enforcement service, or agent of the city with prior approval of the City
Council, is empowered to enter upon any premises, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances, to investigate or inspect the premises for
prohibited deer feeding activities to eliminate the public nuisance. This
section may be enforced by injunction, action for abatement, or other
appropriate civil remedy to eliminate a public nuisance.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-22-2014)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
97.01 through
97.05 shall be subject to an administrative penalty, and, in addition, the
violation shall constitute a petty misdemeanor. A second offense occurring
within 12 months after a conviction of a violation of §§
97.01 through
97.05 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-22-2014)
CHAPTER 98: EVENT PERMITS
Section
   
98.01   Permit requirements
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person, firm, or corporation shall give or
maintain any show or public entertainment, circus, carnival, game, event, or
concert without securing a permit.
   (B)   Prohibited events. No event shall take place on private property, with
the exception of any entertainment of any kind which is given for the benefit
of any school, church, benevolent institution, or 501(c)3 non-profit
organization on the school’s, church’s, benevolent institution’s, or 501(c)3
non-profit organization’s private property is allowable.
   (C)   Application. Application for such permit shall be made to the City
Administrator and shall state the nature of the entertainment, the time, and
place thereof.
   (D)   Issuance. Upon payment of the permit fee and no less than half of the
additional fees (personnel, etc.) by the applicant, the filing of a properly
completed application blank, the filing of any necessary bonds or insurance,
and upon completion of any administrative investigation required by this
chapter, the City Administrator shall issue such permit or deny the application
for a permit if the City Administrator determines from a consideration of the
application or other pertinent information that:
      (1)   The applicant fails to supply information requested after ten
business days after having been notified by the City Administrator of
additional documents needed.
      (2)   The applicant fails to agree to abide by or comply with all of the
conditions or terms of the special event permit.
      (3)   Another permit application has already been approved to hold a
different event at the same time and place as requested by the applicant.
      (4)   The event is too large for location requested.
      (5)   The event requires unreasonable city or police resources to
maintain safety.
      (6)   The event is a non-licensed or bring-your-own alcohol type-event,
or the event type is such where attendees may believe it is encouraged to do
so.
      (7)   Event may create an unreasonable disturbance, such as noise or
light pollution.
      (8)   Event organizers are not in good standing with the city.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any firm, person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
these regulations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof be subject to fine and/or imprisonment. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists
or participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and for each violation
is subject to the maximum penalty prescribed by state law for a misdemeanor.
Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 231, passed 3-14-2022)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOL
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE MATERIALS
      
113.   TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
      
114.   TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL PRODUCTS
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOL
Section
Intoxicating Liquor
   
110.01   Definition of terms
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   Applications for license
   
110.04   License fees
   
110.05   Granting of licenses
   
110.06   Persons ineligible for license
   
110.07   Places ineligible for license
   
110.08   Conditions of license
   
110.09   Hours of operation
   
110.10   Public character of liquor sales
   
110.11   Clubs
   
110.12   Restrictions on purchase or consumption
   
110.13   Revocation
   
110.14   Consumption on licensed premises
Wine and 3.2% Malt Liquor
   
110.25   Provisions of state law adopted
   
110.26   Definitions
   
110.27   License required
   
110.28   Licenses
   
110.29   License fees
   
110.30   Granting and conditions of license
   
110.31   Hours of sale
   
110.32   Revocation or suspension
   
110.33   Sale of 3.2% malt liquor
 
   
110.99   Penalty
INTOXICATING LIQUOR
§ 110.01 DEFINITION OF TERMS.
   Terms used in this subchapter shall be defined as set forth in Minnesota
Statutes, as currently in effect, or as may hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958; Ord. 159, passed 3-28-2000)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent
authorized under state license shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell or
keep for sale any intoxicating liquor without first having received a license
to do so as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   Licenses shall be of three kinds: on sale; off sale; and club
licenses.
      (1)   On sale licenses shall be issued only to hotels, restaurants,
bowling centers, clubs and exclusive liquor stores.
      (2)   Off sale licenses shall be issued only to exclusive liquor stores
and drug stores and shall permit off sales of liquor only.
      (3)   Special club licenses shall be issued only to duly incorporated
clubs which have been in existence locally for 20 years.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958; Ord. 159, passed 3-28-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Every application for a license to sell liquor shall be verified and
filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. It shall state the name of the applicant,
his or her age, representations as to his or her character, with any references
as may be required, his or her citizenship, whether the application is for on
sales or off sales, the business in connection with which the proposed license
will operate and its location, whether applicant is owner and operator of the
business, how long he or she has been in that business at that place, and any
other information as the Council may require from time to time. In addition to
containing any information, each application for a license shall be in the form
prescribed by the Department of Public Safety. No person shall make a false
statement in an application.
   (B)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a surety bond,
liability policy, or in lieu thereof, cash or United States government bonds of
equivalent market value as provided in M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 1, as it shall be
amended from time to time, except that the liability insurance policy, and
embodied in the fourth paragraph of M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 1, as it shall be
amended from time to time, shall not be acceptable. The surety bond or other
security shall be in the sum of $5,000 for an applicant for an on sale license
and $3,000 for an applicant for an off sale license. Every holder of a liquor
license shall have on file at all times with the city an effective bond,
insurance policy or other security as required in this division (B).
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from
the City Clerk-Treasurer for payment in full of the required fee for the
license. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund of the municipality. Upon
rejection of any application for a license, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
refund the amount paid.
   (B)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Each license
shall be issued for a period of one year except, that if a portion of the
license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be issued
for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing the fee, any
unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
   (C)   Annual fees shall be set by ordinance of the City Council. In times of
general economic uncertainty, economic recession, economic depression, natural
disasters or pandemic, the City Council shall have the authority and
discretion, by motion or resolution, to temporarily suspend or reduce the
annual fee.
   (D)   At any time during the year when the license is in effect, or by no
later than February 15 of the following year, the licensee may submit a written
request to the City Council for a full or partial refund of the liquor license
fee and the City Council shall have the authority and discretion to grant a
full or partial refund of the fee if the licensee shows that the operation of
the licensed business was required to cease or significantly scale back its
operations during the course of the license year because of:
      (1)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe;
      (2)   The licensee’s illness that he or she is unable to continue in
business;
      (3)   The licensee’s death;
      (4)   Natural disasters, pandemic or local, state or federal government
laws, regulations or orders requiring the licensed business to cease or
significantly scale back its operations because of or related to natural
disasters or pandemic; or
      (5)   A change in the legal status of the municipality, making it
unlawful for the licensed business to continue.
   (E)   If licensed premises are transferred, and the transferee is issued an
on sale or off sale license for the remainder of the year, no portion of the
license fee shall be refunded to the transferor, but shall be assigned to the
transferee for the remaining period of the license.
   (F)   If an applicant for a license provides in the application that the
sale of intoxicating liquor on the licensed premises shall be temporary or
seasonal, the City Council may charge a pro rata fee based upon each full or
partial calendar month. If an applicant for an on sale license provides in the
application that the sale of intoxicating liquor on the licensed premises shall
be part-time, and will be limited to a total number of hours less than one-half
of the total hours authorized by state law for a sale of intoxicating liquor,
the City Council may reduce the annual license fee equitably to reflect the
reduced hours of sale.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958; Ord. 159, passed 3-28-2000; Ord. 220, passed 12-14-
2020; Ord. 221, passed 12-28-2020; Ord. 232, passed 6-27-2022)
§ 110.05 GRANTING OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the
application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After an investigation and hearing the
City Council shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion. No off
sale license shall become effective until it, together with the bond furnished
by the applicant, has been approved by the Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only. Each license shall
be issued only for the premises described in the application. No license may be
transferred to another person or to another place without the approval of the
City Council.
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall, within ten days after the issuance of any
on sale license under this section, submit to the Department of Public Safety
the full name and address of each person granted a license, the trade name, the
effective license date and the date of expiration of the license. He or she
shall also submit to the Department of Public Safety any change of address,
transfer, cancellation or revocation of any on sale or off sale license by the
Council during the license period.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958)
§ 110.06 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   No license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for a license by
state law.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958; Ord. 159, passed 3-28-2000)
§ 110.07 PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   No license shall be granted to any place or any business made
ineligible for a license by state law.
   (B)   No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school, or within
500 feet of any church.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958; Ord. 159, passed 3-28-2000; Ord. 178, passed 12-12-
2006)
§ 110.08 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In general. Every license is subject to the conditions in the
following divisions and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any
other applicable ordinance, state law or regulation.
   (B)   Insurance. Compliance with the financial responsibility requirements
of state law and of this subchapter is a continuing condition of any license
granted pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   Licensee’s responsibility. Every licensee is responsible for the
conduct in the licensed establishment, and any sale of alcoholic beverages by
any employee authorized to sell the beverages in the establishment is the act
of the licensee.
   (D)   Inspections. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, Health
Officers or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect and search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a
warrant, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958; Ord. 125, passed 3-14-1995; Ord. 159, passed 3-28-
2000)
§ 110.09 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Intoxicating liquor; on sale. No sale of intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the licensed premises may be made:
      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday; and
      (2)   After 1:00 a.m. on Sunday except as provided by division (B) below.
   (B)   Intoxicating liquor; Sunday sales; on sale.
      (1)   A restaurant, club, bowling center or hotel with a seating capacity
for at least 30 persons which holds an on sale intoxicating liquor license may
sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises in conjunction with
the sale of food between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on
Mondays.
      (2)   An establishment serving intoxicating liquor on Sundays must obtain
a Sunday license. The license may be issued by the City Council, for a period
of one year, and the fee for the license shall be established by City Council
resolution. The holder of any Sunday liquor license must comply with all
required state statutes and city ordinances.
   (C)   Intoxicating liquor; off sale.
      (1)   No sale of intoxicating liquor may be made by an off sale licensee:
         (a)   On Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.;
         (b)   Before 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday;
         (c)   After 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;
         (d)   On Thanksgiving Day;
         (e)   On Christmas Day, December 25; or
         (f)   After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
      (2)   No delivery of alcohol to an off sale licensee may be made by a
wholesaler or accepted by an off sale licensee on a Sunday. No order
solicitation or merchandising may be made by a wholesaler on a Sunday.
   (D)   Cigars, cigarettes, tobacco or 3.2% malt liquor or soft drinks. No
cigars, cigarettes, tobacco or 3.2% malt liquor or soft drinks shall be sold in
any exclusive liquor store during the hours when the sale of intoxicating
liquor is prohibited in the store.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958; Ord. 34, passed 4-27-1965; Ord. 62, passed 9-11-
1973; Ord. 96, passed 9-10-1984; Ord. 108, passed 6-27-1989; Ord. 171, passed
12-14-2004; Ord. 213, passed 7-1-2017; Ord. 235, passed 11-14-2022)
§ 110.10 PUBLIC CHARACTER OF LIQUOR SALES.
   All windows in the front of any place licensed for on sales shall be of
clear glass and the view of the whole interior shall be unobstructed by
screens, curtains or partitions. There shall be no partition, box, stall,
screen curtain or other device which shall obstruct a view of any part of the
room from the general observation of persons in the room, except that
partitions, subdivisions or panels not higher than 48 inches from the floor may
be maintained. No place licensed for on sales shall be equipped with swinging
doors.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.11 CLUBS.
   No club holding a special club license shall sell liquor except to members.
No other licensed club shall sell liquor except to members and to guests in the
company of members.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.12 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
obtaining liquor or 3.2% malt liquor; nor shall he or she enter any premises
licensed under this subchapter in order to procure the beverages or to consume
or purchase or attempt to purchase, or have another purchase for him or her,
the beverages on licensed premises.
   (B)   No person shall induce a minor to purchase or procure liquor.
   (C)    No person shall give to, procure or purchase liquor for any minor or
other person to whom the sale of intoxicating liquor is forbidden by law.
   (D)   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public
place or place of business not licensed to sell liquor on sale and no person
shall consume liquor in any place.
   (E)   No liquor shall be sold or consumed on a public highway or in an
automobile.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.13 REVOCATION.
   The Council may suspend or revoke any liquor license for violation of any
provision or condition of this subchapter or any state law regulating the sale
of intoxicating liquor and shall revoke the license if, the licensee willfully
violates any provision of M.S. §§ 340A.101 et seq., as they may be amended from
time to time. Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on
revocation, revocation or suspension by the Council shall be preceded by
written notice to the grantee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at
least ten days’ notice of the time and the place of the hearing and shall state
the nature of the charges against the licensee. The Council may, without any
advance notice, suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation for a
period of not exceeding 30 days.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958)
§ 110.14 CONSUMPTION ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee
to permit consumption of, alcoholic beverages on licensed premises more than 30
minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made.
   (B)   Closing. Except as set forth in division (C) below, it is unlawful for
any person, other than a licensee or his or her bona fide employee actually
engaged in the performance of his or her duties, to be on premises licensed
pursuant to this subchapter, and amendments thereof, more than 30 minutes after
the legal time for making licensed sales, and it is unlawful for any licensee
to permit any person to be on the licensed premises in violation of this
division (B).
   (C)   Permit. A licensee, in connection with an event taking place on the
licensed premises, may apply for a special permit from the City Council to
allow persons to be on licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the legal
time for making licensed sales. The licensee shall make application on a form
provided by the City Council, with no required permit fee, and, if the permit
is granted, it shall require that all doors shall remain unlocked while the
permit is in effect, and shall include any other provisions and restriction as
are imposed by the City Council. The issuance of a permit authorizes persons to
be present on licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the legal time for
making licensed sales, but does not authorize the consumption of alcoholic
beverages on licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale
thereof can legally be made.
(Ord. 109, passed 11-13-1990; Ord. 157, passed 1-25-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
WINE AND 3.2% MALT LIQUOR
§ 110.25 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
relating to the definition of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, liability
insurance, conditions of bond of licensees, hours of sale and all other matters
pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and consumption of 3.2% malt liquor
and wine are adopted and made a part of this subchapter as if set out in full.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
§ 110.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   3.2% MALT LIQUOR. Any malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by
volume, nor more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   WINE. Includes all wine, as defined by Minnesota State Statutes, containing
not less than 0.5% nor more than 24% alcohol by volume.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
§ 110.27 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or partnership, except wholesalers and
manufacturers to the extent authorized by law, shall deal in or dispose of by
gift, sale or otherwise, or keep or offer for sale, any 3.2% malt liquor or
wine within the city without first having received a license as hereinafter
provided. However, any person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at on sale
shall not be required to obtain an on sale license under this subchapter, and
may sell 3.2% malt liquor and wine at on sale without further license.
   (B)   Further, any person licensed to sell intoxicating liquor at off sale
shall not be required to obtain an off sale license under this section, and may
sell 3.2% malt liquor and wine at off sale without further license.
   (C)   Further, no license is required for a bed and breakfast facility, as
defined in M.S. § 340A.4011, as it may be amended from time to time, for
providing at no additional charge to a person renting a room at the facility,
not more than two glasses per day each containing not more than four fluid
ounces of wine, in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 340A.4011, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
§ 110.28 LICENSES.
   (A)   Regular on sale 3.2% malt liquor. Regular on sale licenses shall be
granted only to drug stores, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers and
establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the
incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
   (B)   Off sale 3.2% malt liquor. Off sale licenses shall permit the sale of
3.2% malt liquor at retail, in the original package, for consumption off the
premises only.
   (C)   Temporary on sale 3.2% malt liquor. Temporary on sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses may only be issued to bona fide clubs, or charitable religious or non-
profit organizations. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only, and
shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only
for the premises specified in the application or a part thereof, and the
licenses may not be transferred to another place without the approval of the
City Council. Licenses hereunder shall be issued only to applicants who provide
satisfactory proof that the applicant is a bona fide club or charitable,
religious or non-profit organization, and who satisfy all other requirements or
conditions imposed by City Council resolution. Every license shall be granted
subject to the conditions as required in all other city ordinances, or other
applicable city or state law. Further, each license issued shall be subject to
any other conditions imposed by the City Council resolution in granting the
license, including the location of the sales, times and dates, and other
reasonable conditions imposed. A temporary on sale license issued pursuant to
this division (C) may provide for sale on Sunday.
   (D)   On sale wine license. Wine licenses may be granted with the approval
of the Liquor Control Division of the Minnesota Department of Public Safety to
a restaurant having facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time. A
wine license permits the sale of wine of up to 14% alcohol by volume for
consumption with the sale of food. A wine license authorizes the sale of wine
on all days of the week, unless the City Council restricts the license’s
authorization to the sale of wine on all days except Sundays. Every license
shall be granted subject to the conditions as required in all other city
ordinances, or other applicable city or state law. Further, each license issued
shall be subject to any other conditions imposed by the City Council resolution
in granting the license, including the location of the sales, times and dates,
and other reasonable conditions imposed.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
§ 110.29 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Payment required. Each application for a license shall be accompanied
by payment in full of the required fee for the license. Upon rejection of any
application for a license, the city shall promptly refund the amount paid.
   (B)   Expiration; pro rata fees.
      (1)   Every license, except a temporary license, shall expire on December
31 in each year. Each license, except a temporary license, shall be issued for
a period of one year, except that if a portion of the license year has elapsed
when the license is granted, the license shall be issued for the remainder of
the year.
      (2)   Except as required by state law, in no event shall a license fee be
pro rated or refunded whether a license is issued in mid-year, or a license
terminates due to a revocation of license, licensee’s death or illness, or for
any other purpose.
   (C)   Fees.
      (1)   The fees for licenses provided herein shall be established and
modified by City Council resolution.
      (2)   Until modified, the fees are as follows:
 
Off sale 3.2% malt liquor license          $100/year
On sale wine license                       $100/year
Regular on sale 3.2% malt liquor license   $100/year
Temporary on sale 3.2% malt liquor license $10/day
 
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
§ 110.30 GRANTING AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Application. Each applicant shall complete and file an application for
license on the form provided by the city, and include any information as
required by the application form or as further required by City Council
resolution, and shall be accompanied by payment of the required license fee.
   (B)   Investigation and hearing. The City Council, the Chief of Police or
his, her or its designee, shall investigate all facts set out in the
application, and other relevant facts. Opportunity shall be given to any person
to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation
and hearing, the City Council shall grant or refuse the application in its
discretion.
   (C)   Transfers. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only, and
shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only
for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to
another place without the approval of the City Council.
   (D)   Eligibility, restrictions and conditions of license. The eligibility
requirements for licenses, conditions and restrictions, shall be as set forth
in state law, and as otherwise established by city ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
§ 110.31 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   Generally. The hours of sale shall be governed by Minnesota State
Statutes.
   (B)   After hours; on sale. It Is unlawful for any person to consume, or any
licensee to permit consumption of 3.2% malt liquor or wine on licensed premises
more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made. It
is unlawful for any person, other than a licensee or his or her bona fide
employee actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties, to be on the
premises licensed pursuant to this subchapter, and amendments thereof, more
than 30 minutes after the legal time for making license sales, unless the
licensed establishment is open to the public for serving food.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.32 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   The City Council shall either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke any non-
intoxicating license, upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to 3.2% malt
liquor, or alcoholic beverages. Except in cases of failure of financial
responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the
licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
§ 110.33 SALE OF 3.2% MALT LIQUOR.
   The City Council may, by resolution, authorize a holder of an on sale wine
license, who is also a holder of an on sale 3.2% malt liquor license for the
same premises, and whose gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to the
sale of food, to sell intoxicating malt liquors at on sale on the premises
without an additional license. There shall be no additional fee for the
granting of this authorization.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   All persons violating any provision of §§
110.01 through
110.14 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days, plus the costs of prosecution in either case.
   (C)   Any violation of the provisions of §§
110.25 through
110.33 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 21, passed 1-8-1958; Ord. 140, passed 12-10-1996)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
111.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
111.04   License ineligibility
   
111.05   License suspension and revocation
   
111.06   License transferability
   
111.07   Registration
   
111.08   Prohibited activities
   
111.09   Exclusion by placard
   
111.10   Effectiveness
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to- street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or
otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
“hawker.”
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as regular business days.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the
same as the term “canvasser.”
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for
more than 14 consecutive days.
§ 111.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or
any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict
door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be
required to register as solicitors under §
111.07. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and
other ideas.
§ 111.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S. Ch.
329 as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a license for
the
activity.
   (B)   City license required. Pursuant to M.S. § 437.02, as it may be amended
from time to time, except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person
shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without
first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need not be licensed,
but are still required to register pursuant to §
111.07.
   (C)   New application. Application for a city license to conduct business as
a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting business operations in the
city. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall
be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name.
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers.
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence.
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any).
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant,
including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines.
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license.
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city, with a maximum 14 consecutive
days.
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses.
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
      (15)   Proof of any required county license.
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
      (19)   The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form
of identification.
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number (VIN) for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business, and a physical description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established by City Council Resolution.
   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the City Clerk, within two regular business days, must
determine if the application is complete. An application is determined to be
complete only if all required information is provided. If the City Clerk
determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the
application is complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation, including
background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the
application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application the City Clerk must issue the license unless there exist grounds
for denying the license under §
111.04, in which case the Clerk must deny the license application. If the City
Clerk denies the license application, the applicant must be notified in writing
of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal
the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a
public hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal
within 20 days of the date of the request for a public hearing. The decision of
the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning
the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.
   (F)   Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid
for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted to
peddlers and transient merchants under this chapter shall be valid only during
the time period indicated on the license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of
place-to-place movement when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that
person's State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech,
press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the
person's exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license.
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant.
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General, or other state attorney
general’s office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or
agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed against the
applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 111.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or
incorrect statements provided by the applicant on the application form.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      (3)   Subsequent conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under §
111.04.
      (4)   Engaging in prohibited activity as provided under §
111.08.
      (5)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within ten regular
business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall
be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a
public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular
business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.07 REGISTRATION.
   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter under §
111.03, shall be required to register with the city. Persons engaging in door-
to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for
the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. Registration shall
be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall
be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Clerk shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of
the registration. Certificates of Registration shall be non-transferable.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person.
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conducting business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient
Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign
or placard under this section.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.10 EFFECTIVENESS.
   The provisions of §§
111.01,
111.02,
111.08 and
111.09 shall automatically apply upon adoption of this chapter. Sections
111.03,
111.04,
111.05,
111.06 and
111.07 shall not be effective until the adoption of a City Council resolution
or ordinance authorizing the licensing of persons covered by those sections.
CHAPTER 112: SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE MATERIALS
Section
   
112.01   Obscene materials and activities
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 OBSCENE MATERIALS AND ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, sell, print, offer
to sell, give away, circulate, publish, distribute or attempt to distribute any
obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, card, advertisement,
circular, print, picture, photograph, motion picture film, play, image, status,
drawing or other article, or to voluntarily perform any activity while being
viewed by spectators, which is obscene.
   (B)   Material or activity is obscene within the meaning of this section if:
      (1)   It depicts or describes any of the following:
         (a)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
analingus or any other actual or simulated oral-genital, genital-genital, anal-
genital or oral-anal contact between persons or between persons and animals;
         (b)   Masturbation or ejaculation by persons or animals or the actual
or simulated act of manually stimulating the genitals of another person or
animal;
         (c)   Scenes involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad
in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any persons; and
         (d)   Human genitals in a manner so as to focus the attention of the
reader or viewer to the genitals in a manner calculated to appeal to the
prurient interest of the reader or viewer.
      (2)   If in addition to any of the above, the material or activity:
         (a)   Considered as a whole, by an average person applying
contemporary community standards, is found to appeal to the prurient interest;
         (b)   Describes or depicts sexual conduct mentioned in division (B)(1)
(a) above in a patently offensive way; and
         (c)   Considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
   (C)   The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
      (1)   Recognized and established schools, churches, museums, medical
clinics, hospitals, public libraries, governmental agencies or quasi-
governmental sponsored organizations, and persons acting in their capacity as
employees or agents of the organizations and a licensed physician or
psychiatrist while engaged in his or her practice. For the purpose of this
section, RECOGNIZED AND ESTABLISHED shall mean a school having a full-time
faculty and diversified curriculum; a church affiliated with a national or
regional denomination; a medical clinic comprised of licensed physicians or
psychiatrists; and in the case of all others exempt organizations shall refer
only to income tax exempt organizations which are supported in whole or in part
by tax funds or which receive at least one-third of their support from publicly
donated funds; and
      (2)   Parents disseminating material to their children.
(Ord. 80, passed 1-10-1978) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 80, passed 1-10-1978)
CHAPTER 113: TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
   
113.01   Purpose
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   License
   
113.04   Unlawful acts
   
113.05   Licensee responsibility
   
113.06   Compliance checks; inspections
   
113.07   Other illegal acts
   
113.08   License revocation
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 PURPOSE.
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 21 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products and tobacco
related devices and the sales, possession and use are violations of both state
and federal laws; and because studies, which the city hereby accepts and
adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the
age of 21 years and that those persons who reach the age of 21 years without
having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and
because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health
problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of
government; this chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and
use of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery products and tobacco related devices for the purpose of
enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious
effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products and tobacco
related devices and to further the official public policy of the state in
regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in M.S. §
144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products and tobacco related devices are
following and complying with the requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE
CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this chapter.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase
tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products, or tobacco related devices for educational, research and
training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS
may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing
appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco,
tobacco products and tobacco related devices.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used
by a person to simulate smoking by delivery of nicotine or any other substance
through inhalation of vapor from the product, including any component part of
an electronic delivery device, whether or not it is sold or marketed
separately.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco
products shall include but not be limited to single cigarette packs, single
bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form and single cans or other packaging of
snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this definition shall not be
considered individually packaged.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged
cigarette.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 21 years.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a
fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for
sales transactions.
   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCTS. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption (or any part of such
product) that is not tobacco or an electronic delivery device.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or tobacco
related devices are available for sale to the general public. The phrase shall
include but not be limited to grocery stores, convenience stores, and
restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or tobacco
related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the
tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products, or tobacco related devices, without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee. The assistance or
intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco
product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or
tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. The
phrase shall not include vending machines. Self-service sales are interpreted
as being any sale where there is not an actual physical exchange of the tobacco
between the clerk and the customer.
   TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Includes electronic delivery devices, nicotine
or lobelia delivery products , commonly called an electronic cigarette or an e-
cigarette and any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including but not
limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, fine cut or other chewing
tobacco, cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-
rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers, cavendish, shorts, plug and
twist tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in a
manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. Includes electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery products, commonly called an electronic cigarette or an e-
cigarette and any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers or other
device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables
the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices,
nicotine or lobelia delivery product, or tobacco related devices upon the
insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the machine
by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco
related device.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 113.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco,
tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery
products, or tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to
do so from the city.
   (B)   Number of licenses. The city shall issue no more than five separate
licenses. They are issued generally on a first come, first served basis. Any
applicant with prior violations is considered as a last priority.
   (C)   Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco or tobacco
products shall be made on a form provided by the city. Upon receipt of a
completed application, the Administrator, Clerk/Treasurer shall forward the
application to the Police Department for the purpose of conducting a background
check on the applicant. The Police Department shall have ten days from receipt
of a complete application to complete the background check. Upon completion of
the background check, the Police Department shall forward the application and
investigation results to the City Council for action at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. If the Administrator, Clerk/Treasurer determines that an
application is incomplete, he/she shall return the application to the applicant
with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
   (D)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the
City Council approves the license, the Administrator, Clerk/Treasurer shall
issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license,
notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the
applicant’s right to appeal the decision.
   (E)   License fee. No license shall be issued under this chapter until the
appropriate license fee is paid in full. The annual fee for a license under
this chapter shall be established in the city’s ordinance establishing fees and
charges, as may be amended from time to time. Initial license applications
covering a period of less than one year shall be charged a fee calculated on a
monthly pro rata basis.
   (F)   Restriction on issuance.
      (1)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. In the event an
action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Ch. 278, as it may
be amended from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the
Council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this
division. No waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof
which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due.
      (2)   No license shall be granted if the applicant, responsible party,
owner, manager, or any other person involved with the application:
         (a)   Is under the age of 21;
         (b)   Who is not of good moral character and repute;
         (c)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or
tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding five years of the date of
application; or
         (d)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of
any violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other
regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices.
      (3)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall
be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license
under this chapter.
   (G)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December
31 of each year.
   (H)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter.
   (I)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.
   (J)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this chapter.
   (K)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premises.
   (L)   Renewals. The renewal of a licenses issued under this chapter shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days but not more than 60 days before the
expiration of the current license.
   (M)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute
right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal
of the license.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 113.04 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Prohibited sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
device:
      (1)   To any person under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   By means of any type of vending machine;
      (3)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need
to a make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises
in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery devices,
nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related device and whereby
there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
device between the licensee, or the licensee’s employee, and the customer;
      (4)   By means of loosies;
      (5)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances, except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured
cigarettes, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products
or other tobacco products; or
      (6)   By any other means, to any other person on in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision or
other regulation.
   (B)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person to attempt to disguise his/her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
   (C)   Unlawful purchases. It shall be unlawful for any person who is under
the age of 21 years to purchase tobacco or tobacco products. Persons acting
under the direct supervision of the city, law enforcement, or other
governmental unit and which are actively engaged in a compliance check of the
licensed premises are exempted from this provision while engaged in the
compliance check.
   (D)   Distribution of tobacco or tobacco product samples. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee or any person, business or retailer to distribute or
give away tobacco or tobacco products free of charge to any person.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 113.05 LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Actions of employees. All licensees under this chapter shall be
responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the
sale of an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license
holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from
also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this
chapter, state or federal law or other applicable law or regulation.
   (B)   Maintenance standards. The property shall conform to all building and
zoning requirements of the City of Hoyt Lakes and the laws of the state of
Minnesota. The storefront must be kept in a clean and orderly manner. No
customers or employees may cause a nuisance to neighboring properties.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 113.06 COMPLIANCE CHECKS; INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the East Range Police
Department or other authorized city official during regular business hours.
From time to time, the East Range Police Department or city may conduct
compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or
guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 21 years to enter the
licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised
by East Range Police Department designated law enforcement officers or other
designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be
guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices when
those items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in
compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting
the minor’s age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall
answer all questions about the minor’s age asked by the licensee or his or her
employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or
she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research or training
purposes or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 113.07 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter:
   (A)   Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related device to any
minor.
   (B)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
device. This division shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a
compliance check.
   (C)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to
smoke, chew, snuff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related
device.
   (D)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco,
tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery
products or tobacco related device, and it shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain those items on behalf of a
minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to
coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco,
tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery
products or tobacco related device. This division shall not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   (E)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
   (F)   Child resistant packaging. It shall be a violation of this chapter to
sell, purchase or possess any liquid intended for human consumption and use is
an electronic delivery device which has not been sold or purchased in child
resistant packaging as defined in CFR, Title 16, § 1700.15(b)(1).
   (G)   Public buildings. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use or
operate any electronic delivery device in any building owned or operated by the
City of Hoyt Lakes.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 113.08 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Every tobacco license is subject to revocation for violations of this
section or any other provision of Minnesota or City of Hoyt Lakes Ordinances.
   (A)   Violations. Violations of this section shall be reported to the City
Clerk’s Office. The City Administrator shall review the violation and provide
written notice to the license holder of the violation and any necessary
remedial actions.
   (B)   Revocation. If a license holder fails to correct a violation or
receives three violations within any 12-month period, the City Administrator
shall recommend revocation of the license to the City Council. The City Council
and City Administrator shall provide written notice to the owner and any
registered agent of the revocation. The notice shall inform the owner and agent
of the right to appeal the decision to the Hoyt Lakes City Council.
   (C)   Appeal. A license holder aggrieved by the revocation of a license may
appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City
Clerk’s office within ten days after date of issuance of the written revocation
notice, a written statement requesting a hearing before the City Council and
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. A hearing shall be held within
30 days of receipt of the request. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the
City Clerk’s Office in writing, setting forth the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the license holder at
his/her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for
hearing.
   (D)   Effect of revocation. If a license is revoked, it shall be unlawful
for anyone to thereafter allow any new sale of tobacco or tobacco products
until such time as a tobacco license is issued by the city. No person who has
had a license revoked under this section shall be issued a tobacco license for
five years from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   All persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$300 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, plus the
costs of prosecution in either case.
   (B)   Second offense by the same party in the same calendar year shall be
guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
(Ord. 240, passed 1-23-2023)
CHAPTER 114: TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL PRODUCTS
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   License
   
114.04   Unlawful acts
   
114.05   Hours of sale
   
114.06   Licensee responsibility
   
114.07   Compliance checks; inspections
   
114.08   License revocation
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   The Minnesota Legislature adopted M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from
time to time, making it legal to sell certain edibles and beverages infused
with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the cannabis ingredient extracted from hemp.
The City Council deems it necessary to provide for the regulation of edible
cannabinoid products in order to protect the public health safety and welfare
and to ensure that edible cannabinoid products are sold in accordance with
state law.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings
stated.
   CITY. The City of Hoyt Lakes.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system used by the city, or other applicable
governmental unit, to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell
edible cannabinoid products are following and complying with the requirements
of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may involve the use of persons under the age
of 21 authorized by this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by
other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate state and
local laws and regulations relating to edible cannabinoid product.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of edible cannabinoid products in
any manner where any person has access to the edible cannabinoid product
without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s
employee. Assistance or intervention means the actual physical exchange of the
licensed product between the customer and the licensee or employee.
   TOBACCO STORE. A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is incidental.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric, or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses tobacco-related products upon the insertion of money,
tokens, or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person
seeking to purchase the tobacco-related product.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 114.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any edible
cannabinoid product without first having obtained a license to do so from the
city.
   (B)   License eligibility. No license shall be issued except to a person
operating a tobacco store licensed under City Code
Chapter 113, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Application. An application for a license to sell edible cannabinoid
products shall be made on a form provided by the city. Upon receipt of a
completed application, the Administrator, Clerk/Treasurer shall forward the
application to the Police Department for the purpose of conducting a background
check on the applicant. The Police Department shall have ten days from receipt
of a complete application to complete the background check. Upon completion of
the background check, the Police Department shall forward the application and
investigation results to the City Council for action at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. If the Administrator, Clerk/Treasurer determines that an
application is incomplete, he/she shall return the application to the applicant
with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
   (D)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the
City Council approves the license, the Administrator, Clerk/Treasurer shall
issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license,
notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the
applicant’s right to appeal the decision.
   (E)   License fee. No license shall be issued under this chapter until the
appropriate license fee is paid in full. The annual fee for a license under
this chapter shall be established in the city’s ordinance establishing fees and
charges, as may be amended from time to time. Initial license applications
covering a period of less than one year shall be charged a fee calculated on a
monthly pro rata basis.
   (F)   Restriction on issuance.
      (1)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. In the event an
action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Ch. 278, as it may
be amended from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the
Council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this
division. No waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof
which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due.
      (2)   No license shall be issued for a premises within 500 feet of any
school or church. The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the
school or church to the closest side of the structure on the premises within
which edible cannabinoid products are to be sold.
      (3)   No license shall be granted if the applicant, responsible party,
owner, manager, or any other person involved with the licensee:
         (a)   Is under the age of 21;
         (b)   Who is not of good moral character and repute;
         (c)   The applicant has had a license to sell cannabinoid products
revoked within the preceding five years of the date of application; or
         (d)   Who has been convicted, within five years prior to the
application for such license, of any violation of any law of the United States,
this state or any other state or territory or of any local ordinance regarding
the manufacture, sale or distribution of edible cannabinoid products.
      (4)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall
be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license
under this chapter.
   (G)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December
31 of each year.
   (H)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter.
   (I)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.
   (J)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premises.
   (K)   Renewals. The renewal of a licenses issued under this chapter shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days but not more than 60 days before the
expiration of the current license.
   (L)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute
right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal
of the license.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 114.04 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Unlawful sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell any edible cannabinoid product:
      (1)   To any person under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   By means of any type of vending machine;
      (3)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need
to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in
order to receive the edible cannabinoid product and whereby there is not a
physical and in person exchange of the edible cannabinoid product between the
licensee or the licensee’s employee, and the customer; or
      (4)   That is in violation of M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (B)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person to attempt to disguise his/her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
   (C)   Unlawful purchases. It shall be unlawful for any person who is under
the age of 21 years to purchase any edible cannabinoid product. Persons acting
under the direct supervision of the city, law enforcement, or other
governmental unit and which are actively engaged in a compliance check of the
licensed premises are exempted from this provision while engaged in the
compliance check.
   (D)   Distribution of edible cannabinoid product samples. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee or any person, business or retailer to distribute or
give away edible cannabinoid products free of charge to any person.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 114.05 HOURS OF SALE.
   No sale of cannabinoid products may be made:
   (A)   After 10:00 p.m. on Mondays through Sundays;
   (B)   Before 8:00 a.m. on Mondays through Saturdays;
   (C)   Before 12:00 noon on Sundays;
   (D)   On Thanksgiving Day;
   (E)   On Christmas Day, December 25; and
   (F)   After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 114.06 LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Actions of employees. All licensees under this chapter shall be
responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of edible
cannabinoid products on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by
an employee shall also be considered a sale by the license holder. The license
holder shall at all times be responsible for how edible cannabinoid products
are offered for sale on the licensed premises and for ensuring that such edible
cannabinoid products are compliant with this chapter and state and federal law.
Violations of this code, state law, or other applicable law or regulation may
be enforced against the license holder and any other responsible individual.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting such separate
enforcement actions related to a single behavioral incident nor shall the
imposition of any penalty act as a bar to the prosecution, licensing action, or
other enforcement action against another.
   (B)   Maintenance standards. The property shall conform to all building and
zoning requirements of the City of Hoyt Lakes and the laws of the state of
Minnesota.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 114.07 COMPLIANCE CHECKS; INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the East Range Police
Department or other authorized city official during regular business hours. The
East Range Police Department or city may conduct compliance checks from time to
time. The city may conduct a compliance check that involves the participation
of a person between the ages of 18 and 20 to enter the licensed premises to
attempt to purchase edible cannabinoid products. Persons under the age of 21
used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of an unlawful purchase or
attempted purchase, not the unlawful possession of edible cannabinoid products
when those items are obtained or attempted to be obtained as part of the
compliance check. No person under the age of 21 used in compliance checks shall
attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the persons age and all
persons under the age of 21 lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer
all questions about their age asked by the licensee or his/her employee and
shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he/she is asked.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 114.08 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Every cannabinoid license is subject to revocation for violations of this
section or any other provision of Minnesota or City of Hoyt Lakes Ordinances.
   (A)   Violations. Violations of this section shall be reported to the City
Clerk’s Office. The City Administrator shall review the violation and provide
written notice to the license holder of the violation and any necessary
remedial actions.
   (B)   Revocation. If a license holder fails to correct a violation or
receives three violations within any 12-month period, the City Administrator
shall recommend revocation of the license to the City Council. The City Council
and City Administrator shall provide written notice to the owner and any
registered agent of the revocation. The notice shall inform the owner and agent
of the right to appeal the decision to the Hoyt Lakes City Council.
   (C)   Appeal. A license holder aggrieved by the revocation of a license may
appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City
Clerk’s office within ten days after date of issuance of the written revocation
notice, a written statement requesting a hearing before the City Council and
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. A hearing shall be held within
30 days of receipt of the request. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the
City Clerk’s Office in writing, setting forth the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the license holder at
his/her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for
hearing.
   (D)   Effect of Revocation. If a license is revoked, it shall be unlawful
for anyone to thereafter allow any new sale of cannabinoid products until such
time as a cannabinoid license is issued by the city. No person who has had a
license revoked under this section shall be issued a cannabinoid license for
five years from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   All persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$300 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, plus the
costs of prosecution in either case.
   (B)   Second offense by the same party in the same calendar year shall be
guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
(Ord. 241, passed 1-23-2023)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   FIREARMS
      
132.   DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Curfew
   
130.02   Gambling
   
130.03   Trespass
   
130.04   Disorderly conduct
   
130.05   Assault
   
130.06   Vagrancy
Misdemeanors
   
130.20   Adoption
   
130.21   Offenses against public peace
   
130.22   Offenses against morals or decency
   
130.23   Miscellaneous offenses
   
130.24   Offenses against property
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 CURFEW.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to be
on or present in any public street, avenue, alley, park or other public place,
including the places open to the public described in division (C) below, in the
city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following day, Sunday
through Friday morning, and 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following day,
Friday through Sunday morning, official city time, unless accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian or person having lawful custody and control of his or
her person, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity thereof. The fact
that the child, unaccompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody, is found upon any street, avenue, alley, park or other public place
after 10:00 p.m. (or 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday) and before 4:00 a.m. of
the following day, official city time, shall be prima facie evidence that the
child is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse exists therefor.
      (2)   There shall be no violation if the minor person is in attendance
at, participating in, or returning from, an activity (including lawful
employment) or function sponsored by a church, school, municipality or other
organization which function or activity has been under adult supervision;
provided that the minor person shall expeditiously and directly return to his
or her home within 30 minutes after the completion of the activity or function,
or within 30 minutes after his or her return to the city in the event that the
function or activity was conducted outside of the city.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person
having the lawful care, custody or control of any person under 16 years of age
to allow or permit the person over whom they have care, custody or control, to
violate the provisions of division (A) above.
      (2)   To ALLOW or PERMIT means to have knowledge of the violation, or to
be aware of facts and circumstances so that a reasonable person should know of
the violation.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment,
or other place of business, to permit minors under 16 years of age to loiter,
loaf or idle in any place during the hours prohibited by this section.
      (2)   Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place
of amusement, entertainment, refreshment, or other place of business shall find
minors under the age of 16 years, loafing or idling in any place of business,
that person shall immediately order the minor to leave, and if the minor
refuses to leave the place of business, the operator shall immediately notify
the Police Department and inform them of the violation.
      (3)   This section shall not be construed as permitting the presence at
any time of any person under the age of 16 years in any place where his or her
presence is now prohibited by any existing law or ordinance.
   (D)   Any member of the police force is authorized to arrest, with or
without warrant, any person or persons violating the provisions of divisions
(A) though (C) above.
(Ord. 136, passed 5-14-1996) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   No person or organization shall conduct lawful gambling as defined by
the laws of the state within the city limits of the city, and no person or
organization shall receive or renew a license or permit required for lawful
gambling activities within the limits of the city, except upon compliance with
the terms and conditions of this section and the terms and conditions of
Minnesota Statutes.
   (B)   The CITY OF HOYT LAKES TRADE AREA is hereby defined to include all
that geographic area within the boundaries of School District No. 2711, as
constituted and in existence on the date of enactment of this section, together
with the geographic area within the boundaries of the City of Babbitt.
   (C)   Each licensed organization which conducts lawful gambling within the
city shall expend or contribute a minimum of 70% of its lawful expenditures of
funds derived from gambling activities conducted within the limits of the city
for lawful purposes only conducted and located within the City of Hoyt Lakes
trade area as defined in this section.
   (D)   (1)   Each organization or person conducting lawful gambling within
the city limits of the city shall file true and correct copies with the City
Clerk-Treasurer of all applications, licenses, permits and reports issued
pursuant to or required under the authority of the Gaming Laws of the state,
M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time, in the same form and
at the same times as required under state law.
      (2)   Each organization or person conducting lawful gambling within the
city limits of the city shall segregate and report to the City Clerk-Treasurer
the gross receipts, expenses, profits and expenditures of profits from lawful
gambling operations conducted within the city limits of the city. Further, each
organization or person conducting lawful gambling within the city limits of the
city shall provide all additional information and documentation as is necessary
or reasonable to determine whether the organization or person is in compliance
with this section.
      (3)   The city reserves the right to require that the books and reports
which licensed organizations conducting charitable gambling are required to
keep and submit to the state, be also made available to designated city
officials from time to time for the city to review, and to also require
additional reporting from the organization or person as is necessary to carry
out the intent of this section.
(Ord. 127, passed 3-28-1995; Ord. 129, passed 4-11-1995; Ord. 141, passed 1-14-
1997) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 TRESPASS.
   (A)   Trespass. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in a public or
private school building or upon the grounds or office after being requested to
leave the premises by the school principal or other persons lawfully
responsible for the control of the premises.
   (B)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person whether on or off school
premises willfully to annoy, disturb, interfere with or obstruct any classroom
instruction teaching program or other school organization or assembly being
conducted upon the premises of any public or private school.
(Ord. 60, passed 6-25-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Every person who, without authority of law, shall willfully disturb
any assembly or meeting not unlawful in its character, or the peace and quiet
of any family or neighborhood, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who shall use profane, vulgar or indecent language in or
about any public building, store or place of business, or upon any of the
streets, alleys, or sidewalks of this city or so as to be audible thereon, or
as to be offensive, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Every person who shall be upon any public street or other public place
in an intoxicated condition shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any person voluntarily entering the water of any lake or public
swimming pool within the limits of the city, without being garbed in a bathing
suit sufficient to cover his or her person and equal to the standards generally
adopted and accepted by the public or willfully and lewdly exposing his or her
person or the private parts thereof, or procuring another to so expose himself
or herself, and any open and gross lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act
of public indecency shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (E)   No person or persons shall commit, do, make, aid, countenance or
assist in committing, doing or making any noise, riot, disturbance, improper
diversion or disorderly conduct, or shall collect in bodies or crowds in the
city for unlawful purposes or to the annoyance or disturbance of the citizens
or travelers.
(Ord. 7, passed 4-11-1956; Ord. 45, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 ASSAULT.
   No person shall strike or attempt to strike, nor in any unlawful manner
offer to do or do any bodily harm to another person; nor unlawfully make an
attempt to apply any degree of force or violence to the person or another; nor
in a violent, rude, angry or insolent manner touch or lay hands upon the person
of another.
(Ord. 8, passed 4-11-1956) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 VAGRANCY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person who shall have no visible means of support, and
live idly, without employment or any settled place of abode, or loiter about
the streets, pool halls, soft drink parlors or any other places, or who shall
be found trespassing on private property, and not be able to account for his or
her presence, shall be deemed a vagrant.
   (B)   Vagrancy prohibited. No vagrant shall be permitted on the streets or
in any public place in this municipality.
(Ord. 9, passed 4-11-1956) Penalty, see §
130.99
MISDEMEANORS
§ 130.20 ADOPTION.
   M.S. §§ 340A.502, 340A.503, 609.2231, 609.27, 609.52, 609.595, 609.605,
609.66, 609.68, 609.685, 609.72, 609.705, 609.715, 609.72 and 609.74, as they
may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference, and are
hereby made a part of this subchapter as if fully set forth herein, and shall
be in full force and effect in this city insofar as applicable.
(Ord. 45, passed 10-14-1969)
§ 130.21 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE.
   No person shall commit an offense against the public peace by violating any
of the following sections of Minnesota Statutes, as they may be amended from
time to time:
   (A)   M.S. § 609.72, (disorderly conduct);
   (B)   M.S. § 609.705, (unlawful assembly);
   (C)   M.S. § 609.715, (remaining after warning);
   (D)   M.S. § 609.66, (dangerous weapons);
   (E)   M.S. § 609.66, (use of firearms by minors);
   (F)   M.S. § 609.72, (provoking assault); and
   (G)   M.S. § 609.2231, (assault).
(Ord. 45, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.22 OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS OR DECENCY.
   No person shall commit an offense against morals or decency by violating any
of the following sections of Minnesota Statutes, as they may be amended from
time to time:
   (A)   M.S. § 609.685 (use of tobacco by children); and
   (B)   M.S. § 609.72 (disturbing religious meeting).
(Ord. 45, passed 10-14-1969) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.23 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES.
   No person shall commit an offense with regard to intoxication, vagrancy and
the like, by violation of any of the following sections of Minnesota Statutes,
as they may be amended from time to time:
   (A)   M.S. § 340A.502, (intoxication);
   (B)   M.S. § 609.74, (vagrancy);
   (C)   M.S. § 609.74, (public nuisance);
   (D)   M.S. § 609.68, (unlawful deposit of garbage or litter);
   (E)   M.S. § 609.595, (damage to property);
   (F)   M.S. § 609.605, (trespass and other acts);
   (G)   M.S. § 609.605, (trespass and other acts);
   (H)   M.S. § 609.52, (constituting theft);
   (I)   M.S. § 609.27, (threats and coercion); and
   (J)   M.S. § 340A.503, (minors, forbidden acts or statements).
(Ord. 45, passed 10-14-1969)
§ 130.24 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY.
   No person shall commit an offense against property by violation of any of
the following sections of Minnesota Statutes: M.S. § 609.595, as it may be
amended from time to time, (damage to property).
(Ord. 45, passed 10-14-1969)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
130.01 shall, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
      (1)   A first offense shall constitute a petty misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine of not more than $200; and
      (2)   Any second, or successive violations, of §
130.01 within 12 calendar months, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by
a sentence of imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than
$700, or both.
   (C)   Violation of any part of §
130.02, including the failure to make timely reports to the city, shall be
considered grounds for the city to refuse to approve the granting or renewal of
the gambling license of the organization which is in violation. In addition,
any person or organization violating any term of §
130.02 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be
subject to a fine up to $100. Further, a violation that is preceded within the
previous 12 months by two or more violations of §
130.02 shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be subject to
a fine of up to $700, imprisonment up to 90 days, or both.
   (D)   Any violation of a provision of §
130.03 shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the
offender may be imprisoned for not more than 90 days or may be fined not more
than $300, or both.
   (E)   Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
130.04(A) through (D), upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $5 nor more than $100 and costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of a fine or costs or both shall be confined in the county jail for not
to exceed 90 days.
   (F)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §
130.05 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than
90 days, together with the costs of prosecution in either case.
   (G)   Any vagrant found within the limits of this municipality, in violation
of §
130.06, shall be subject to arrest, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25 plus costs of
prosecution in any case, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of
not to exceed 90 days.
   (H)   The violation of §§
130.04(E) and
130.20 through
130.24 by any person shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $300, or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for
not more than 90 days unless a lesser punishment or fine is provided in §§
130.04(E) and 130.20 through 130.24 hereby adopted, together with the costs of
prosecution in either case. The violation of §§
130.04(E) and
130.20 through
130.24 shall be deemed a separate violation, each to be deemed a separate
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 7, passed 4-11-1956; Ord. 8, passed 4-11-1956; Ord. 9, passed 4-11-1956;
Ord. 45, passed 10-14-1969; Ord. 60, passed 6-25-1973; Ord. 127, passed 3-28-
1995; Ord. 136, passed 5-14-1996)
CHAPTER 131: FIREARMS
Section
   
131.01   Discharge of firearms, bow and arrow and cross-bows prohibited
   
131.02   Exceptions
   
131.03   Prohibitions
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, BOW AND ARROW AND CROSS-BOWS PROHIBITED.
   Except as set forth in this subchapter, no person shall fire, discharge or
explode any gun, pistol, air rifle or other weapon, or shoot an arrow from a
bow or cross-bow, or throw any deadly missile in any of the following places
within the city:
   (A)   In Sections Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten, Fifteen, Sixteen, Seventeen and
Eighteen, Township 58, Range 14 West;
   (B)   In a public place or in any place where there is any person to be in
danger although no injury actually results;
   (C)   Upon or over the grounds of any cemetery, public park, public
campgrounds, public beach, public school, public picnic area, or within 500
feet thereof;
   (D)   Within 500 feet of any building occupied by human beings or by
livestock, or within 500 feet of any stockade or corral containing livestock,
or within 500 feet of any burning area; or
   (E)   Upon, over or across any improved public highway or within limits of
the right-of-way of any improved public highway.
(Ord. 124, passed 10-25-1994) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any firing of a firearm,
gun, pistol, air rifle, bow and arrow or cross-bow, or any other weapons as
defined in §
131.03, when done in the lawful defense of persons or property, or in the
necessary defense or enforcement of the laws, or when done on supervised target
range or shooting range established solely for the purpose of target practice.
   (B)   Hunting of waterfowl on Whitewater Lake and Colby Lake will be
allowed, except within 300 feet of any picnic area, camping area, public beach,
or any public water access site as provided in M.S. § 97A.141, subd. 5, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 124, passed 10-25-1994; Ord. 208, passed 12-22-2014)
§ 131.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person, except military personnel or peace officers engaged in the
course of their duties, shall keep, carry, or have in his or her possession on
any public street, or being a trespasser upon the premises of another, or in a
public place, or in any school zone, or at any public event, in the city, any
assault weapon or military-type weapon. ASSAULT WEAPON shall mean any weapon
other than a firearm having the personal assault characteristics of any sap,
numchucks, blackjack, slungshot or slingshot, wrist rocket, sand club, chain
club, police type baton, metal knuckles, or shurikens, dirk, dagger, stiletto,
switch-blade knife, spring blade knife, push button knife, butterfly-type
knife, potato gun or any other similar devise using gunpowder or other
explosive or incendiary power to propel an object. MILITARY-TYPE WEAPON shall
mean any destructive device having fire power, mass, explosive or incendiary
characteristics of weapons such as cannons having a bore diameter larger than
one-half inch, bazookas, machine guns, fully automatic weapons, mortars,
grenades, and Molotov cocktail; however, military type weapon shall not include
shotguns, pistols, revolvers or rifles that are not machine guns or fully
automatic weapons.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person
possessing or transporting an assault weapon or military type weapon while
lawfully engaged in the business of making, selling or repairing assault
weapons or military-type weapons, nor to persons using or possessing a weapon
in accordance with a valid permit or for use in officially recognized
competition.
(Ord. 124, passed 10-25-1994) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of §§
131.01 through
131.03 shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished according to prevailing state laws.
(Ord. 124, passed 10-25-1994)
CHAPTER 132: DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
Sale, Possession, Transfer or Manufacture of Synthetic or Alternative Drugs
   
132.01   Prohibitions
   
132.02   Definitions
   
132.03   Substances
Drug Paraphernalia
   
132.15   Definitions
   
132.16   Drug paraphernalia evidence
   
132.17   Prohibited acts
   
132.18   Civil forfeiture
 
   
132.99   Penalty
SALE, POSSESSION, TRANSFER OR MANUFACTURE OF SYNTHETIC
OR ALTERNATIVE DRUGS
§ 132.01 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   A person is guilty of a violation of this subchapter if he or she
sells, possesses, distributes, transfers or manufactures any substance or
product containing any quantity of synthetic or alternative drug as defined
under this subchapter.
   (B)   All substances made unlawful by this subchapter shall constitute
contraband, subject to immediate seizure by law enforcement and shall be
destroyed upon a conviction for a violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   The substances defined in this subchapter shall not include
medications or substances for which the possession party holds a valid
prescription or beer, wine or intoxicating liquors as defined by local, state
and federal laws.
   (D)   Products commercially available and sold which have common, proven and
lawful uses under local, state and federal law shall not be deemed unlawful by
this subchapter. Examples are prescription and over the counter medications,
health supplements where the ingredients are listed on the packaging, food and
drink products and the like.
   (E)   In addition to the definitions provided in this subchapter, the
following additional factors shall be considered in making the determination if
a substance is unlawful under this subchapter:
      (1)   Scope of legitimate uses of the product;
      (2)   Physical and testimonial evidence provided by officers and
prosecutors regarding known uses of the product;
      (3)   Statements made by persons selling, possessing and using the
product;
      (4)   Availability of the product to include types and number of area
businesses selling it;
      (5)   The ratio of the price of the product compared to the quantity
sold; and
      (6)   The proximity of the product in relation to devices used to ingest
or consume controlled substances.
(Ord. 202, passed 12-10-2013)
§ 132.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANUFACTURE. To complete, blend, formulate, package, repackage or develop by
any means any substance made unlawful by this subchapter.
   POSSESSION. To possess on one’s own person or possession by a person
exercising dominion or control over the immediate area where contraband is
found whether in a vehicle, vessel, container, dwelling, building or other
structure, whether upon public or private property.
   SALE/TRANSFER. To offer for sale, to advertise for sale, to sell, to
distribute, to furnish, to transfer, to barter or to exchange to any person or
entity with or without an exchange of compensation or service.
   SALVIA DIVINORUM/SALVINORUM. All parts of the plant presently classified
botanically as salvia divinorum whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any
extract from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts,
derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or extracts.
   SYNTHETIC/ALTERNATIVE DRUG.
      (1)   Any substance containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant,
psychedelic, depressant or hallucinogenic;
      (2)   Salvia Divinorum or any substance known by this name or any version
of this name;
      (3)   Substances described as herbal blends, botanical blends, botanical
sachet, herbal sachet, herbal potpourri, herbal incense, spice, salts or any
blend or combination of these, regardless of it the substance is marketed as
“not for human consumption” which if ingested causes intoxication, euphoria,
giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior or in any manner changes, distorts or
disturbs the auditory, visual or mental process;
      (4)   Any substance defined in subsequent portions of this subchapter;
      (5)   Any substance which has a stimulant, depressant, psychedelic,
psychotropic or hallucinogenic effect on the body that is substantially similar
to or greater than that of any controlled substance or unlawful drug; or
      (6)   Any substance marked or packaged under any name listed in §
132.03.
   SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA/SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID/HERBAL SMOKING PRODUCT.
      (1)   A natural or human-made substance that elicits psychoactive or
psychotropic euphoric effects, or, a natural or human-made compound that
functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana (tetrahydrocannabinol
“THC”) including, but not limited to, any quantity of a synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analogs (including isomers,
esters, ethers, salts and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor
agonist, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of
being consumed, including any of the following:
         (a)   2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol with substitution at the 5-
position of the phenolic ring by alkyl or alkenyl, whether or not substituted
on the cyclohexyl ring to any extent;
         (b)   3-(1-naphthoyl)indole or 3-(1-naphthylmethane)indole by
substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further
substituted on the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the
naphthoyl or naphthyl ring to any extent;
         (c)   3-(1-naphthoyl)pyrrole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of
the pyrrole ring, whether or not further substituted in the pyrrole ring to any
extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl ring to any extent;
         (d)   1-(1-naphthylmethylene)indene by substitution of the 3-position
of the indene ring, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to
any extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent;
         (e)   3-phenylacetylindole or 3-benzoylindole by substitution at the
nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted in the
indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the phenyl ring to any
extent;
         (f)   5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(lR,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol
(CP-47,497);
         (g)   5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(lR,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol
(cannabicyclohexanol or CP-47,497 C8-homolog);
         (h)   1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-018 and AM678);
         (i)   1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-073);
         (j)   1-hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-019);
         (k)   1-[2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-200);
         (l)   1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (JWH-250);
         (m)   1-pentyl-3-[1-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)]indole (JWH-081);
         (n)   1-pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-122);
         (o)   1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-398);
         (p)   1-(5-fluoropentyl)-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (AM2201);
         (q)   1-(5-fluoropentyl)-3-(2-iodobenzoyl)indole (AM694);
         (r)   1-pentyl-3-[(4-methoxy)-benzoyl]indole (SR-19 and RCS-4);
         (s)   1-cyclohexylethyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (SR-18 and
RCS-8); and
         (t)   1-pentyl-3-(2-chlorophenylacetyl)indole (JWH-203).
      (2)   HERBAL SMOKING PRODUCTS, despite their labeling, are commonly
identified by being sold in small packets containing natural or human-made
substances, packaged under various retail names, identified as herbal
potpourri, herbal sachet, herbal aromatherapy and the like, sold without a
listing of ingredients, and sold with disclaimers warning against ingestion and
stating they are free of controlled substances. By virtue of this subchapter,
those products are unlawful.
      (3)   SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA/SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID/HERBAL SMOKING PRODUCT
are commonly marketed under various commercial trade names, which change often,
and contain a common disclaimer that the products are “not safe for human
consumption”, “novelty item” or similar disclaimer. Refer §
132.03 for a listing of commercial names commonly used to advertise and portray
these substances.
      (4)   SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA/SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID/HERBAL SMOKING PRODUCT
shall exclude typical, standard incense and potpourri that is sold as incense
sticks, oils, or cones that is commonly used for their aromatic qualities and
do not contain any synthetic chemical compounds, do not provide a prohibition
against ingestion, and do not elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric
effects.
   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELICS/HALLUCINOGENS.
      (1)   A substance that mimics the effects of any federally or state
controlled substance, including, but not limited to, any natural or human-made
substance, compound, mixture, preparation, or is laced with a synthetic
chemical compound that elicits a psychedelic/hallucinogenic effect including,
but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenly)ethanamine (2C-E);
         (b)   2-(2,5,Dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);
         (c)   2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C);
         (d)   2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I);
         (e)   2-(4-Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]ethanamine (2C-T-2);
         (f)   2-[4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxphenyl]ethanamine (2C-T-4);
         (g)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H);
         (h)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N); and
         (i)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
      (2)   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGENS, despite their labeling, are
commonly identified by being sold in small packets, tubs, or vials and are
often in tablet, capsule and liquid form and packaged under various retail
names, sold without a listing of ingredients, and often sold with disclaimers
warning against ingestion and stating they are free of controlled substances.
By virtue of this subchapter, those products are unlawful.
      (3)   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELICS/HALLUCINOGENS are commonly marketed under
various commercial trade names, which change often, and contain a common
disclaimer that the products are “not safe for human consumption”, “novelty
item” or similar disclaimer. They may also be marked in a consumable pill form
under various names. Refer to §
132.03 for a listing of commercial names commonly used to advertise and portray
these substances.
   SYNTHETIC STIMULANT.
      (1)   A product that contains a synthetic chemical compound that elicits
psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects, especially where those products
are in a powder, crystal or granular form, including, but not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (Methylene);
         (b)   3,4-Methyenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV);
         (c)   4-Methylmethcathinone (Mephedrone);
         (d)   4-Methoxymethcathinone (Methedrone);
         (e)   4-FIuoromethcathinone (Flephedrone);
         (f)   3-Fluoromethcathinone (3-FMC);
         (g)    Naphthylpyrovalerone; and
         (h)   2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone (Cathinone).
      (2)   SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS, despite their labeling, are commonly
identified by being sold in small packets, tubs and vials, packaged under
various retail names, often identified as bath salts, plant food, fertilizer,
insect repellant and the like, and are usually powder or granular in form, sold
without a listing of ingredients, and sold with disclaimers warning against
ingestion and stating they are free of controlled substances. By virtue of this
subchapter, those products are unlawful.
      (3)   SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS, often referred to as “bath salts”, are
commonly marketed under various commercial trade names, which change often, and
contain a common disclaimer that the products are “not safe for human
consumption”, “novelty item” or similar disclaimer. Refer to §
132.03 for a listing of commercial names commonly used to advertise and portray
these substances.
      (4)   SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS, as defined in this subchapter, shall exclude
normal, typical bath salts and bath additives which do not contain synthetic
chemical compounds listed herein that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic
stimulant effects; standard bath salts primarily contain magnesium sulfate
(Epsom salts), sodium chloride (table salt), sodium bicarbonate (baking soda),
sodium hexametaphosphate (Caigon), amorphous/glassy sodium metaphosphate,
sodium sesquicarbonate and borax.
(Ord. 202, passed 12-10-2013)
§ 132.03 SUBSTANCES.
   Substances described in this subchapter and distributed under the
commercial/retail names contained in this section shall be deemed to be
unlawful and a synthetic drug, especially if they are packaged in a manner that
indicates the product is “not for human consumption” or if it fails to disclose
the products ingredients. Products commercially sold under similar or like
names which have common, proven and lawful uses and which list their
ingredients and directions for use shall not be deemed unlawful under this
subchapter.
 Commercial/Retail Name
        Commercial/Retail Name
        8-ball
Numbers 251
        201
        Afgan Black
        Am-hi-co (All Types)
A       Aphrodisia
        Atomic Bomb
        Aztec Gold
        Aztec Midnight Wind Tezcatlipoca
        Back Draft
        Bad 2 the Bone
        Banana Cream Nuke
        Bath Salt
        Bayou Blaster
        Bigdaddy
        Black Diamond
        Black Magic Salvia
B       Black Mamba
        Bliss (All Types)
        Blizzard
        Blue Silk
        Blueberry Hayze
        Blueberry Haze
        Bombay Blue
        Bonzai
        BRGMO-dragonfly
        Buzz
        C3
        C4
        C4 Herbal Incense
        Caneff
        Charge Plus
C       Cherry Bomb
        Chill X
        Chronic Spice
        Citrus
        Cloud 9
        Colorado Chronic
        CTLL out
        D-Rail
        Da Block
        Dark Night II
        Demon
        Devil Eye
D       Dex
        Diamond Spirit
        Doves
        Dragon Spice
        Dream
        Dynamite N-R-G
        Earthquake
        Eruption Spice
        Euphoria
E       Ex-Ses Gold plus
        Ex-Ses Platinum (All Types)
        Exotic Ultra
        Exses
        Extreme Spice
        Fake Weed
        Fertilizer
        Fire Bird Ultimate Strength Cinnamon
F       Forest Humus
        Freedom
        Fully Loaded
        Funky Monkey XXXX
        G Four
        G Greenies Caramel Crunch
        Genie
        Genie (All Types)
G       Glass Cleaner
        Gold Spirit Spice
        Green Monkey Chronic Salvia
        Greenies Strawberry
        Grow
        Head Rush Ultra
        Heaven Improved
        Heavenscent Suave
        Heoctane
H       Herbal Ecstasy
        Humboldt Gold
        Hurricane
        Hush
        Hyper X Ultra
I       Ice Bud
        Ivory (All Types)
J       Jamaican Gold
        Joker
        K Royal
        K1 (All Types)
        K2 (All Types)
K       K3 (All Types)
        K4 (All Types)
        Kind Spice
        Kush
        KW Orisha Max
        Legal (All Types)
        Legal Eagle (All Types)
        Legal Meth
        Legal Phunk
L       Legan Ecstasy
        Love Potion 69
        Love Strawberry
        Lunar Diamond
        Lunar Wave
        Magic Dragon Platinum
        Magic Gold
        Magic Silver
        Magic Spice
        Maya Blue
        Mega Bomb
        Melloman
        Mellow Madness 1A
        Methoxetamine
M       Mid-Atlantic Exemplar (All Types)
        Midnight Chill
        Mind Bliss
        MNGB (All Types)
        MNGB Almond/Vanilla
        Moe Joe Fire
        Mojo (All Types)
        Mr. Smiley’s
        MTN-787
        Mystery
        Natural Ecstasy
        Natural LSD
        Naughty Nights
        Neutronium
N       New Improved K3 (All Types)
        New K3 (All Types)
        New-Kron Bomb
        Nitro
        Number One Choice (All Types)
O       Ocean Blue
        Ocean Burst (All Types)
        P.E.P. Potpourri (All Types)
        Paradise
        Pink Lotus
        Pink Tiger
        Pixie Dust
        Plant Food
P       Posh
        Potpourri (All Types)
        Pow
        Pulse
        Pump It Powder
        Pure Ivory
        Purple Wave
Q       Quick Silver
        Radioactive
        Rasta Citrus Spice
        Rebel Spice
R       Recharge (All Types)
        Red
        Red Bird
        Red Dove
        Red Doves
        Samurai Spirit
        Sativah
        Scarface
        Scope (All Types)
        Sence
        Serenity (All Types)
        Sex Intense
        Sextacy (All Types)
        Shamantrance
        Shanti Spice (All Types)
        SI. Swerve
        Silent Black
        Skink
        Smoke
        Smoke Plus
        Snow Leopard
        Solar Star Gold
S       Space (All Types)
        Spacetrips
        Speed Freak
        Spice (All Types)
        Spice 99 (All Types)
        Spicery (All Types)
        Spicey XXX (All Types)
        Spicylicious
        Spike (All Types)
        Spike 99 (All Types)
        Stardust
        Starry Night
        Stinger
        Summer Skyy
        Super Kush
        Super Summit
        Swagger Grape
        Syn (All Types)
        Texas Gold
        Time Warp
T       TNT
        Tranquility
        Tribal Warrior (All Types)
        Ultra Cloud 10
U       Unknown Cigarette
        Utopia (All Types)
        V8
V       Vanilla Sky
        Voodoo (All Types)
        White (All Types)
        Who Dat (All Types)
        Wicked X
W       Wild Opium
        Winder Boost
        Window Cleaner
        Wood Stock
X       XTC
        X-Tracy Ultra
Y       Yucantan Fire
        Yucatan Fire
Z       Zombie World
        Zoom
 
(Ord. 202, passed 12-10-2013)
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 132.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2) below, DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA means all equipment, products and materials of any kind, which
are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, enhancing,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injection, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to time. The term
PARAPHERNALIA includes, without limitation:
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant, which is a controlled
substance;
         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, including quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, grinders and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding, manufacturing,
producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;
         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or products or materials
used or intended for use in manufacturing, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances; and
         (k)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing controlled substances to include, but not
limited to, marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body,
including:
            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
            2.   Water pipes;
            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            5.   Objects, sometimes commonly referred to as roach clips, used
to hold burning material, for example, a marijuana cigarette, that has become
too small or too short to be held in the hand;
            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            7.   Chamber pipes;
            8.   Carburetor pipes;
            9.   Electric pipes;
            10.   Air driven pipes;
            11.   Chillums;
            12.   Bongs; and
            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.
      (2)   Exceptions: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA shall not include:
         (a)   Those items used in conjunction with permitted uses of
controlled substances under the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, being 21
U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq.;
         (b)   Those items used by law enforcement officials as it relates to
the seizure or forfeiture of drug paraphernalia in connection with a crime or
offense;
         (c)   Those items used by federal, state or local law enforcement
officials for educational purposes; and
         (d)   The possession, manufacture, delivery or sale of hypodermic
needles or syringes in accordance with M.S. § 151.40, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   OTHER TERMS. Other terms are defined as specified in M.S. § 152.01, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 200, passed 5-28-2013)
§ 132.16 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA EVIDENCE.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
   (A)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
   (C)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this section;
   (D)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   (E)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   (F)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of any
person in control of the object, to deliver the object to another person whom
the owner or person in control of the object knows, or should reasonably know,
intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. The
innocence of an owner, or of any person in control of the object, as to a
direct violation of this section may not prevent a finding that the object is
intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
   (G)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning the
object’s use;
   (H)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object, which explain or depict
the object’s use;
   (I)   National and local advertising concerning the object’s use;
   (J)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   (K)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, for example, a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
   (L)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   (M)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
   (N)   Expert testimony concerning the object’s use; and
   (O)   The actual or constructive possession by the owner or by a person in
control of the object or the presence in a vehicle or structure where the
object is located of written instructions, directions or recipes to be used, or
intended or designed to be used, in manufacturing, producing, processing,
preparing, testing or analyzing a controlled substance.
(Ord. 200, passed 5-28-2013) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.17 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Use or possession prohibited. It is unlawful for any person knowingly
or intentionally to use or to possess drug paraphernalia.
   (B)   Delivery or manufacturing prohibited. A person may not deliver,
possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug
paraphernalia, if that person knows or should reasonably know that the drug
paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, enhance, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to time, or any other state or
federal law, rule or regulation governing the manufacture, delivery, sale,
advertisement, possession and/or use of controlled substances.
   (C)   Delivery or sale to minors prohibited. A person 18 years of age or
over may not sell or deliver drug paraphernalia to a person who is under 18
years of age and at least three years his or her junior.
   (D)   Advertisement prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to place in
any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the
purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of
objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (E)   Public cannabis use prohibited. The use of cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower- potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products is
prohibited in all public places and public property within the municipal
boundaries of the city except for the following:
      (1)   A private residence including the person’s curtilage or yard.
      (2)   Private property not generally accessible by the public, unless the
person is explicitly prohibited from consuming cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products on the
property by the owner of the property.
      (3)   The premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit on-
site consumption.
      (4)   Campsites at Fisherman’s Point Campground.
      (5)   Hoyt Lakes Municipal Golf Course.
(Ord. 200, passed 5-28-2013; Ord. 242, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.18 CIVIL FORFEITURE.
   All drug paraphernalia as defined in this subchapter are subject to
forfeiture, subject to the provisions set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
(Ord. 200, passed 5-28-2013)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any violation of the terms of §§
132.01 through
132.03 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (C)   (1)   Any violation of §
132.17(A) is a petty misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any violation of §
132.17(B), (C) and (D) is a misdemeanor.
      (3)   Any violation of §
132.17(E) is a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 202, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 242, passed 10-10-2023)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   PLANNING COMMISSION
      
151.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
152.   ZONING
      
153.   LONG-TERM RENTALS
      
154.   SHORT-TERM RENTALS
      
155.   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
150.01   Establishment of Commission
   
150.02   Composition
   
150.03   Organization, meetings and the like
   
150.04   Adoption of program of work
   
150.05   Preparation of city plan
   
150.06   Procedure for adoption of plan
   
150.07   Means of executing plan
   
150.08   Zoning plan
   
150.09   Official map of street extensions
   
150.10   Plats
   
150.11   Procedure for changes
   
150.12   List of recommended public works
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.
   A City Planning Commission for the city is hereby established.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.02 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of five members to be appointed
by the City Council.
   (B)   The members of the first Commission pursuant to this section shall be
the members of the present Planning Commission, whose terms expire as follow:
the two members whose terms expire on April 1, 1968; the one member whose term
expires on April 1, 1969; and the two members whose term expire on April 1,
1970. Thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of three years.
Appointees shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed and
qualified.
   (C)   Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the Council for the
unexpired portion of the term. Every appointed member shall, before entering
upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an oath that he or she will
faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office. All members shall serve
without compensation.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961; Ord. 40, passed 7-31-1967)
§ 150.03 ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its appointed
members for a term of one year; and the Commission may create and fill any
other offices as it may determine. The Commission may call upon any other city
officers and employees as it deems necessary to assist it in the performance of
its duties.
   (B)   The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. It
shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of
its resolutions, transactions and findings, which record shall be a public
record. On or before January 1 of each year, the Commission shall submit to the
City Council a report of its work during the preceding year. Expenditures of
the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City
Council.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.04 ADOPTION OF PROGRAM OF WORK.
   (A)   Upon the appointment and organization of the Commission, it shall
proceed with the preparation and adoption of resolution of a program of work,
outlining activities proposed to be undertaken in the exercise of its powers
and the performance of its duties.
   (B)   This program will include:
      (1)   An outline of data and information to be assembled as a basis for
the city plan;
      (2)   An outline of subjects to be covered by the city plan; and
      (3)   An outline of types of procedure necessary to make the city plan
effective.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may, by resolution, revise its program of work
from time to time.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.05 PREPARATION OF CITY PLAN.
   It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission to prepare and
adopt a comprehensive city plan for the physical development of the city,
including proposed public buildings, street arrangements and improvements,
public utility services, parks, playgrounds and other similar developments, the
use of property, the density of population and other matters relating to the
physical development of the city. The plan may be prepared in sections, each of
which shall relate to a major subject of the plan, as outlined in the
Commission’s program of work.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.06 PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   (A)   Before adopting the city plan or any section of it or any substantial
amendment thereof, the Commission shall hold at least one public hearing
thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given by publication in
a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days before the day of the
hearing. The adoption of the city plan or of any section or amendment thereof
shall be by resolution of the Commission, approved by the affirmative votes of
not less than two-thirds of its total membership. The Commission may from time
to time amend or add to the city plan or section thereof as herein provided for
the adoption of the original plan whenever changed conditions or further
studies by the Commission indicate that the amendment or addition is necessary.
   (B)   An attested copy of the plan or of any section, amendment or addition
to the city plan adopted by the Planning Commission shall be certified to the
City Council.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.07 MEANS OF EXECUTING PLAN.
   (A)   Upon the adoption of the city plan or any section thereof, it shall be
the duty of the Planning Commission to recommend to the City Council reasonable
and practicable means for putting into effect the plan or section thereof in
order that the same will serve as a pattern and guide for the orderly physical
development of the city and as a basis for the efficient expenditure of the
funds thereof relating to the subjects of the city plan.
   (B)   These means shall consist of a zoning plan, the control of subdivision
plats, a plan of future streets, coordination of the normal public improvements
of the city, a long-term program of capital expenditures and any other matters
as will accomplish the purposes of this section.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.08 ZONING PLAN.
   The Planning Commission, upon its own motion may and upon instructions by
the City Council, shall prepare a proposed zoning plan for the city. Before
recommending the plan to the City Council, the Planning Commission shall hold
at least one public hearing thereon after a notice similar to that required by
§
150.06. The same procedure shall apply for the preparation of any plan of
proposed rights-of-way for future streets or highways, or the future widening
of existing streets or highways, or for the reservation of lands for other
public purposes.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.09 OFFICIAL MAP OF STREET EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may, and upon instruction by the City Council
shall, prepare an official map of the platted and unplatted portions of the
city and adjoining territory, or portions thereof, indicating upon the map the
proposed future extension or widening of streets of the city within the
existing platted and developed territory or across the unplatted territory.
   (B)   After the map has been prepared and a hearing on it has been held as
provided in §
150.08, it shall be submitted to the Council, which shall thereupon consider
the map and may adopt it or any part of it with any amendments as it deems
advisable. Before the adoption by the Council, a public hearing shall be held
upon the proposal at least ten days after a notice thereof has been published
in a newspaper published in the city. After the map has been adopted by the
Council and filed, with the Register of Deeds, whenever any existing street or
highway is widened or improved, or any new street is opened, or lands for other
public purpose are acquired by action of the city, it shall not be required in
these proceedings to pay for any building or structure placed without a permit
or in violation of conditions of a permit after the filing of a map within the
limits of the mapped street, or outside of any building line that may have been
established upon the existing street, or within any area, thus reserved for
public purposes.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.10 PLATS.
   (A)   Every proposed plat of land within the city or within two miles of the
limits of the city and not within a town which itself requires the approval of
plats, shall be submitted to the City Council before being filed and no plat of
land shall be filed unless and until the same shall first have been approved by
the City Council.
   (B)   The Planning Commission, within 40 days after any plat has been
referred to it by the City Council, shall act on the same and shall make its
recommendations with respect thereto. These recommendations may consist of:
      (1)   Recommendation that the City Council approve the plat;
      (2)   Recommendation that the City Council disapprove the plat, in which
case the recommendation shall include a statement of the specific reasons for
the recommendation; or
      (3)   Recommendation that the City Council approve the plat after
specified changes or revisions are made therein, which recommendations may
include the condition that a revised plat, containing the changes or revisions,
to submitted to the Planning Commission, in which case the revised plat shall
be so submitted to the Planning Commission for its further consideration and
recommendations before action thereon by the City Council.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.11 PROCEDURE FOR CHANGES.
   No change shall be made in the zoning plan, future street and public lands
plan, or regulations governing the platting of land after the plans or
regulations have been adopted by the City Council, until the proposed change
has been referred to the Planning Commission for report thereon and an attested
copy of the report has been filed with the Council; and no ordinance or
resolution establishing any of the plans or specifications shall be adopted by
the City Council until the ordinance or resolution has been referred to the
Planning Commission for a report thereon and an attested copy of the report has
been filed with the Council. Failure of the Planning Commission so to report
within 40 days or a longer period as may be designated by the Council after the
reference shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.12 LIST OF RECOMMENDED PUBLIC WORKS.
   Each officer, department, board or commission of or in the city whose
functions include recommending, preparing plans for or constructing public
works shall, at least three months before the end of each fiscal year, submit
to the Planning Commission a list of the proposed public works recommended by
the officer, department, board or commission for planning, initiation or
constructing during the ensuing fiscal years. The Planning Commission shall
request from the local school district a similar list of its proposed public
works. The Planning Commission shall list and classify all proposed public
works and shall prepare a coordinated program of proposed public works for the
ensuing fiscal year. The program shall be recommended by the Commission to the
Council and to any other officers, departments, boards or public bodies as have
jurisdiction over the recommending, planning or constructing of the public
works. A copy of the recommended program of public works shall be included in
the annual report of the Planning Commission provided for in §
150.03.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
150.10 or who sells land or offers land for sale or contracts for the sale of
land by reference to or by other use of any plat before the plat has been
approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of §
150.10 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than
90 days. Before acting on the plat, the City Council shall submit the same to
the Planning Commission for its recommendations.
(Ord. 26, passed 4-11-1961)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   Purpose and jurisdiction
   
151.03   Definitions
Procedure
   
151.15   Generally
   
151.16   Sketch plans
   
151.17   Submission
   
151.18   Action by planning staff
   
151.19   Action by Planning Commission
   
151.20   Action by City Council
   
151.21   Final plat
   
151.22   Approval or rejection
   
151.23   Recording
   
151.24   Necessary data for preliminary plat
   
151.25   Requirements governing approval of preliminary plat
   
151.26   Necessary data for final plat
   
151.27   Acceptance of streets
   
151.28   Required land improvements
   
151.29   Arrangements for improvements
Design Standards
   
151.40   Street plan
   
151.41   Streets
   
151.42   Alleys and pedestrian ways
   
151.43   Easements
   
151.44   Block standards
   
151.45   Lot standards
   
151.46   Park dedication
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.60   Inspection at subdivider’s expense
   
151.61   Zoning permit
   
151.62   Variances and exceptions
   
151.63   Record of plats
   
151.64   Enforcement
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “City of Hoyt
Lakes Subdivision Ordinance”, except as referred to herein, where it shall be
known as “this chapter”.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.02 PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Purpose. Because each new subdivision accepted by the city becomes a
permanent unit in the basic physical structure of the future community and to
which the future community will of necessity be forced to adhere, and further
because piecemeal planning of subdivisions will bring a disastrous,
disconnected patchwork of pattern and poor circulation of traffic unless its
design and arrangement is correlated to a proposed master plan study aiming at
a unified scheme of community interests; all subdivisions of land lying within
the incorporated limits of the city shall in all respects fully comply with the
regulations set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. It is the purpose of this chapter to make certain
regulations and requirements for the platting of land within the city pursuant
to the authority contained in M.S. Chapters 412, 429, 471, 505 and 508, as they
may be amended from time to time, which regulations the City Council deems
necessary for the health, safety, general welfare, convenience and good order
of this community.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
   BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and
the property line.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot or other parcel of land so
designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision between which, and the
adjacent boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts, the erection of a
structure or portion thereof is prohibited.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from minor streets of
residence development and the principal circulating streets within a
development.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A short minor street having one open end and being permanently
terminated at the other by a vehicular turnaround.
   DESIGN STANDARDS. The specifications to landowners or subdividers for the
preparation of preliminary plans indicating, among other things, the optimum,
minimum or maximum dimensions of features such as right-of-way and blocks as
set forth in §§
151.40 through
151.46.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
public or any person for a specific purpose or purposes.
   FINAL PLAT. A map or plan of subdivision and any accompanying material as
described in §
151.26.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
building development or for transfer of ownership,
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street which is parallel to and contiguous
with a thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the adjoining
thoroughfare (frontage road).
   MINOR STREET. A street other than a thoroughfare or collector street which
affords local access to abutting properties.
   OWNER. Includes the plural as well as the singular, and includes any person.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public or private right-of-way across a block or providing
access within a block to be used by pedestrians and for the installment of
utility lines.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as
described in §
151.24.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts made between private parties and constitute
an agreement between these parties as to the manner in which land may be used
with the view to protecting and preserving the physical, social and economic
integrity of any given area.
   STREET. A public or private right-of-way which affords primary access by
pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties whether designated as a street,
avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane or however otherwise designated.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between curb lines or edge of pavement.
   SUBDIVISION. A described tract of land which is to be or has been divided
into five or more lots or parcels any of which resultant parcels is two and
one-half acres or less in size, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
building development or, if a new public street is involved, any division of a
parcel of land. The term includes RESUBDIVISION and, where it is appropriate to
the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the land
subdivided.
   THOROUGHFARE. A public right-of-way with a high degree of traffic continuity
and serving as an arterial trafficway between the various districts.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
PROCEDURE
§ 151.15 GENERALLY.
   Except as provided in §
151.62, before dividing any tract which falls within the definition of
subdivision of this chapter, the owner or subdivider shall submit a preliminary
plat of the subdivision for the approval of the Planning Commission and the
City Council in the following manner.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.16 SKETCH PLANS.
   (A)   Contents of plans. Subdividers shall prepare, for review with the City
Planning Commission staff, subdivision sketch plans which shall contain the
following information: tract boundaries; north point; streets on and adjacent
to the tract; significant topographical and physical features; proposed general
street layout; and proposed general lot layout.
   (B)   Informal consideration. The sketch plans will be considered as
submitted for informal and confidential discussion between the subdivider and
the City Zoning Administrator. Submission of a subdivision sketch plan shall
not constitute formal filing of a plat with the Commission.
   (C)   Modifications. As far as may be practical on the basis of a sketch
plan, the City Zoning Administrator will informally advise the subdivider as
promptly as possible of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms
to the design standards of this chapter and will discuss possible plan
modifications necessary to secure conformance.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.17 SUBMISSION.
   (A)   Filing. Four copies of the preliminary plat shall be filed with the
City Zoning Administrator before the last business day of the month prior to
the regular Planning Commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered,
together with the filing fee and a certified property owner list from the
county showing the property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundary of the
proposed subdivision. Any necessary applications for variances from the
provisions of this or other applicable chapter provisions shall be filed with
the proper city official before a preliminary plat will be considered
officially filed.
   (B)   Filing fee. The filing fee shall be as set by the City Council, to be
used for the expenses of the city in connection with the approval or
disapproval of the plans and the approval or disapproval of any final plat
which may thereafter be submitted.
   (C)   Rezoning. If the property must be rezoned for the intended use, an
application for rezoning, pursuant to the procedure in the zoning regulations,
shall be filed with the preliminary plat.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.18 ACTION BY PLANNING STAFF.
   Prior to the meeting of the City Planning Commission at which the
preliminary plat is to be considered, the Zoning Administrator and Operations
Superintendent shall examine the plat for compliance with this and other
ordinances of the city, and submit a written report to the Commission. The City
Zoning Administrator will submit a copy of the preliminary plat to the County
Surveyor and include county recommendations in this report.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.19 ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Examination of preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall
consider the preliminary plat together with the staff reports referred to in §
151.18 at the first regular meeting after the plan has been filed. Mailed
notices of this meeting shall be sent to the surrounding property owners within
350 feet and to state, county and federal agencies if applicable (shoreline
management and wetlands).
   (B)   Recommendation. The City Planning Commission shall thereafter
formulate a recommendation concerning the preliminary plat within 60 days from
filing, and shall promptly transmit it to the City Council together with one
copy of the plan and the staff report, or the City Council may take action
without a recommendation.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.20 ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Unless the City Council takes action without a recommendation, the
recommendation of the Planning Commission on the preliminary plat shall be
considered by the City Council, and the City Council shall approve or
disapprove the plan within 60 days of receipt of the recommendation. If the
City Council shall disapprove the plan, the grounds for any refusal shall be
set forth in the proceedings of the City Council and reported to the person or
persons applying for the approval.
   (B)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not be construed to be approval
of the final plat.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.21 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Filing. After approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat by the
City Council, the owner or subdivider may, within 60 days thereafter, file with
the city a final plat with a formal request for approval. At the time of the
filing of the final plat, there shall be filed three additional copies together
with an up-to-date abstract of title or registered property abstract showing
the title to the land designated in the plat and access to the plat. The
Administrative Superintendent shall refer the original and one copy of the plat
to the Operations Superintendent for examination and report, and shall refer
one copy and the abstract to the City Attorney for examination and report. The
Administrative Superintendent shall also forward one copy of the final plat to
the County Surveyor for examination and report. The reports of the Operations
Superintendent, the County Surveyor and the City Attorney shall be due within
15 days after the reference, but if delayed, may be considered by the City
Council if submitted prior to the public hearing.
   (B)   Required changes incorporated. The final plat shall have incorporated
all changes or modifications required by the City Council; in all other
respects it shall conform to the preliminary plat. It may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to
record and develop at the time; provided that the portion conforms with all the
requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Public hearing. After filing of the final plat, a public hearing shall
be held by the City Council, preceded by ten days’ published notice of the
public hearing. Mailed notices of this hearing shall be sent to the surrounding
property owners within 350 feet.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.22 APPROVAL OR REJECTION.
   (A)   At the hearing, all persons interested may be heard, and the City
Council may approve or disapprove the plat. The approval or disapproval shall
be given not more than 60 days after the filing of the final plat with a formal
request for approval.
   (B)   The grounds for any refusal to approve the plat shall be set forth in
the proceedings of the City Council and reported to the person or persons
applying for the approval.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.23 RECORDING.
   Following final approval or disapproval of the plat by the City Council, the
Administrative Superintendent shall notify the owner or subdivider of the City
Council’s action and within 30 days thereafter the final plat, if approved,
shall be filed with the Administrative Superintendent. The owner or subdivider
shall then record the plat with the County Recorder and/or Registrar of Titles
and thereafter, the owner or subdivider shall furnish the Administrative
Superintendent with two prints and one reproducible copy of the final plat.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.24 NECESSARY DATA FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   In addition to the data prescribed by the law of the state, the preliminary
plan shall include the following data:
   (A)   Identification and description.
      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate the
name of any plat previously recorded in the county;
      (2)   Location by township, section, town or range or by other legal
description;
      (3)   Names and addresses of the owner or subdivider having control of
the lands included in the plan, the designer of the plan and the surveyor;
      (4)   Graphic (engineering) scale not less than one inch to 100 feet;
      (5)   North point (designated as true north);
      (6)   Date of preparation; and
      (7)   Proposed protective covenants if any are contemplated.
   (B)   Existing conditions.
      (1)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated;
      (2)   Existing zoning classification;
      (3)   Total approximate acreage in the plan;
      (4)   Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted
streets or other public ways showing type of improvement, if any, railroad and
utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings
and structures, easements and section and corporate lines within the tract and
to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract;
      (5)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or
other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of 100 feet
beyond the tract. Data such as grades, invert elevations and location of catch
basins, manholes and hydrants shall also be shown;
      (6)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land within
100 feet, identified by name and ownership; and
      (7)   Topographic data including contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two feet, except that contour lines shall be no more than 100 feet
apart. Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops and other significant features also
shall be shown including wetlands. Topography maps shall be clearly indicated
with dotted lines. High water elevation and date thereof if part or all of plat
adjoins a watercourse. County wetland and city shoreland management regulations
will be followed.
   (C)   Subdivision design features.
      (1)   Layout of streets showing right-of-way widths and names of streets.
The name of any street previously used in the city or its environs shall not be
used, unless the proposed street is an extension of an already named street in
which event the name shall be used;
      (2)   Location and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways and utility
easements;
      (3)   Typical cross-sections of streets and alleys, together with an
indication of the proposed storm water runoff;
      (4)   Approximate centerline gradients of streets and alleys, if any;
      (5)   Location, size and approximate gradient of sewer lines;
      (6)   Layout, numbers and typical dimensions of lots to the nearest foot;
      (7)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines indicating
dimensions of same;
      (8)   Areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and utility
easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use including the
size of the area or areas in acres;
      (9)   Location, sizing and valving of water lines; and
      (10)   Locations and specifications of street lighting.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.25 REQUIREMENTS GOVERNING APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Recommendations by Planning Commission. The City Planning Commission
may recommend and the City Council may require those changes or revisions as
the City Council deems necessary for the health, safety, general welfare and
convenience of the city.
   (B)   Tentative approval. The approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning
Commission and the City Council is tentative only, involving merely the general
acceptability of the layout as submitted.
   (C)   Subsequent approval. Subsequent approval will be required of the
engineering proposals pertaining to water supply, storm drainage, sewerage and
sewage disposal, gas and electric service, grading, gradients and roadway
widths and the surfacing of streets, by the Operations Superintendent and other
public officials having jurisdiction, prior to the approval of the final plat
by the city.
   (D)   Flooding; poor drainage. No plat will be approved for a subdivision
which is subject to periodic flooding, or which contains poor drainage
facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots
impossible. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will,
in the opinion of the Operations Superintendent, make the area completely safe
for residential occupancy and provide adequate street and lot drainage, the
preliminary plat of the subdivision may be approved.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.26 NECESSARY DATA FOR FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   General. All information, except topographic data and zoning
classification required on the preliminary plat shall be accurately shown.
   (B)   Additional delineation.
      (1)   Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles and
curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be
reserved for public use and other important features. Lot lines to show
dimensions in feet and hundredths;
      (2)   An identification system for all lots and blocks;
      (3)   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines
or official monuments (not less than three), which shall be accurately
described in the plat;
      (4)   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles;
      (5)   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and
lengths of all arcs;
      (6)   Accurate location of all monuments, which shall be concrete six
inches by six inches by 30 inches with iron pipe cast in center. Permanent
stone or concrete monuments shall be set at each corner or angle on the outside
boundary. Pipes or steel rods shall be placed at the corners of each lot and at
each intersection of street centerlines. All United States, state, county or
other official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent
to the property shall be preserved in precise position;
      (7)   Accurate outlines, legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated
or reserved for public use or for the exclusive use of property owners within
the subdivision with the purpose indicated therein;
      (8)   Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the
plat represents a survey made by the surveyor and that monuments and markers
shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details
are correct;
      (9)   Notarized certification by owner and by any mortgage holder of
record of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public areas;
      (10)   Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments due
on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full;
      (11)   Approval by signature of city, county and state officials
concerned with the specifications of utility installations;
      (12)   Form for approval of the City Council as follows:
 
Approved by the City Council of the City of Hoyt Lakes, Minnesota, this _______
day of _________, _____.
Signed ______________________________________
Mayor
Attest ______________________________________
City Clerk-Treasurer
 
      (13)   Form for approval by county authorities as required.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.27 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS.
   (A)   Approval of plat or annexation into city not considered acceptance. If
any plat or subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are
dedicated as that, whether located within the corporate limits of the city or
outside the corporate limits or contains existing streets outside of the
corporate limits, the approval of the plat by the City Council or the
subsequent annexation of the property to the city shall not constitute an
acceptance by the city of the streets or thoroughfares, nor the improvements
constructed or installed in the subdivision, irrespective of any act or acts by
an officer, agent or employee of the city with respect to the streets or
improvements.
   (B)   Acceptance by resolution of City Council. The acceptance of the
streets or thoroughfares shall be made only by the approval of a resolution by
the City Council after there has been filed, with the City Clerk-Treasurer, a
certificate by the Operations Superintendent. The certificate shall indicate
that all improvements required to be constructed or installed in or upon the
streets or thoroughfares in connection with the approval of the plat of
subdivision by the City Council have been fully completed and approved by the
Operations Superintendent, or a cash deposit or bond is on file to ensure the
installation of the required improvements. However, if it appears to the City
Council that a public local improvement will be constructed in any street or
thoroughfare within a reasonable foreseeable time, the City Council, upon the
recommendation of the Operations Superintendent may, by resolution, temporarily
accept the street or thoroughfare for the purpose of maintenance by the city,
and defer the completion of the street or thoroughfare by the developer until
the local improvement has been constructed.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.28 REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS.
   No final plat shall be approved by the City Council without first receiving
a report signed by the Operations Superintendent certifying that the
improvements described in the subdivider’s preliminary plans and specifications
meet the minimum requirement of all ordinances in the city, and that they
comply with the following.
   (A)   Sewers.
      (1)   Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all
properties in the subdivision where a connection to the city sanitary sewer
system is available or where detailed plans and specifications for sanitary
sewers to serve the subdivision are available. Unless otherwise required, a
sanitary sewer of eight inches PVC pipe shall be installed as a minimum size
and placed at grades approved by the city; service wyes will be four inches.
      (2)   Storm sewers. Storm sewers shall be constructed to serve all
properties in the subdivision where a connection to the city storm sewer system
is available or where detailed plans and specifications for storm sewers to
serve the subdivision are available. Where drainage swales are necessary, they
shall be sodded. Storm water drainage will not be permitted to combine with
sanitary sewers, nor shall sanitary sewers be permitted in storm water sewers.
      (3)   Neighborhood grading and drainage plan. The developer will submit a
neighborhood grading and drainage plan (similar to plan submitted to F.H.A.)
indicating the elevation of proposed houses, surrounding ground and direction
of flow. The developer will adhere to this plan, and the developer shall obtain
prior written acceptance from the Operations Superintendent before any changes
can be made.
      (4)   City participation in cost. Where sewer mains are larger than
required to serve the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plan, the
city may elect to participate in the cost of the sewer mains.
   (B)   Water supply. Where a connection to the city water system is presently
available, water distribution facilities including pipe fittings, hydrants,
valves and the like, shall be installed to serve all properties within the
subdivision. Water mains shall be ductile iron and be a minimum of six inches
in diameter and where larger mains are required to serve future growth, the
city may elect to participate in the cost of the water mains. Looping of all
water mains shall be required. Fire hydrants will be provided in accordance
with Minnesota Department of Health (MDOH) standards.
   (C)   House services. Each house service shall be run from the main to the
property line where a cap or plug shall be placed until the service line is
extended to the structure. The end of the service shall be marked with a six-
foot long steel fence post painted blue for water service and green for sewer
service. A one-inch type K copper service, corporation stop, curb box and curb
stop and a four inch PVC (SDR-35) pipe sewer service shall be the minimum
requirements. Sewer and water services shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the Ten States Standards.
   (D)   Street grading. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded,
including the subgrade of the areas to be paved, in accordance with the plans
approved by the Operations Superintendent and in accordance with the applicable
requirements for street construction of the city.
   (E)   Street improvements.
      (1)   All streets shall be improved with pavements to an overall width
and pavement depth in accordance with the projected 20-year traffic volumes and
consistent with street width policy adopted by the City Council.
      (2)   The paved surface in cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a minimum
diameter of 90 feet measured from the face of the curb.
      (3)   All pavements shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of the Minnesota Department of Transportation Road Design Manual.
      (4)   Concrete curbs and gutters on all streets within the subdivision
shall be included as part of the street surface improvement unless deemed
unnecessary by the City Council such as in more rural areas where a ditch
system would be more appropriate.
      (5)   In congested traffic areas or in areas where the City Council deems
necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of this community,
sidewalks, to a width of not less than five feet and constructed of portland
cement concrete, shall be required.
      (6)   Storm water inlets and necessary culverts shall be provided within
the roadway improvement as needed and in accordance with the Minnesota
Department of Transportation Hydraulic Design Manual.
      (7)   All curb corners shall be a radii of not less than 15 feet, except
at collector and marginal access streets where they shall be not less than 25
feet.
      (8)   All parkways within the dedicated street area shall be graded and
turf established in an approved manner.
   (F)   Off-street improvements.
      (1)   Trees shall not be allowed to be planted in the right-of-way.
Future care of trees will not be the responsibility of the city. Trees shall be
planted as far away as practical from sewer service lines.
      (2)   The entire boulevard area, except driveways, shall have turf
established with a good quality weed-free sod or approved seed mixture.
      (3)   All drainage swales shall be graded and sodded with a good quality
weed-free sod. Appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion.
   (G)   Pedestrian ways. Pedestrian ways installed or required by the City
Council shall be constructed according to specifications approved by the
Operations Superintendent.
   (H)   Public utilities. All utility installation shall be in accordance with
the city ordinance on right-of- way regulation, as codified in Chapter 95 of
this code of ordinances.
   (I)   Street lighting. An electrical plan prepared by a registered
electrical engineer will be submitted to the city and the electric utility
supplier for approval prior to installation of street lighting. Power will be
fed from the utility supplier through a disconnect which will be labeled as to
the lights it controls. All light poles will be mounted on a minimum six feet
deep concrete pedestal with conduit of sufficient size to allow for the size
and type of conductors to be used. All electric power will be fed underground.
Approval of the type(s) of street fixtures, lamp wattage, pole specifications
(including arms or brackets) and proposed location(s) within the road/street
right-of-way shall be required by the city and the electric utility supplier
prior to the installation. An electrical permit will be required from the city
and all work will be inspected by the City Electrical Inspector. All applicable
electrical codes will be strictly adhered to.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.29 ARRANGEMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Contract for development. Prior to the acceptance of the final plat,
the owner or subdivider shall enter into a contract for development of new
subdivisions with the city. In conjunction with this contract, the owner or
subdivider shall deposit with the City Clerk-Treasurer either a cash deposit or
a corporate surety performance bond, approved as to form by the City Attorney,
in an amount equal to one and one-half times the Operations Superintendent’s
estimated cost of the improvements or one and one-fourth times the actual bid.
This bond shall also have a clause which guarantees the improvements for a
period of one year after acceptance by the city of the improvements. In lieu of
this clause, a separate one year maintenance bond approved as to form by the
City Attorney, shall be submitted to the Operations Superintendent upon
acceptance of the improvements by the City Council. Upon receipt of this
maintenance bond, the performance bond may be released.
   (B)   Improvements. All improvements shall be made in accordance with the
plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer and
approved by the Operations Superintendent and in accordance with applicable
city standards and requirements. Upon approval, the plans and specifications
become a part of the contract for development. A reproducible set of plans and
specifications plus two copies shall be furnished to the city to be filed as
public record. A copy of all approved pertinent regulatory forms (MPCA sewer
extension, State Department of Health water extension and MPCA storm water and
the like) shall be provided to the city.
   (C)   Bond. The owner or subdivider shall deposit with the City Clerk-
Treasurer cash or an approved indemnity bond to cover all expenses incurred by
the city for engineering, legal fees and other incidental expenses in
connection with the making of the improvements. In the event of a cash deposit,
any balance remaining shall be refunded to the owner or subdivider after
payment of all costs and expenses to the city have been paid.
   (D)   Street access to improved lots required. It is not the intent of this
section to require the owner or subdivider to develop the entire plat at the
same time making all the required improvements, but zoning permits will not be
granted except as to lots having access to streets on which the required
improvements have been made or arranged for by cash deposit or bond as herein
provided.
   (E)   Compliance. Compliance with the terms of this chapter in subdividing
land, and in completing the required improvements, shall be at the sole expense
of the owner and/or subdivider, except as set forth in a development contract
with the city which may provide for assistance from funding sources such as
IRRRB, and for special assessment financing, and for additional assistance from
the city if the City Council finds that the subdivision will not occur without
the additional assistance from the city and that the proposed subdivision is in
the best interests of the city.
   (F)   Waiver.
      (1)   The City Council may, at its discretion, waive the requirement that
the owner/developer complete and dedicate all public improvements, or execute a
development contract requiring completion within one year, prior to acceptance
of the final plat. If the City Council so waives this requirement, the owner or
developer shall submit to the City Clerk-Treasurer financial assurances in an
amount designated by the City Council and in a form acceptable to the City
Council. The financial assurances may include, but are not limited to: a bond
executed by a surety company; an irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the
city issued by a banking institution approved by the City Council; a cash
deposit in an approved financial institution in an account established in the
name of the city. If the improvements have not been installed within the terms
of financial assurances, the City Council may bring actions for recovering or
forfeiture of the financial assurances. Upon completion of all required
improvements, the owner or developer shall notify the Administrative
Superintendent in writing. The Administrative Superintendent shall, within a
reasonable period of time, arrange for inspection of improvements. If all
improvements are satisfactorily completed, the financial assurances shall be
released by the City Council.
      (2)   The City Council may, at its discretion, waive the requirement that
the owner or subdivider develop the entire plat at the same time making all of
the required improvements. If the City Council so waives this requirement, the
owner or subdivider shall execute a contract with terms acceptable to the City
Council which provides satisfactory assurance for the construction of the
required improvements in connection with the development of the entire plat.
These terms may include a requirement that the owner or subdivider record a
document in the office of the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles office
which sets forth the future development and construction of improvements, and/
or a requirement that the language be included in all purchase agreements and/
or deeds conveying lots in which the required improvements have not been
previously completed.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 151.40 STREET PLAN.
   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to runoff of
storm water, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate
relations to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.41 STREETS.
   (A)   Right-of-way. All right-of-way width and pavement width (face to face
of curb) shall conform to minimum dimensions listed in the table below. If a
rural road section is being utilized, the minimum driving surface shall be 26
feet with three-foot shoulders on each side. Maximum ditch slopes shall be 3:
1 or flatter and there shall be minimum of two and one-half feet of separation
from road shoulder to ditch bottom.
 
                        Right-of-Way   Roadway
Collector streets       66 feet        44 feet
Cul-de-sacs             60-foot radius 45-foot radius
Local streets           66 feet        32 feet
Marginal access streets 50 feet        32 feet
 
   (B)   Horizontal street lines. Where horizontal street lines within a block
deflect from each other at any one point more than ten degrees, there shall be
a connecting curve. Minimum centerline horizontal curvatures shall be:
 
Collector streets 300 feet
Minor streets     150 feet
 
   (C)   Tangents. Tangents at least 50 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on collector streets.
   (D)   Centerline gradients. All centerline gradients shall be at least 0.5%
and shall not exceed on:
 
Collector streets 6%
Minor streets     8%
 
   (E)   Connecting street gradients. Different connecting street gradients
shall be connected with vertical parabolic curves. Minimum length, in feet, of
these curves, shall be 15 times the algebraic difference in the percent of
grade of the two adjacent slopes. For minor streets, the minimum length shall
be seven and one-half times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of
the two adjacent slopes.
   (F)   Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
   (G)   Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be prohibited.
   (H)   Intersections. It must be evidenced that all street intersections and
confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow.
   (I)   Alleys. Alleys are not permitted in residential areas unless deemed
necessary by the City Council.
   (J)   Cul-de-sacs. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular
shape with a minimum right-of-way diameter of 120 feet.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.42 ALLEYS AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS.
   (A)   Alleys. Where permitted by the City Council, alley rights-of-way shall
be at least 20 feet wide in residential areas and at least 24 feet wide in
commercial areas. The City Council may require alleys in commercial areas where
adequate off-street loading space is not available.
   (B)   Pedestrian ways. Pedestrian rights-of-way shall be at least 20 feet
wide.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.43 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements at least a total of 15 feet wide, centered on rear and side
yard lot lines shall be provided for drainage and utilities where necessary.
They shall have continuity of alignment from block to block, and at deflection
points easement for pole line anchors shall be provided.
   (B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourses,
together with further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the
storm water drainage of the area.
   (C)   All drainage easements shall be so identified on the plat and shall be
graded and sodded.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.44 BLOCK STANDARDS.
   (A)   The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,800 feet. Blocks over 900 feet
long may require pedestrian ways at their approximate centers. The use of
additional access ways to schools, parks or other destinations may be required
by the City Council.
   (B)   Blocks shall be shaped so that all blocks fit readily into the overall
plan of the subdivision and their design must evidence consideration of lot
planning, traffic flow and public open space areas.
   (C)   Blocks intended for commercial, institutional and industrial use must
be designated as such and the plan must show adequate off-street areas to
provide for parking, loading docks and any other facilities that may be
required to accommodate motor vehicles.
   (D)   Where a subdivision borders upon a railroad or limited access highway
right-of-way, a street may be required approximately parallel to, and at a
distance suitable for, the appropriate use of the intervening land as for park
purposes in residential districts or for parking, commercial or industrial
purposes in appropriate districts. The distances shall be determined with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades and possible features grade
separations.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.45 LOT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The minimum lot dimensions in subdivisions shall be in accordance with
the city’s zoning regulations.
   (B)   All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
   (C)   Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
the street line.
   (D)   Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall
have an additional depth or width as required to assure house sites that meet
shoreland ordinance requirements and that are not subject to flooding.
   (E)   In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all
natural features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar
conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the
proposed development.
   (F)   Where new principal structures are constructed on lots contiguous to
roadways designed as major thoroughfares, the city may require driveways
servicing the lots shall be designed and constructed so as to provide a vehicle
turnaround facility within the lot.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.46 PARK DEDICATION.
   (A)   Condition to approval. As a condition to the approval of any
subdivision of land in any zone, including the granting of a variance and
including approval of planned unit developments, there shall be a portion
dedicated to the public for use as a park as provided by M.S. § 462.358, subd.
(2)(b), as it may be amended from time to time, or in lieu thereof, a cash
deposit given to the city to be used for park purposes all as hereafter set
forth.
   (B)   Amount to be dedicated. The portion to be dedicated in all zoned areas
shall be 7%.
   (C)   Utility dedications not qualified. Land dedicated for required street
right-of-way or utilities, including drainage, does not qualify as park
dedication.
   (D)   Payment in lieu of dedication. Where park dedication is deemed
inappropriate by the city, the city shall allow the owner to deposit a sum of
money in lieu of a dedication. The deposit for park purposes shall be 4% of the
value of the unimproved land as determined by the County Assessor pursuant to
M.S. § 273.17, as it may be amended from time to time, or $4,500 per acre,
whichever amount is less.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.60 INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDER’S EXPENSE.
   All required land improvements to be installed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be inspected during the course of construction by the Operations
Superintendent. Salaries and all costs pursuant to the inspection shall be paid
by the owner or subdivider.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.61 ZONING PERMIT.
   No zoning permit shall be issued for the construction of any building,
structure or improvement to the land or any lot within a subdivision as defined
herein which has been approved for platting until all requirements of this
chapter have been complied with fully.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.62 VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Variances.
      (1)   In any case in which the compliance with the provisions of this
chapter will involve unnecessary hardship, and failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter does not interfere with the purpose of the platting
regulation, a variance may be granted. A variance may be granted only if the
Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that all of the following conditions
exist:
         (a)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property so that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
involve unnecessary hardship;
         (b)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to the other property in the vicinity of the
property being developed or for future residents of the proposed subdivision;
and
         (c)   Failure to comply with the strict application of the provisions
of this chapter does not interfere with the purpose and intent of the
subdivision regulations.
      (2)   Except as stated above, all other procedures for applying for a
variance and the decision making process will be the same as set forth in the
city’s zoning regulations. Final approval of any plat or registered land survey
shall not relieve the developer or the property owner of any obligation to meet
all requirements contained in the city’s zoning regulations, or all other city
ordinances. In the event that this chapter contains one or more provisions
which conflicts with the provisions of the city’s zoning regulations or another
city ordinance, the provisions which are more restrictive apply.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a
subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder or Registrar of
Titles prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any preliminary plats
which have had a public hearing before the Commission, nor is it intended by
this chapter to repeal, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws or ordinances except those specifically repealed by,
or in conflict with, this chapter, or with private restrictions placed upon
property by deed, covenant or other private agreement, or with restrictive
covenants running with the land. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the land than is imposed or required by existing provisions of
law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
      (2)   Compliance with this chapter is not required for transfers of
interest in land by will, or pursuant to court order.
      (3)   Compliance with this chapter is not required for divisions of land
in which less than five parcels are created during a 24-month period of time,
unless a new public street is involved.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.63 RECORD OF PLATS.
   All plats of subdivisions after the same have been submitted and approved as
provided in this chapter shall be filed and kept by the City Clerk-Treasurer
among the records of the city.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
§ 151.64 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No subdivision shall be recorded that does not meet the requirements
of state statutes or regulations, or the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell, lease, trade or otherwise convey any
land not in accordance with these regulations.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation defined. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal
entity, which violates this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day
the violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Injunctive relief. The City Council may enforce all provisions of this
chapter through proceedings for injunctive relief as may be proper under the
laws of the state. The City Council may initiate action to prevent, restrain,
correct, abate violations or threaten violations. Further, anyone violating the
provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the city for all reasonable attorney
fees and costs incurred by the city in enforcing the provisions of this chapter
including obtaining injunctive relief.
(Ord. 153, passed 11-8-1999)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Intent and purpose
Definitions and Regulations
   
152.015   Rules of language construction and definitions
   
152.016   Definitions
General Regulations
   
152.030   Application and interpretation
   
152.031   Separability
   
152.032   Nonconforming uses and structures
   
152.033   Lot provisions
   
152.034   Accessory buildings and structures
   
152.035   Required yard and open space
   
152.036   Traffic visibility and control
   
152.037   Essential services
   
152.038   Annexed territory
   
152.039   Land reclamation and gravel extraction
   
152.040   Structures in public right-of-way
   
152.041   Relocating structures
   
152.042   Front setbacks
   
152.043   Street frontage required
   
152.044   Uses not provided for within zoning districts
   
152.045   Setbacks adjacent to residential areas
   
152.046   Setbacks along thoroughfares
   
152.047   Height limitations
   
152.048   Corner lot setbacks in residential districts
   
152.049   Planned unit development
   
152.050   Planned development area (density zoning)
   
152.051   Development without public sanitary sewer and water
   
152.052   Flood control
   
152.053   Maintenance standards
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.065   Amendment of zoning regulations
   
152.066   Conditional use permit
   
152.067   Variances
   
152.068   Home occupation permits
   
152.069   Zoning Administrator
   
152.070   Zoning Officer
   
152.071   Board of Adjustment/Planning Commission
   
152.072   Zoning permit
   
152.073   Appeals
District Provisions
   
152.085   Districts
   
152.086   Zoning district map
   
152.087   Single-Family Residential District (R-1)
   
152.088   Single-Family Residential District (R-2)
   
152.089   Single-Family Residential District (R-3)
   
152.090   Mobile Homes (R-4)
   
152.091   Two-Family and Townhouse District (R-5)
   
152.092   Multiple-Family Residential District (R-6)
   
152.093   Single-Family Lakeshore Residential (R-7)
   
152.094   Retail Business District (B-1)
   
152.095   General Business District (B-2)
   
152.096   Residential Light Commercial (B-3)
   
152.097   Industrial District (I-1)
   
152.098   Conservancy District (CD)
   
152.099   Mineral Mining District (MM)
   
152.100   Shoreland management
   
152.101   Adult oriented establishments
   
152.102   Closed Landfill Restricted (CLR)
   
152.103   Storage District (S-1)
Performance Standards
   
152.115   Generally
   
152.116   Exterior storage
   
152.117   Refuse
   
152.118   Screening
   
152.119   Glare
   
152.120   Signs, advertising lights and devices
   
152.121   Off-street parking areas
   
152.122   Drainage
   
152.123   Explosives
   
152.124   Dwelling units in business and industrial districts
   
152.125   Restaurants (Class 2)
   
152.126   Radiation and electrical emissions
   
152.127   Other nuisance characteristics
   
152.128   Automobile sales and show rooms
   
152.129   Standards regulating outdoor swimming pool location and construction
   
152.130   Motor fuel stations
   
152.131   Recreational fires
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “City of Hoyt
Lakes Ordinance”, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as
“this chapter”.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of:
   (A)   Protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare;
   (B)   Dividing the city into use districts restricting and regulating
therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alterations and use of the
structures and land;
   (C)   Promoting orderly development of the residential, business,
industrial, recreational and public areas;
   (D)   Providing for adequate light, air and convenience, of access to
property by regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of buildings
in relation to surrounding properties;
   (E)   Limiting congestion in the public right-of-way;
   (F)   Providing for the administration of this chapter and amendments
thereto;
   (G)   Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies, as provided hereinafter; and
   (H)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
chapter or any amendment thereto.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 152.015 RULES OF LANGUAGE CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this zoning chapter, certain terms and words are hereby
defined as follows.
   (A)   The word person includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
   (B)   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
   (C)   The present tense included the past and future tenses, and the future
the present.
   (D)   The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
   (E)   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth
of foot.
   (F)   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof.
   (G)   The words “used” or “occupied” include the words “intended”,
“designed” or “arranged to be used or occupied”.
   (H)   The word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel”.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.016 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUTTING. Making contact with or separated only by public thoroughfare,
railroad, public utility right-of-way or navigable waters.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING. A nonresidential use or structure, or a
portion of the main building, subordinate to and serving the principal use or
structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto. Among others,
garages, sheds, saunas, boathouses shall be considered ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING, ATTACHED. An accessory structure joined to
the principal structure by a common wall.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING, DETACHED. An accessory structure not
attached to the principal structure.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use subordinate to the principal use on the same premises
and customarily incidental thereto.
   ADDITION. A physical enlargement of an existing structure.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
   ANIMALS, DOMESTIC. Rabbits, dogs, cats, birds and similar household pets.
   ANIMALS, NON-DOMESTIC. Cattle, hogs, horses, bees, sheep, goats, chickens
and other commonly known farm animals.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.
   AUTOMOBILE REDUCTION YARD. A lot or yard where one or more unlicensed motor
vehicles or the remains thereof, are kept for the purpose of dismantling,
wrecking, crushing, repairing, rebuilding, sale of parts, sale of scrap,
storage or abandonment.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, framework, welding
and major painting service.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. The replacement of any part or repair of any part
which does not require the removal of the engine head or pan, engine,
transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work, minor painting
and upholstering service when the service above stated is applied to passenger
automobiles and trucks not in excess of 7,000 pounds gross weight.
   ATTORNEY. The City Attorney of Hoyt Lakes, Minnesota, or his or her
authorized representative.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partially underground, but having
less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The board established under §
152.071 of this chapter.
   BOATHOUSE. A structure used for the storage of watercraft and related
equipment. These structures shall not be used for guest or sleeping quarters,
or for saunas.
   BOUNDARY LINES. Any line indicating the bounds or limits of any tract or
parcel of land; also a line separating the various use districts as shown on
the city zoning map.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure
for persons, animals or chattel, and when the structure is divided by party
walls without openings, each portion of the building so separated shall be
deemed a separate building.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The distance between the average ground level at the
building line and the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a
mansard roof or to the highest gable on a pitched or hipped roof.
   CABIN - SEASONAL OR RECREATIONAL. A residence occupied only on a part-time
basis, not to exceed eight consecutive months, and not requiring public
services such as school bus transportation or snow plowing of roads by
governmental unit.
   CARPORT. An automobile shelter, having one or more open sides.
   CELLAR. The portion of a building having more than half of the clear floor-
to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjacent ground.
   CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a
religious body organized to sustain public worship.
   CITY ENGINEER. The registered engineer employed by the city or person
otherwise authorized by the city.
   CLUB or LODGE. A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members
paying annual dues, with a use of premises being restricted to members and
their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on the premises
providing adequate dining space and kitchen facilities are available. Serving
of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed, providing
the serving is secondary and incidental to the operation of the dining room for
the purpose of serving food and meals and providing further that the serving of
alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state and
municipal laws.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATION. Bowling alley, cart tract, golf, skating, tavern,
firearms range, automobile camp and similar uses.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of Hoyt Lakes.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Unless otherwise stated, it is the general plan for land
use, transportation and community facilities prepared and maintained by the
City Planning Commission.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without
restriction throughout the zone district but which, if controlled as to number,
area, location or relation to neighborhood, would not be injurious to the
public health, safety, morals, order, comfort, convenience appearance,
prosperity or general welfare. These uses may be permitted in listed zone
districts only after approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit specially and individually granted by the
Council after public hearing thereon by the Commission for any conditional use
so permitted in any use district.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of Hoyt Lakes.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street closed at one end, with the end being semi-circular.
For purposes of determining the minimum lot width allowed within a zoning
district for a lot with the front line abutting a CUL-DE-SAC, the horizontal
distance shall be measured at the location of the principal structure
constructed on the lot, with the measurement being at the specific part of the
structure and the specific direction that results in the narrowest width. For
purposes of determining the minimum front yard depth within a zoning district
for a lot with the front lot line abutting a CUL-DE-SAC, the distance shall be
measured from the centerline of the right-of-way, or from the front of the lot
line, whichever is greater.
   CURB LEVEL. The elevation of the established curb in front of a building
measured at the center of the front.
   DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the boundary of the special flood
hazard areas indicated as Zone A on the City of Hoyt Lakes FIA Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps No. HO1-14 dated July 11, 1975 and as periodically updated by the
Federal Insurance Administration.
   DWELLING. A building or one or more portions thereof occupied or intended to
be occupied for residence purposes; but not including rooms in motels, hotels,
nursing homes, boarding houses, trailers, tents, cabins or trailer coaches.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling which is joined to other dwellings at both
sides by party walls, as one of a series or not more than eight dwellings
arranged in a row including the semi-detached dwellings at the ends.
   DWELLING, DETACHED. A single dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling
or structure.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (APARTMENT BUILDING). A residential building, or
portion thereof, containing two or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A residential building containing one detached
dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. A residential accommodation including complete kitchen
facilities, permanently installed, which is arranged, designed, used or
intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one family.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES (PUBLIC UTILITY USES). Underground or overhead gas,
electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems; collection,
communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in
conjunction therewith; but not including buildings.
   EXTERIOR STORAGE (INCLUDES OPEN STORAGE). The storage of goods, materials,
equipment, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a
building.
   FAMILY. An individual, or two or more persons each related by blood marriage
or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not
more than four persons not so related, maintaining a common household and using
common cooking and kitchen facilities.
   FARM. A parcel of land that includes an area of five acres or more which is
under cultivation, or a parcel of land that includes an area of ten acres or
more which is fenced and utilized as pasture, or a parcel of land that includes
an area of ten acres or more which is partially under cultivation and partially
fenced and utilized as pasture.
   FARMING. Process of operating a farm for the growing and harvesting of crops
and/or raising farm animals, which shall include those necessary accessory
buildings, related to operating the farm.
   FENCE. For the purpose of this chapter, any partition, structure, wall or
gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure and located along the
boundary, or within the required yard.
   FISH HOUSE or DARK HOUSE. A portable structure that is used for sport
fishing or spearing of fish during the winter months.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining a river, stream, drainage channel, pond or a
low area which is subject to flooding. For the purposes of this chapter, the
FLOODPLAIN shall include all the special flood hazard areas indicated as Zone A
on the City of Hoyt Lakes FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Maps No. HO1-14 dated July
11, 1975 and as periodically updated by the Federal Insurance Administration.
   FLOOD WATER. The water of any river, stream, drainage channel, low area or
pond which is above and/or outside the channel or banks of the river, stream,
drainage channel or pond.
   FLOODWAY. The channel or bed of a river, stream, drainage channel or pond
and those portions of the floodplains adjoining which are required to
efficiently carry and discharge the flow of the river or stream and for the
purpose of the chapter.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached
accessory buildings, excepting that area primarily devoted to window display,
fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory
buildings utilized as dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-
street parking or loading space.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross
floor area of a building or buildings by the net area of the lot or parcel of
land on which the building or buildings are located.
   FRONTAGE. See LOT WIDTH.
   FUEL/WOOD/STORAGE. Fuel wood shall include any combustible material which is
or can be used for heating purposes, and shall apply only to outside storage
which includes storage within a structure not enclosed by walls.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles
of the family or families’ resident upon the premises, and in which no business
service or industry is carried on; provided that not more than one-half of the
space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident on the
premises, except that all the space in a garage of one- or two-car capacity may
be so rented. This GARAGE shall not be used for more than one commercial
vehicle. The load capacity of the commercial vehicle shall not exceed one ton.
   GARAGE SALE. Any display of used goods and/or salesperson’s samples and sale
of the goods on a property customarily used as a residence. The persons
conducting the sale shall be residents of the immediate neighborhood.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful occupation carried out by the occupant of a
residential dwelling unit that occurs within the principal or accessory
building on the property and does not change the primary residential use of the
property. LEVEL 1 AND LEVEL 2 HOME OCCUPATIONS shall be as defined in §
152.068.
   HORTICULTURE. The production and storage of fruits, vegetables, grains,
ornamental trees or other crops but not including the keeping, raising or
production of livestock.
   HOTEL. A building containing eight or more guest rooms in which lodging is
provided with or without meals for compensation and which is open to transient
or permanent guest or both, and where no provision is made for cooking in any
guest room, and in which principal access to and from all rooms is made through
an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge.
   HOTEL (APARTMENT). A hotel providing one or more dwellings where cooking
facilities are present.
   JUNK YARD or RECYCLING CENTER. An area where used waste, discarded or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned,
abandoned, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to,
scrap iron, and other metals, paper, rags, rubber products, bottles and lumber.
Storage of those materials in conjunction with a permitted manufacturing
process when within an enclosed area or building shall not be included.
   KENNEL. Any premises where more than three of any type of domestic animals
over six months of age are present as owners’ pets, or accepted for boarding,
breeding, training or sale, except when located in a pet shop or veterinary
clinic.
   LAND RECLAMATION. Depositing 400 cubic yards or more of material so as to
elevate the grade.
   LANDSCAPING. Planting such as trees, grass and shrubs.
   LOADING BERTH. An unobstructed area provided and maintained for the
temporary parking of trucks and other motor vehicles for the purpose of loading
and unloading goods, wares, materials and merchandise.
   LOT.
      (1)   For zoning purposes, as covered by this chapter, a lot is a parcel
of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for
use, coverage and area and to provide yards and other open spaces as are herein
required. A LOT shall have frontage on an improved public street, and may
consist of:
         (a)   A single lot of record;
         (b)   A portion of a lot of record;
         (c)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; and
         (d)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
      (2)   In no case of new subdivision shall any lot be created which does
not meet the requirements of this chapter. A parcel of land shall be considered
one LOT for zoning purposes if the parcel is used as a single LOT.
   LOT AREA. The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines,
but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly recorded lake or
river or area which has been dedicated as public thoroughfare or road.
   LOT AREA PER UNIT. The number of square feet of lot area required per
dwelling unit.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear lines
of a lot.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT, KEY. The first lot to the rear of a corner lot the front line of which
is a continuation of the side line of the corner lot and fronting on the street
which intersects the street on which the corner lot fronts.
   LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of
a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way,
the nearest line of the public right-of-way shall be the LOT LINE for applying
this chapter.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street, and in the case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest
dimension on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are within 10%
of being equal, the FRONT LOT LINE shall be that street line designated by the
owner and filed with the Zoning Officer.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.
If the REAR LOT LINE is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE shall be a line ten feet in length within
the lot, connecting the side lot lines and parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved
and filed, or one unit of an Auditor’s subdivision or a registered land survey,
or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered but for which a
deed, Auditor’s subdivision or registered land survey has been recorded in the
office of the Register of Deeds of Registrar of Titles for St. Louis County,
Minnesota prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two
substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a THROUGH
LOT, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this chapter.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at the building setback line. However, for purposes of determining the
minimum LOT WIDTH allowed within a zoning district for a lot with the front lot
line abutting a cul-de-sac, the horizontal distance shall be measured at the
location of the principal structure constructed on the lot, with the
measurement being at the specific part of the structure and the specific
direction that results in the narrowest width.
   MOBILE HOMES.
      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER (or FOLDING TENT TRAILER). A vehicular portable
structure mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls
of fabric, plastic or other pliable material which are adapted for folding for
towing by another vehicle and unfolding at the campsite to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
      (2)   DOUBLE WIDES. Two (or more) mobile home units, separately towable
but designed without a permanent foundation to be joined into one integral
unit, capable of being again separated for repeated towing. (See also SECTIONAL
HOUSE.)
      (3)   EXPANDABLES. A mobile home containing a collapsible or telescoping
unit which meets highway towing standards when “closed”; expanded at site
(“pulled out like a bureau drawer to form a bar or an ell”) for added living
space.
      (4)   MOBILE HOME. Any type of transportable structure or vehicle not
drawn by its own power with permanently attached undercarriage and wheels which
is designed, constructed and equipped for use as a single-family dwelling
place, living abode or living quarters, suitable for occupancy during the
entire year, which contains the same water supply, waste disposal and
electrical conveniences as immobile housing. It is the intention of the Council
that this definition shall include MOBILE HOMES as defined in M.S. § 327.14,
subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (5)   MOBILE HOME COURT. Any premises on which are parked two or more
occupied mobile homes, but this definition shall exclude sales lots on which
automobiles or unoccupied mobile homes, whether new or used, are parked for
purposes of inspection or sale.
      (6)   MOBILE HOME LOT. A parcel of land for the placement of a single
mobile home for the exclusive use of the occupants of the mobile home.
      (7)   MOBILE HOME STAND. The part of an individual mobile home lot which
has been reserved for placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or
additions.
      (8)   MOTOR HOME (MOTORIZED HOME). A vehicular structure built on a self-
propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
      (9)   PREFABRICATED HOUSING. Conventional-type housing for permanent
foundations, assembled and “finished” on-site, from factory pre-constructed
separate sections of walls, roofs and the like, typically lifted from trucks
into place with the aid of cranes.
      (10)   SECTIONAL OR MODULAR HOUSE. A factory pre-finished house designed
for a permanent foundation which can include a full-depth basement, shipped in
(normally two) completed sections, fastened together and “finished” at the
site.
      (11)   TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure designed and used for human
living quarters which meets all of the following qualifications:
         (a)   Is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or occupant;
         (b)   Is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant
while engaged in recreational or vacation activities; and
         (c)   Is towed or otherwise transported, by its own or by other motor
power on the public streets or highways incidental to recreational or vacation
activities.
      (12)   TRAILER, DEPENDENT. A travel trailer which is dependent upon a
service building for toilet and lavatory facilities.
      (13)   TRAILER PARKS. A park, court, campsite, lot, parcel or tract of
land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying the location
or accommodations for any trailers, as defined herein, and upon which the
trailers are parked. The term TRAILER PARK shall include all buildings used or
intended for use as a part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made
for the use of the park and its facilities or not.
      (13)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure, mounted on wheels,
of a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when
drawn by a stock passenger automobile, primarily designed and constructed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use.
      (14)   TRUCK CAMPER. A portable structure, designed to be loaded onto, or
affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck constructed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use.
   MOTEL (TOURIST COURT). A building or group of detached, semidetached or
attached buildings containing guest rooms or dwellings, each of which has a
separate outside entrance leading directly from the outside of the building,
with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is
designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of
automobile transients.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by motor
truck or rail, is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate or
interstate shipment by motor truck.
   MOTOR FUEL STATION. A place where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel
or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale
to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any structure permitted by existing city ordinance
upon the effective date of this chapter, which would not conform to the
applicable regulations if the structure were erected under the provisions of
this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Use of land, buildings or structures existing at the time
of adoption of this chapter which does not comply with all the regulations of
this chapter or any amendments hereto governing the zoning district in which
the use is located.
   NOXIOUS MATTER. Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction, or which is capable of causing detrimental effects to the
physical, psychological, social or economic well-being of individuals, animals
and ecology.
   NURSERY, DAY. A use where care is provided for pay for three or more
children for periods of four hours or more per day.
   OPEN SALES LOT. Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease,
advertising or trade where the goods are not enclosed within a building.
   PARKING SPACE. A suitably surfaced or permanently maintained area on
privately owned property of sufficient size to store one standard automobile
either within or outside of a building. For the purposes of this chapter, a
PARKING SPACE shall not be less than ten feet in width by 20 feet in length
with a minimum driving or maneuvering area of 25 feet required.
   PARTY WALL. A wall which divides two independent structures.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. Criterion established to control noise, odor, toxic or
noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
   PERSON. Includes both male and female and shall also extend and be applied
to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships and other unincorporated
associations.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An urban development having two or more principal
uses or structures on a single lot and developed according to an approved plan.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of Hoyt
Lakes except when otherwise designated.
   POOLS. Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas shall be interpreted to mean the
same as swimming pool. This applies to any outdoor, permanent, in- or above-
ground bathing facility.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE. One which determines the predominant use as
contrasted to accessory use or structure.
   PUBLIC. Uses owned or operated by municipal, school district, county, state
or other governmental units.
   PUBLIC HEARING. Whenever is used in this chapter, unless other wise
specifically redefined, it shall mean a PUBLIC HEARING pursuant to a notice
published once in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days before
the date of the hearing, which notice shall specify the general purpose, time
and place of the hearing. Any hearing after the publication may be continued,
recessed or adjourned from time to time without any further publication or
notice thereof.
   PUBLIC UTILITY USES. See ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   PUBLICATION. Notice placed in the official city newspaper stating time,
location and date of meeting and description of the topic.
   RECREATION EQUIPMENT (IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS). Play apparatus such as
swing sets and slides, sandboxes, poles for nets, unoccupied boats and trailers
not exceeding 25 feet in length, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands
and similar equipment or structures and including tree houses, swimming pools,
playhouses, exceeding 24 square feet of floor area and sheds utilized for
storage of equipment subject to provisions of §
152.034.
   RESEARCH LAB. Medical, chemical, electrical, metallurgical or other
scientific research and quality control, conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   REST HOME; NURSING HOME. A private home for the care of children, aged or
infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. These homes do
not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease, injury
or mental care, nor provides maternity care.
   RESTAURANTS (CLASS 1).
      (1)   CAFETERIA. Food is selected by a customer while going through a
serving line and taken to a table for consumption.
      (2)   TRADITIONAL RESTAURANTS. Food is served to a customer and consumed
by him or her while seated at a counter or table.
   RESTAURANTS (CLASS 2), FAST FOOD RESTAURANTS. A majority of customers order
and are served their food at a counter and take it to a table or counter where
it is consumed. However, a significant number may take the food outside to eat
in an automobile or off the premises.
      (1)   CARRY OUT AND DELIVERY RESTAURANT. Food is prepared for consumption
off the premises only.
      (2)   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Most customers consume their food in an
automobile regardless of how it is served.
   SIGNS.
      (1)   ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix,
including the painting of wall signs.
      (2)   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material which will not ignite at or
below a temperature of 1,200°F and will not continue to burn or glow at that
temperature.
      (3)   LIGHTING, INDIRECT OR DIFFUSED. Lighting designed so that direct
source of light is not visible, is screened through plastic, neon tube, shaded
or similar design.
      (4)   LOT FRONTAGE. The lot line which is also a public street right-of-
way line; all corner lots shall be considered as having two lot frontages.
Buildings or lots containing more than one principal use shall be considered as
one principal use for the application of area standards; principal uses of
buildings and adjacent to a parking lot containing over five off-street parking
spaces shall be considered as having LOT FRONTAGE on that parking lot in
addition to LOT FRONTAGE on another face of the building on a public street.
      (5)   MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by
the building and projecting over public property.
      (6)   PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE. The entrance of a building designed for use by
customers, visitors and tenants; does not include loading doors, service
entrances, doors to storage areas or similar entrances.
      (7)   SHOPPING CENTER. Any grouping of two or more principal retail or
other commercial uses whether on a single lot or on abutting lots under
multiple or single ownership. For purposes of sign regulations, a SHOPPING
CENTER shall mean five or more adjacent commercial uses.
      (8)   SIGN. A name, identification, description, logo, display,
illustration, structure or device which is affixed to or painted, or presented
directly or indirectly upon a building or other surface not within a building
and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person,
institution, organization or business.
      (9)   SIGN AREA. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, exclusive of sign embellishments,
which may extend beyond the perimeter as regulated herein, and in no case,
passing through or between any adjacent elements; however, the perimeter shall
not include any structural elements lying outside of the sign and not forming
an integral part of the display. Double faced signs may be permitted with the
maximum square footage on each side; multi-faced signs shall not exceed double
the AREA of single-faced signs.
      (10)   SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or to the commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon
the premises where the signs are located or to which it is attached.
      (11)   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign which directs attention to a business,
profession or service not located upon the premises where the sign is located
or to which it is attached.
      (12)   SIGN, ELECTRIC. Any sign containing electrical wiring but not
including signs illuminated by an exterior, unattached light source.
      (13)   SIGN, FLASHING. An illuminated sign on which the artificial light
is not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color.
      (14)   SIGN, GROUND. A sign which is supported by one or more uprights,
poles or braces in or upon the ground other than a combination sign.
      (15)   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. In a residential district, a nameplate sign
identifying a resident (including address and profession or occupation),
school, church or other non-business use. In a business or industrial district
a sign (nameplate) which states the name or address or both of the business,
industry or occupation of the lot or a directory listing the names, addressed
and business of occupants.
      (16)   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, design or outline illuminated by electric lights or tubes as part of
the sign proper.
      (17)   SIGN, MOVING. A permanent, streamer, whirling disc or other moving
device attracting attention.
      (18)   SIGN, PEDESTAL. A ground sign erected on not more than three
shafts or posts solidly affixed to the ground, emerging from a common base.
      (19)   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A sign offering property (land and/or
buildings) for sale, lease or rent.
      (20)   SIGN, STRUCTURE. The supports, uprights, braces and framework of
the sign.
      (21)   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign not exceeding ten square feet placed in
a manner as not to be solidly affixed to any building, structure or land and
advertising and event such as a bazaar, special sale, sporting event or similar
situation; in no event, however, shall the signs be placed on any lot of parcel
of land for a period to exceed 90 days out of any 12-month period.
      (22)   SIGN, WALL. A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a
building with the exposed face of the sign in plane parallel to the plane of
that wall.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted
as a full STORY, and a cellar shall not be counted as a STORY.
   STREET. Any public or private way set aside as a permanent right-of-way for
vehicular access existing at the time of enactment of this chapter and any
public right-of-way acquired or accepted by the Council after the enactment of
this chapter.
   STRUCTURE. Anything erected, whether permanent or not, or whether
permanently attached to the ground, or not. The definition of STRUCTURE does
not include mail or newspaper receptacles, licensed fish houses, lawn ornaments
or yard playground equipment. In addition, the following special provisions
apply to the definition of STRUCTURE and the application of these zoning
regulations, as amended, to certain structures:
      (1)   Any ACCESSORY STRUCTURE that was previously considered “temporary”
or “not permanent”, located on a lot as of the effective date of this chapter,
shall be considered a lawful nonconforming use for a period of five years from
the date of this chapter. Thereafter, the STRUCTURE must comply with all
provisions of the zoning regulations (as codified in this Chapter 152), as
amended. However, the STRUCTURE may continue as a lawful nonconforming use
following the five-year date if the STRUCTURE complies with all provisions
other than the total square footage allowed for ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. A
STRUCTURE will constitute a lawful nonconforming use so long as that structure
complies with all other provisions of the zoning regulations (as codified in
this Chapter 152), as amended; and
      (2)   Any STRUCTURE which remains erected or otherwise located on a lot
for a period of 90 days or less in any calendar year shall be considered a
lawful nonconforming use. However, the STRUCTURE shall be considered a lawful
nonconforming use only if the structure complies with all provisions other than
the total square footage allowed for accessory structures. A STRUCTURE will
constitute a lawful nonconforming use so long as that structure complies with
all other provisions of the zoning regulations (as codified in this Chapter
152), as amended.
   THOROUGHFARE. Those streets as shown on the city major circulation plan at
the right-of-way width indicated.
   TOWNHOUSE. Attached single-family dwelling units, each with separate
entrance to front and rear yards and having only one or more walls in common
with another single-family dwelling unit, oriented so all exits open directly
to the outside.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or
maintained, and shall include the performance of the activity as defined by the
performance standards of this chapter.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. Those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses,
professions or uses specifically designated in each zoning use district, which
for their respective conduct, exercise or performance in those designated use
districts may require reasonable but special, peculiar, unusual or
extraordinary limitations, facilities plans, structures, thoroughfares,
conditions, modification or regulations in the use district for the promotion
or preservation of the general public welfare, health, convenience or safety
therein and in the city and therefore may be permitted in the use district only
by a conditional use permit.
   USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and performance standards of the districts.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses. A PRINCIPAL USE may be either permitted or
conditional.
   USED AUTO PARTS. The processing, storage and sale of secondhand or used
automobile or other vehicle parts, provided the use is established entirely
within enclosed buildings.
   USES, NONCONFORMING. Any use of a building or premises which on the
effective date of this chapter, does not, even though lawfully established,
comply with all of the applicable use regulations of the zoning district in
which the building or premises is located.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any coin operated device which dispenses a product or
service without an attendant.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and
care of animals, including animal or pet hospitals.
   WAREHOUSING. The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed
building as a principal use including packing and crating.
   YARD. A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by
a building from its lowest ground level to the sky except as expressly
permitted in this chapter. A YARD shall extend along a lot line and at right
angles to a lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for
the district in which the lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-
way line to a depth at its shallowest dimension required in the yard
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a depth
as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the lot is
located.
   YARD, REAR YARD ON THROUGH LOT. A yard opposite the front yard on a through
lot.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along the side lot line between the front and
rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the
district in which the lot is located.
   YARD, SIDE STREET. A side yard abutting a side street.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR and ZONING OFFICER. Persons appointed by the City
Council as provided by this chapter.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas within the limits of the city for which
the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and size of building and
premises are uniform.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 118, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 168, passed 5-
25-2004; Ord. 172, passed 3-22-2005; Ord. 184, passed 3-11-2008; Ord. 191,
passed 7-27-2010)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 152.030 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, convenience and welfare.
   (B)   Where the condition imposed by any provision of this chapter are
either more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any law,
ordinance, statute, resolution or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
prevail.
   (C)   No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any
manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.031 SEPARABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and City Council that
the several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the
following.
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this chapter to be invalid, the judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this chapter not specifically included in the judgment.
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building
or other structure, the judgment shall not affect the application of the
provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in the judgment.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.032 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this
chapter may be continued at the size and in the manner of operation existing
upon the date as hereinafter specified.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the placing of a structure in
safe condition when the structure is declared unsafe by the Zoning Officer,
providing the necessary repairs shall not constitute more than 50% of
replacement value of the structure.
   (C)   When any lawful nonconforming use of any structure or land in any
district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be
changed to any nonconforming use.
   (D)   A lawful nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be
changed to a similar nonconforming use or to a more restrictive nonconforming
use. Once a structure or parcel of land has been placed in a more restrictive
nonconforming use, it shall not return to a less restrictive nonconforming use.
   (E)   Whenever a lawful nonconforming structure shall have been damaged by
fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot or act of God, it may be
reconstructed and used as before if it is reconstructed within 12 months after
the calamity, unless the damage to the building or structure if 50% or more of
its fair market value as shown on the assessment records at the time of damage,
in which case the whole thereof shall be demolished, and any construction
thereafter shall be for a use in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (F)   Whenever a lawful nonconforming use of a structure or land is
voluntarily discontinued and remains discontinued after a notice by the city
for a period of 30 days, any future use of the structure or land shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Any lawful nonconforming use of land not involving a structure, and
any lawful nonconforming use involving a structure with an assessed market
value upon the effective date of this chapter of $1,000 or less, may be
continued for a period of 36 months after the effective date of this chapter,
whereupon the nonconforming use shall cease, unless brought into conformity.
   (H)   Any proposed structure which will, under this chapter become
nonconforming but for which a zoning permit has been lawfully granted, not more
than six months prior to the effective date of this chapter, may be completed
in accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within
six months of the effective date of this chapter, and continues to completion
within two years. The structure and use shall thereafter be a legally existing
nonconforming structure and use.
   (I)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or
related to a lawful nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary non-
structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify
the nonconforming use.
   (J)   Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful nonconforming
residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they
will not increase the number of dwelling units or bulk of the building.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.033 LOT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   A lot of record for which a deed has been recorded in the office of
the Registrar of Titles or County Recorder prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall be deemed a buildable lot provided it fronts on a public right-
of-way and has the minimum size area requirements set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this chapter in an
R District, which does not meet the requirements of this chapter as to area or
width may be utilized for single-family detached dwelling purposes provided the
measurements of the area or width are within 75% of the requirements of this
chapter but the lot of record shall not be more intensively developed unless
combined with one or more abutting lots or portions thereof so as to create a
lot meeting the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Except in the case of planned unit developments as provided for
hereinafter, not more than one principal building shall be located on a lot.
   (D)   Where no curb elevation has been established, the City Engineer shall
furnish the elevations.
   (E)   On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for
applying the yard and parking regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.034 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Accessory buildings and structures related to a farming operation and
on a farm may be located anywhere on the lot except that building for housing
more than two non-domestic animals shall be not less than 50 feet from lot line
and all buildings shall conform to yard regulations.
   (B)   No accessory building or structure other than a fence or temporary
construction office shall be permitted on any lot in an R District heretofore,
prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory except a residential garage, which prior to construction of the
residence can be used only for storage purposes pertaining to, and until the
completion of, the main structure.
   (C)   In all R and CD Districts, no accessory building shall be less than
four feet from the side lot line, or less than five feet from the rear lot
line.
   (D)   Whenever a garage is so designed that it is to be entered directly
from a side street, the distance between the doors and the lot line shall be 20
feet or more.
   (E)   Should the lot grade between the street line and the required setback
be ten feet or more, either above or below the curb level, in the R District, a
garage for the storage of two passenger automobiles may be located in the front
yard subject to minimum front yard setback or existing setback established by
existing buildings.
   (F)   Unless otherwise specified in the zoning regulations (as codified in
this Chapter 152), no accessory building in an R or CD District shall exceed
the height of 18 feet except pursuant to a conditional use permit issued for a
lot described in Category 4 of division (G) below. In addition, the 18-foot
limit provided in this division (F) shall not apply to an accessory building
attached to a dwelling of the same height, so as long as the portion of the
attached accessory building that exceeds the height of 18 feet is used as a
dwelling, namely occupied or intended to be occupied for residence purposes,
and not for accessory use.
   (G)   (1)   In all R and CD Districts, the following provisions will apply
for accessory buildings:
 
           Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Category 4  Category 5  Category 6
           10,000     10,001 to  20,001 to  40,001 to   80,001 to
Lot area   square     20,000     40,000     80,000      130,680     130,681 and
by square  feet or    square     square     square feet square feet above
footage    less       feet or    feet or    or less     or less     square feet
                      less       less
Maximum
size of
any one
accessory  960        1,040      1,200      1,500       1,800       No limit
building
(square
feet)
Maximum
number of  3          3          4          4           5           No limit
accessory
structures
Maximum
total
square
footage    1,200      1,716      2,400      3,000       3,600       No limit
for all
accessory
buildings
allowed
Peak       18 feet    18 feet    20 feet    20 feet     20 feet     No limit
height
 
      (2)   Except where otherwise set forth, the term “accessory structure” or
“accessory building” shall include attached or detached. In all R districts and
CD Districts, the maximum number of accessory buildings, which may be located
on a lot are as follows.
         (a)   The maximum number of accessory buildings, whether attached or
detached, is three. However, a structure that is not enclosed by walls and is
used exclusively for the storage of firewood will not be included in this
maximum of three accessory buildings, nor will it be included in the maximum
total for all accessory buildings referenced in this division (G), if the
firewood storage building is no greater than 180 square feet in size and no
greater than ten feet in height.
         (b)   In an R-1 District, the maximum number of accessory buildings
allowed shall be increased by one if it is a boathouse which complies with all
other rules and regulations contained within this chapter and the shoreline
management ordinance, as codified in §
152.100. The square footage of the boathouse will be in addition to the total
permitted square footage indicated in this division (G); however, the square
footage for the boathouse may not exceed the requirements of §
152.100(E)(6) dealing with water-oriented accessory structures. This boathouse
exception is available only on lots abutting water.
   (H)   Garage structures shall be anchored to a footing or concrete slab with
a suitable connection of a breaking strength equal to or exceeding 2,000 pounds
and the structure shall be provided a surfaced floor.
   (I)   No accessory building in a business or industrial district shall
exceed the height of the principal building except by conditional use permit.
   (J)   An accessory building in the business or industrial districts may be
located within the rear yard setback, subject to building code and fire zone
regulations and provided that the lot is not a through lot and the accessory
building shall be a part of the principal building if it is located less than
12 feet from the principal building. No accessory building shall be located
less than ten feet from a rear lot line.
   (K)   Fish houses or dark houses may be stored temporarily in the rear yard
in R Districts for not more than ten months in any calendar year provided the
structure is painted and maintained to a standard compatible with the principal
structure.
   (L)   No shipping containers, rail car containers or “Conex” containers are
allowed in R-3 District (Hoyt Lakes Proper), except in those limited
circumstances when such a container is temporarily placed, for a period to not
exceed ten calendar days, on or adjacent to a lot in conjunction with an
individual or family moving into or out of a residence located on the lot.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 118, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 131, passed 7-
25-1995; Ord. 137, passed 5-28-1996; Ord. 151, passed 6-23-1998; Ord. 167,
passed 2-24-2004; Ord. 172, passed 3-22-2005; Ord. 173, passed 6-28-2005; Ord.
186, passed 9-23-2008; Ord. 188, passed 5-26-2009; Ord. 224, passed 6-7- 2021;
Ord. 225, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 152.035 REQUIRED YARD AND OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Whenever a park or play area is so located that it abuts on a public
right-of-way or railroad right-of-way, either a landscaped yard area of at
least 30 feet shall be maintained between the right-of- way and the nearest
developed play space, or a six foot chain link fence shall also be used. This
section shall apply to all zoning districts and to all public and private
parks, schools, churches and areas where play space is provided.
   (B)   No lot, yard, parking area or other open space shall be so reduced in
area or dimension as to make any area or dimensions less than required by this
chapter, and if already less than the minimum required, it shall not be further
reduced.
   (C)   No required yard or open space allocated to a structure or lot, or
dwelling group in compliance with this chapter shall be used to satisfy yard,
other open spaces or minimum lot area requirement for any other structure, lot
or dwelling group.
   (D)   The following shall not be considered as encroachment on yard and
setback requirements:
      (1)   In any yards - posts, off-street open parking spaces, chimneys,
flues, belt course, leaders, sills (pilasters, lintels, cornices and eaves up
to 30 inches), bays, gutters, awnings, open terraces, open canopies, steps,
flagpoles, ornamental features, open fire escapes, sidewalks and other similar
projections provided they do not extend more than three feet into the yard and
in no instance in the R District or CD District nearer than four feet from the
lot line. However, fences, walls and hedges shall be allowed up to, but not on,
the lot line;
      (2)   Yard lights and nameplate signs in the R District provided the
lights and signs are three feet or more from all lot lines and subject to §
152.120. Lights for illuminating parking and loading areas or yards for safety
and security purposes may be provided where necessary provided that glare is
not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential property and
not more than three foot candle of light intensity is present at the property
line;
      (3)   In front yards, balconies that extend a distance of four feet or
less, provided they are seven feet or more above grade at building line;
      (4)   In side and rear yards, terraces, steps, stoops and uncovered
porches which do not extend in elevation above the height of the ground floor
level of the principal building and do not extend nearer than four feet from
the lot line. However, fences, walls and hedges shall be allowed up to, but not
on, the lot line, if they are six feet in height or less;
      (5)   In rear yards, recreational and laundry drying equipment, picnic
tables, open arbors and trellises, balconies, breezeways, porches, detached
outdoor living rooms and swimming pools, provided they are five feet or more
from any lot line;
      (6)   Height limitations shall not apply to church spires, belfries,
cupolas and domes, monuments, chimneys and smokestacks, flag poles, private and
public utility facilities and television antennas; and
      (7)   A storm entrance may be added and permitted to encroach on the
front yard of any single- family dwelling existing at the date of adoption of
this chapter, provided the structure does not extend more than five feet into
the front yard, is not more than 40 square feet in area, is constructed on a
foundation in accordance with the building code and is covered with a siding or
material substantially the same in appearance as the principal structure.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 118, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 137, passed 5-
28-1996) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.036 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY AND CONTROL.
   (A)   The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and controlled
in a manner that will avoid congestion on the public streets, traffic hazards
and excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic.
Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to ensure its safe and orderly flow.
Traffic into and out of business and industrial districts shall in all cases be
forward moving with no backing into streets.
   (B)   On corner lots in a residential district, no structure or planting in
excess of 30 inches above the curb line shall be permitted within a triangular
area as follows: “beginning at the intersection of the projected curb lines of
two intersecting streets, thence 30 feet along one curb line, thence diagonally
to a point 30 feet from the point of beginning on the other curb line, thence
to the point of beginning.”
   (C)   No hedge, bushes or fence located within 15 feet of the front lot line
shall exceed 30 inches in height above the yard ground level. Trees in the
front yard must be pruned so as not to impede vision across the yard creating a
traffic hazard nor impede pedestrians on the sidewalks.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.037 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   This chapter shall require a permit for all structures and rights-of-way
which are an integral part of a system for public transportation or for
transmitting power, water, heat, communication, gas or sewage by any public
utility.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.038 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Annexed territory shall be placed in the CD Zoning District until a time as
a detailed study determining its proper use district is undertaken.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.039 LAND RECLAMATION AND GRAVEL EXTRACTION.
   It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the economical availability
of sand, gravel, rock, soil, sod and other materials vital to the continued
growth of the city.
   (A)   Land reclamation. Under this chapter, land reclamation is the
reclaiming of land by depositing of material so as to elevate the grade. Land
reclamation shall be permitted only by conditional use permit in all districts.
Any lot or parcel which 400 cubic yards or more of fill is to be deposited
shall be land reclamation. The permit shall include, as a condition thereof, a
finished grade plan which will not adversely affect the adjacent land, and as
conditions thereof shall regulate the type of fill permitted, program for
rodent control, plan for fire control and general maintenance of the site,
controls of vehicular ingress and egress, and for control of material disbursed
from wind or hauling of material to or from the site.
   (B)   Gravel extraction. The extraction of sand, gravel or other material
from the land in the amount of 400 cubic yards or more and removal thereof from
the site without processing shall be permitted in all districts upon issuance
of a conditional use permit, except that no conditional use permit shall be
required in ID or MD zoning districts or in sand or gravel pits that exist as
of the date of the passage of this chapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 137, passed 5-28-1996) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.040 STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No buildings, structures or uses may be located in or on any public lands or
right-of-way without a conditional use permit being issued after approval by
the City Council and subject to other applicable approvals.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.041 RELOCATING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Permit required. Every licensed house mover shall, in each and every
instance, before raising, holding up or moving any building, obtain a permit
thereafter from the Zoning Officer. An application for the permit shall
designate the origin and destination of the building, the route over which it
is to be moved and shall state the time in which the moving of the building
shall be issued. No permit to move a building shall be issued unless and until
the following conditions are fully complied with and approved by the Zoning
Officer.
      (1)   All sewer charges and water bills payable against the property from
which the building is to be moved have been paid and that all sewer and water
connections have been plugged or discontinued at the curb line or at the main,
that all cesspools, septic tanks and cisterns have been filled, all other
hazards have been eliminated and all taxes against the property have been paid
in full.
      (2)   The building to be moved must comply in all respects with all other
laws and other applicable ordinances; provided, that the person proposing that
the building be moved may present to the Zoning Officer complete and detailed
plans showing changes which will be made in order to attain compliance with the
ordinances. In the event that the changes are proposed, a permit authorizing
the moving of the building shall not be issued until the owner has agreed in
writing to complete the necessary changes within a period of one year, the
Zoning Officer has approved the plans, the building permit fee has been paid
and the building permit issued, and a performance bond guaranteeing completion
of the changes, and equal to at least one and one-half times the cost of the
proposed work as estimated by the Zoning Officer has been posted with the city.
      (3)   Upon compliance with divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, the Zoning
Officer, licensee and applicant shall submit the application to the Planning
Commission for approval and recommendations to the City Council at the next
stated meeting of the Commission. The Planning Commission shall determine
whether the application shall conform to the immediate surrounding community.
The Planning Commission in its discretion shall call a public meeting of
resident owners within a radius of 500 feet from subject property owners review
of the proposed application. The Planning Commission will determine the
application on its merits and make its recommendations to the Council.
   (B)   Electrical correction requirements.
      (1)   In every case in which a permit shall be issued, as herein
provided, for the removal required or the displacement of any overhead
electrical or other wires, it shall be the duty of the person, association or
corporation owning, operating or controlling the wires to remove or displace
the same, so far as the same may be necessary to effect the removal thereof,
shall be authorized by the permit.
      (2)   The person to whom the permit shall have been issued shall notify
the person, association or corporation owning, operating or controlling the
wire to remove or displace the same to facilitate the removal of the building,
and shall at the same time exhibit to the person, association or corporation
the properly issued permit authorizing the removal of the wires sufficiently to
allow the passage of the building along the street over which the wires are
suspended.
      (3)   Any expenses incurred or to be incurred in the moving, removing or
displacing of the wire shall be paid for by the person who makes application
for the permit.
   (C)   Railroad and bridge requirements. No building shall be moved across
any railroad or bridge, unless the hour be specified and approved by the
company or governmental unit controlling the tracks or bridge.
   (D)   Additional requirements. Any person, firm, association or corporation
desiring to move any building to within the limits of the city from outside of
the limits shall comply with the following additional requirement:
      (1)   Notify the Zoning Officer of the city during the process of the
construction of the building in sufficient time so that the Zoning Officer may
make all necessary inspections in order to determine whether the building
complies with the applicable ordinances of the city;
      (2)   The applicant, at the time of application for a permit, shall pay
to the City Clerk-Treasurer the sum of $10 for each house to be moved in the
city. The sum shall be retained by the city whether or not a permit is granted
to the applicant; and
      (3)   The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized and required to make the
inspections provided for herein upon compliance with the foregoing
requirements.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.042 FRONT SETBACKS.
   In an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District where adjoining principal building exists at
the time of adoption of this chapter has a lesser setback from that required,
the required front yard of a new structure shall not be less than the average
front yards of the buildings on each side lot for 400 feet and in no case shall
the front yard be less than 20 feet in depth or 53 feet from the centerline of
the road. The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to supersede
§
152.046.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.043 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED.
   No lot shall contain any building used as a dwelling unless it abuts at
least 20 feet on a public street.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.044 USES NOT PROVIDED FOR WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Whenever in any zoning district a use is neither specifically permitted nor
denied, the City Council, the Planning Commission or a property owner may
request a study by the Planning Commission to determine whether the particular
use is compatible with the city’s comprehensive plan, what zoning district
would be most appropriate and the determination as to conditions and standards
relating to use. The City Council may upon receipt of the study, initiate an
amendment to the zoning ordinance to provide for the particular use under
consideration or find that the use is not compatible.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.045 SETBACKS ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   Where a business district is adjacent to a residential district, the minimum
building setback from the lot line shall be 35 feet. In the case of industrial
districts, the minimum setbacks shall be 50 feet.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.046 SETBACKS ALONG THOROUGHFARES.
   Along streets designated as “thoroughfare” in the adopted comprehensive
plan, the yard adjacent to the thoroughfare shall have a depth of 50 feet from
the planned right-of-way line. Where the right-of-way width has not been
established on the thoroughfare plan, a 100-foot minimum setback from the
centerline of all existing thoroughfares shall be required.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.047 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   In residential districts, multiple dwellings and places of public assembly,
such as churches and schools, are exempt from height limitations except that
the required setback from any residential lot shall be at least one and one-
half times the height, and the distance between any two principal buildings
must be no less than one-half the sum of the heights of the two structures,
except that any structure exceeding 45 feet in height shall require a
conditional use permit granted by resolution of the City Council determining
that the structure would not be dangerous and would not adversely affect the
adjoining or adjacent property.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.048 CORNER LOT SETBACKS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The side yard abutting a side street in all residential districts shall have
a depth of 60% of the required front yard. In the case where the side yard
abuts the front yard of an adjacent lot, the side yard setback adjacent to the
street shall not be less than 20 feet.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.049 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   The purpose of this section of the zoning chapter is to provide a method
where flexibility of site design and architecture may be applied by placing
more than one building on a lot in a residential, commercial or industrial
district, according to the following provisions. Planned unit development
applications shall be administered and processed through the conditional use
permit procedure specified in §
152.066 of this chapter.
   (A)   Residential district.
      (1)   The purpose of this division (A) is to establish provisions for the
granting of a conditional use permit to erect a multi-building apartment or
institutional project in relation to an overall design, an integrated physical
plan and in accordance with the provisions and procedures as provided in this
chapter.
      (2)   The owner or owners of any tract of land within the R-2, R-3, R-
5 or R-6 Use Districts may submit to the City Council for approval, a plan for
the development and use of a tract of land for a PUD for any permitted or
conditional use within the district in which the land is located by making an
application for a conditional use permit authorizing completion of the
development and shall conform to the requirement of the use district within
which it is located except as herein amended.
         (a)   The tract of land for which a development is proposed and permit
requested shall contain not less than four acres.
         (b)   The tract of land for which a development is proposed and a
permit requested shall not have less than 100 feet of frontage on a public
street.
         (c)   The proposed development shall be served by the public water and
sewer system, and fire hydrants shall be installed according to a plan approved
by the Fire Chief as to type and location.
         (d)   No principal building shall be nearer than its height to the
rear or side property line when the line abuts an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
         (e)   No building or multi-building structure within the development
shall be nearer to another building than one-half the sum of the heights of the
two buildings.
         (f)   Private roadways within the project shall have an improved
surface of 25 feet or more in width and shall be so designed and constructed as
to permit the city fire trucks to provide protection to each building. Parking
on a 25-foot roadway is to be prohibited, parking on one side of a 27-foot
roadway is to be permitted, and parking is permitted on both sides of roadways
32 feet or more in width.
         (g)   No building shall be located less than 15 feet from the back of
the curb line along those roadways which are a part of the internal road
system.
         (h)   Off-street parking for townhouse and multiple-family dwellings
shall be two spaces per dwelling unit.
         (i)   Provision for trash pick-up shall be provided according to a
plan reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
         (j)   Incinerators shall not be permitted.
         (k)   Landscaping shall be provided according to a plan reviewed by
the Planning Commission and approved by City Council and shall include a
detailed planting list with sizes indicated.
         (l)   The surface drainage system shall be constructed according to a
plan approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Business district.
      (1)   The purpose of this division (B) is to establish provisions for the
granting of conditional use permits to erect a multi-building retail sales and
service facility in relation to an overall design, and integrated physical plan
and in accordance with the provisions and procedures as provided in this
chapter.
      (2)   The owner or owners of any tract of land within the B-1 or B-
2 District may submit to the Council for approval a plan for the development
and use of a tract of PUD for commercial or other uses permitted in the
district within which the land is located, by making an application for a
conditional use permit authorizing completion of the development in accordance
with the plan. The plan for the development shall conform to the requirements
of the use district within which it is located except as herein amended.
         (a)   The tract of land for which a development is prepared and a
permit requested shall not have less than two acres.
         (b)   The tract shall have not less than 200 feet of frontage on a
public street.
         (c)   The development shall be served by the public sewer and water
system and fire hydrants shall be installed according to a plan approved by the
Fire Chief as to type and location. Private water may be allowed subject to
Council approval.
         (d)   The surface drainage system shall be constructed according to a
plan approved by the City Engineer.
         (e)   The entire site other than that taken up by structures or
landscaping shall be surfaced.
         (f)   The off-street parking spaces shall be painted on the surfaced
area according to a plan which has received approval of the City Council.
         (g)   Provisions shall be designated for off-street loading to service
the businesses and the space shall have easy access and not be designated for
any other use.
         (h)   Private roadways within the project shall have an improved
surface of 25 feet or more in width and shall be so designed and constructed as
to permit the city fire trucks to provide protection to each building. Parking
on a 25-foot roadway is to be prohibited.
         (i)   Provision for trash pick-up shall be provided according to a
plan reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
         (j)   Incinerators shall not be permitted.
         (k)   Landscaping shall be provided according to a plan reviewed by
the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council and shall include a
detailed planting list with sizes indicated.
   (C)   Industrial district.
      (1)   The purpose of this division (C) is to establish provisions for the
granting of a conditional use permit to erect a multi-building industrial
facility in relation to an over design, and integrated physical plan and in
accordance with the provisions and procedures as provided in the chapter.
      (2)   The owner or owners of any tract of land within an I District may
submit to the Council for approval a plan for the development and use of a
tract of land for a PUD for commercial or other uses permitted in the district
within which the land is located by making an application for a conditional use
permit authorizing completion of the development in accordance with the plan.
The plan for the development shall conform to the requirements of the district
within which it is located except as herein amended.
         (a)   The tract of land for which a development is proposed and a
permit requested shall not be less than five acres.
         (b)   The tract shall be served by the city water and sewer system and
fire hydrants shall be installed according to a plan approved by the Fire Chief
as to type and location. Private water may be allowed subject to Council
approval.
         (c)   A surface drainage system shall be constructed according to a
plan approved by the City Engineer.
         (d)   The off-street parking spaces shall be painted on the surfaced
area according to a plan which has received approval of the City Council.
         (e)   Private roadways within the project shall have an improved
surface of 25 feet or more in width and shall be so designed and constructed as
to permit the city fire trucks to provide protection to each building. Parking
on a 25-foot roadway is to be prohibited.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.050 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AREA (DENSITY ZONING).
   (A)   The purpose of this section of the zoning regulations is to provide a
method by which parcels of land in the R District having unusual building
characteristics due to sub-soil conditions, elevation of water table, water
area, wooded areas, relative location or shape of the parcel may be more
efficiently utilized.
   (B)   The owner or owners of any tract of land in the R District may submit
to the City Council for approval, a plan for the use and development of a tract
of land as a planned development area by making an application for a
conditional use permit authorizing completion of the project according to the
plan. The plan for the proposed project shall conform to the requirement of the
use district within which the land is located except as hereinafter modified.
      (1)   The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a permit
requested shall not be less than ten acres.
      (2)   The applicant shall state precisely what in his or her opinion are
the unusual characteristics of the site for purposes of justifying the granting
of a special permit.
      (3)   The plan shall be submitted in the form of a preliminary plan and
in complete conformance with the subdivision regulations.
      (4)   The number of dwelling units proposed for the entire site shall not
exceed the total number permitted under density control provision for the use
district within which the land is located.
      (5)   The density in the plan should not exceed the maximum for the
zoning district and the lot area of any one lot as required within the use
district shall not be reduced to less than two-thirds of the required area.
      (6)   All housing types included as permitted uses in all R Districts may
be included in the planned development area. Each lot as shown on the plan
shall have indicated on it the maximum number of dwelling units to be permitted
within a single building.
      (7)   The land which is to be set aside as unbuildable and on which the
plan is justified shall be clearly indicated on the plan. Provisions for
recreational area and for continual maintenance of that area not dedicated and
accepted by the city shall be required.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.051 DEVELOPMENT WITHOUT PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER AND WATER.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure whereby
commercial and industrial structures may be built in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter at a standard which will prevent pollution to ground
water resources or will not result in hazard to health.
   (B)   The applicant before obtaining a zoning permit for a commercial or
industrial structure shall provide the following:
      (1)   Written approval of the project by the Pollution Control Agency;
      (2)   A sanitary sewage disposal system plan with standards for
population equivalent and percolation rate based upon the Minnesota Department
of Health’s Tentative Standards for Design of Small Sewage Works;
      (3)   A plan for the disposal of surface water; and
      (4)   A fee of $25 to cover the administration and cost of the City
Engineer verifying the workability of the system.
   (C)   (1)   The City Engineer shall certify that the design and location of
the system will not adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of
the residents of the city or adjoining communities.
      (2)   The Engineer will also verify that the system is so designed to be
incorporated into the public system when it is so provided.
   (D)   The City Engineer shall submit his or her finding to the City Council
in a written form prior to the City Council approving the building permit.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.052 FLOOD CONTROL.
   (A)   Floodway District regulations (permitted uses).
      (1)   All buildings, structures, construction grading and deposits that
are essential to the operation of the city such as bridges, sewer outfalls,
power and telephone line supports and other service structures; and
      (2)   Non-damageable or low damage potential type of uses, such as
agriculture, parking lots, park, recreation areas and docking facilities.
Mineral resources and extraction operations.
   (B)   Floodplain District regulations (permitted uses). All buildings,
structures, construction, grading and deposits that are permitted under the
primary zoning classification:
      (1)   Provided that no residence or place of abode shall be constructed
unless the ground upon which the residence and the entire access drive to the
public street shall, prior to or at the time of the construction, be raised to
an elevation not less than one foot above the design flood elevation as shown
on the zoning maps and the first floor of the residence shall not be less than
three feet above the design flood elevation;
      (2)   No basement floor shall be constructed to an elevation lower than
the design flood elevation unless the basement has been designed to withstand
pressure from water at the design flood elevation and certified by a registered
engineer with the condition being made a part of the building permit; and
      (3)   No street grades shall be placed at a lower elevation than the
design flood elevation. Filling or excavating of land or pumping water into or
out of water bodies may be permitted subject to the approval of the City
Council. Construction of street, residences and other buildings at elevations
below design flood elevations may be permitted if adequate flood protection is
provided. Any flood protective works must be approved in writing by the City
Council prior to the granting of building permits.
   (C)   Issuance of zoning permits.
      (1)   Before a zoning permit shall be issued for a building, structure,
construction, grading or deposit in a floodway or floodplain, the applicant
must provide: an executed application form for zoning permits; all plans,
exhibits and certification required by the chapter; and the written approval of
other governmental agencies if required by the chapter.
      (2)   This permit would be issued with the condition that before a permit
would be issued for the structure or use, the applicant would be required to
furnish a certification from a registered engineer that the elevation of the
structure and the site meet all requirements of the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.053 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   The owner and occupant of a property shall keep and maintain the property in
compliance with the following requirements.
   (A)   Exterior property areas. Exterior property areas, which means all
areas of a property which are exterior and not related to any portion of a
building, structure or accessory structure located on the property, shall be
maintained as follows.
      (1)   The exterior property areas shall be kept and maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition.
      (2)   The property shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion
of soil and accumulation of water thereon, or within any building located
thereon, except in approved water retention areas.
      (3)   Private sidewalks, driveways and similar areas shall be kept in
good repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
   (B)   Yards. The owner shall be responsible for providing and maintaining
premises yards consistent with §§
91.25 through
91.28 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Exterior of buildings, structures and accessory structures. The
exterior of any building, structure or accessory structure shall be maintained
in good repair so as not to pose a threat to public health, safety or general
welfare.
      (1)   Exterior surfaces. Exterior wood surfaces shall be protected from
the elements and decay by maintained paint, stain or other protective covering
or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be removed and the
surfaces repainted or otherwise covered by other protective wood covering.
Joints in siding materials and between siding and other features shall be
maintained weather-resistant. Metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall
be stabilized and treated to inhibit future rust or corrosion. For purposes of
this chapter, if 20% or more of a wall or other surface area, such as fascia,
soffits, rake, has the protective coating peeling, flaking, chipping or
deteriorated, then the wall or surface area shall be restored to a protected
condition.
      (2)   Foundations, exterior walls, roofs and drainage. Exterior walls
shall be free from holes, breaks and loose, missing or rotting materials. The
roof and flashing shall be maintained weather- resistant so as not to allow
moisture to enter the building. Roof drainage systems shall be maintained in
good working order to perform the intended function. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
      (3)   Windows, doors, screens. Every window, exterior door and all other
exterior openings, shall be substantially tight, shall be kept in sound
condition and repair, and shall not be covered by construction materials such
as tarps, plywood sheets or other material not designed to be used as windows,
doors and frames. Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and
maintained in relation to the adjacent wall construction as to completely
exclude rain, wind, vermin and rodents from entering the building.
      (4)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Stairways, decks, porches,
and balconies, and attachments hereto, shall be maintained structurally sound,
in good repair, capable of supporting the imposed loads, able to perform the
intended function and maintained weather-resistant.
(Ord. 172, passed 3-22-2005)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.065 AMENDMENT OF ZONING REGULATIONS.
   The Council may by four-fifths vote of the entire Council, from time to
time, adopt amendments to this chapter.
   (A)   Initiation for amendment. The Council or the Commission may, upon
their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text or the districting map
of this chapter. Any person owning or holding a legal or equitable interest in
real estate may petition the Council to amend the district boundaries so as to
affect his or her real estate or a larger parcel which includes the real
estate.
   (B)   Application for amendment. All petitions for amendments (rezoning)
which are initiated by owners of property shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. Property owners wishing to initiate a rezoning of their property
shall fill out a “zoning form” which is available from the Zoning Administrator
office. The forms shall be completed and signed by the petitioners, who shall
recite therein, the general terms or particularity as the Planning Commission
or City Council may require, the nature of their legal or equitable interest in
the property in question, the change desired and the reason for the requested
change. The zoning form shall be accompanied by a fee of $10 to cover the cost
of processing the application. The zoning form shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. When the application involves the changing of zoning districts
and boundaries thereof, it shall be accompanied by a map or plat showing the
lands proposed to be changed and all lands within 350 feet of the boundaries of
the property proposed to be rezoned, together with a certified list of names
and addresses of the owners of the land in the area as is currently on record
with the County Auditor, and certified by him or her or his or her agents.
   (C)   Referral to the Commission. All petitions for amendments shall be
referred to the Commission which shall hold an official public hearing within
60 days of the date of filing the petition.
   (D)   Hearing. The Zoning Administrator shall cause to be published a notice
of public hearing in the official newspaper at least ten days but not more than
30 days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (E)   Action by the Commission. If the request is for a district change,
notices shall be mailed to all owners of property within 350 feet of the parcel
included in the request not less than ten days nor more than 60 days prior to
the hearing. Failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate
any proceedings as set forth within this chapter. The Commission shall make its
recommendation to the Council within 60 days of filing of the request or within
60 days of any continuance of any matter granted at the applicant’s written
request, by filing the recommendation with the Zoning Administrator.
   (F)   Action by the Council. The City Council may not act on the amendment
without the recommendation of the Planning Commission until 60 days have
elapsed after the proposed amendment has been referred to the Commission.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.066 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Application. Whenever this chapter requires a conditional use permit,
an application therefore submitted as a conditional use permit form may be
filed with the Zoning Officer together with a filing fee of $10 and shall be
accompanied with site plan and other information including, but not limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Site plan drawn at scale showing dimensions with setbacks noted;
      (2)   Location of all buildings, heights and square footage;
      (3)   Curb cuts, driveways, parking spaces;
      (4)   Off-street loading areas;
      (5)   Drainage plan;
      (6)   Type of business, proposed number of employees by shift;
      (7)   Proposed floor plan with use indicated and building elevations;
      (8)   Sanitary sewer and water plan with estimated use per day;
      (9)   A lighting plan showing the lighting of parking area, walks,
security lighting and driveway entrance light;
      (10)   A landscape plan with a schedule of the plantings; and
      (11)   The Commission may require an environmental impact statement.
   (B)   Referral to Commission. The application and related file shall be
referred to the Commission for study concerning the effect of the proposed use
on the comprehensive plan and on the character and development of the
neighborhood. The Commission shall hold an official public hearing within 60
days of the date of filing the petition.
   (C)   Hearing. The Zoning Administrator shall cause to be published a notice
of public hearing in the official newspaper at least ten days, but not more
than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (D)   Action by the Commission. Notices shall be mailed to all owners of
property within 350 feet of the parcel included in the request not less than
ten days nor more than 60 days prior to the hearing. Failure of a property
owner to receive notice shall not invalidate any proceedings as set forth
within this chapter. The Commission shall reach a decision upon the request
within 60 days after the date of the above hearing.
   (E)   Amendment to conditional use permit. Procedure is the same as required
for a conditional use permit.
   (F)   Records of conditional use permits. The Planning Commission shall
maintain a record of all conditional use permits issued, including information
on the use, location, conditions imposed by the Commission, time limits, review
dates and other information as may be appropriate.
   (G)   Procedure for periodic review. If a periodic review is imposed, as a
condition of the granting of a conditional use permit, the conditional use
permit shall be reviewed at a public hearing at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of the permit, with notice of the hearing published in the official
newspaper at least seven days prior to the review. It shall be the
responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to schedule the public hearing, and
the owner of land having a conditional use permit shall not be required to pay
a fee for the review.
   (H)   Concept plan review. The person applying for a conditional use permit
or a planned unit development may request a concept review of the proposed
development by the Planning Commission to gain information and thoughts
relevant to the city plans and his or her development prior to filing formal
application for a conditional use permit. The concept plan review, if for
informative purposes only, and shall not be considered as either approval or
denial of the applicant’s proposal.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.067 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Applications. Applications for variances shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator along with a filing fee of $10 and shall state the
exceptional conditions of the lot and the peculiar and practical difficulties
claimed as a basis for a variance.
   (B)   Referral to Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   All applications for variances shall be referred by the Zoning
Administrator to the Board of Adjustment which shall hear the applicant, or
representative thereof, at its next regular meeting. Applications must be filed
by the last business day of the month in order to be heard during a public
hearing at the Board of Adjustment’s next regular meeting.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall determine the conditions relating to
the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to adjust the hardship or
special situation so as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter or
shall deny the request. Notice of the application shall be mailed to all owners
of property within 350 feet of the parcel included in the request not less than
ten days nor more than 60 days prior to the hearing. Notice will be published
in the official newspaper at least ten days, but not more than 60 day prior to
the hearing.
   (C)   Issuance of variances. In considering all requests and in taking
subsequent action, the Board of Adjustment shall make a finding showing that
all of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   There are practical difficulties in complying with the existing
zoning regulations;
      (2)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by current zoning regulations;
      (3)   The plight of the property owner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the property owner; and
      (4)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality and is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
   (D)   Action by the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall reach
a decision upon the request within 60 days after the date of the above public
hearing. The Board of Adjustment may grant variances from the literal
provisions of this chapter in instances where their strict enforcement would
cause undue hardship because of circumstances peculiar and unique to the
individual premises, or property, under consideration, and may grant a variance
only when the applicant therefore has demonstrated that the action will be in
keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter with the zoning district in
which a variance is applied for. The Board of Adjustment may impose any
condition in the granting of the variances in order to ensure compliance with
this chapter, or to protect adjacent property. No variance shall be granted
pursuant to which the use of the property is extended or changed beyond the use
permitted by this chapter in the district where the land is located.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 194, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 152.068 HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry
on, a Level 2 home occupation, as that term is defined, without first having
obtained a license therefore from the city. Level 1 home occupations as defined
in the zoning chapter are not required to be licensed as long as all conditions
set forth in the zoning chapter are fully met.
   (B)   Regulation. Licenses will only be issued if the specific use is not
prohibited, and the Planning Commission determines that the home occupation
will be conducted with minimal or no effect on the surrounding neighborhood.
The Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions in the license to
ensure that the home occupation will be conducted with minimal or no effect on
the surrounding neighborhood.
   (C)   License period. All licenses for Level 2 home occupations shall expire
on September 30 of each year.
   (D)   Public notification and hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing for all home occupations required to be licensed. The owners of
all parcels within 350 feet of the property (or a larger area at the discretion
of the city) shall be notified ten days prior to the public hearing. The
applicant or a representative of the applicant must be present at the public
hearing.
   (E)   Purpose. Home occupation regulations are established to ensure that
home occupations will not adversely affect the character and livability of the
surrounding residential neighborhood. The home occupation shall function as an
accessory and subordinate use to the principal use of the dwelling unit. In
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare within residential
neighborhoods, home occupations shall be divided into two regulatory levels.
      (1)   Level 1 home occupations. Home occupations that comply with all
standards of division (G) below and which have no potential neighborhood
impacts. Level 1 home occupations may be operated without a license or permit.
      (2)   Level 2 home occupations.
         (a)   Home occupations that comply with all standards of division (G)
below but which could have potential neighborhood impacts; and home occupations
that do not comply with all standards of division (G) below and which are not
prohibited home occupations under division (H) below. Level 2 home occupations
are required to be licensed per the provisions of this section. Level 2 home
occupations may include, but are not strictly limited to:
            1.   Those with employed persons other than occupants of the
dwelling;
            2.   Those involving the use or parking of a commercial or non-
passenger vehicle, whether the use or parking is in a building or outside;
            3.   Those which do not meet one or more of the specified
performance standards in division (G) below; and
            4.   Those which generate excessive traffic per the standards of
division (G)(12) below.
         (b)   In cases where it is unclear whether a home occupation should be
classified as Level 1 or Level 2, the Zoning Officer shall make a determination
subject to Planning Commission confirmation if requested by the operator of the
home occupation.
   (F)   License required for Level 2 home occupations. An annual license shall
be obtained by any person operating a Level 2 home occupation.
   (G)   Home occupation regulations. The regulations recognize that many types
of home occupations can be conducted with minimal or no effect on the
surrounding neighborhood. Home occupations that comply with all of the
following standards are Level 1 home occupations and are not required to be
licensed. Home occupations that do not comply with all of the following
standards are Level 2 home occupations and are required to be licensed.
      (1)   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the residential use of the premises, and shall result in no incompatibility
with or disturbance to the surrounding area.
      (2)   Employed persons: no one other than the occupant(s) of the dwelling
shall be on the property at any given time in relation to the home occupation.
The home occupation may employ additional nonresident employees only if their
work activities are performed off the premises. Domestic employees shall not be
considered employees of the home occupation.
      (3)   Exterior alterations or modifications that change the residential
character or appearance of the dwelling unit or accessory structure to that of
a commercial nature shall be prohibited.
      (4)   Interior alterations or modifications that eliminate the kitchen,
habitable areas for sleeping and bathrooms shall be prohibited.
      (5)   No home occupation shall produce noise, light and glare, odor,
vibration or traffic that will in any way have a perceptible effect upon
adjacent or nearby property.
      (6)   Outdoor storage prohibited: outdoor storage or display of
materials, goods, supplies or equipment related to the conduct of the home
occupation shall be prohibited, except that licensed passenger vehicles used in
the home occupation may be parked outside provided they are in compliance with
all other requirements of this section.
      (7)   Parking: all vehicle parking required for conduct of the home
occupation shall be off-street. The off-street parking area required for the
principal residential use shall be retained exclusively for the principal
residential use and shall not be made unusable by the home occupation.
      (8)   Commercial or non-passenger vehicles: parking/storage of any
commercial or non- passenger vehicles used in the home occupation shall be
within a fully-enclosed building. Noise, odors or vibration from the operation
of vehicles shall not be discernible at the property line.
      (9)   No equipment, machinery or materials other than of a type normally
found in or compatible with a dwelling unit shall be allowed.
      (10)   No home occupation activity of a nonresidential character shall be
discernible from any private or public street. There shall be no exterior
signage or display, or interior signs or display, which are visible from
outside the dwelling.
      (11)   The hours of operation that a home occupation may be accessible to
the public shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
      (12)   The home occupation shall not generate excessive traffic that is
detrimental to the residential character of the surrounding properties or the
neighborhood. For the purposes of this division (G)(12), more than five
customers or clients per day, or more than two customers at any given time, may
be determined to be an excessive and detrimental level of traffic. The number
shall apply to each dwelling unit, regardless of the number of home occupations
conducted in the dwelling unit. The criteria used by the Zoning Officer to
determine impact shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   The characteristics of the neighborhood, including current land
use, lot sizes, lot widths, parking availability and screening;
         (b)   Type of street, width and traffic volumes; and
         (c)   The availability and location of off-street parking.
      (13)   Shipment and delivery of products, merchandise or supplies shall
be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and shall regularly occur
only in single rear axle straight trucks or smaller vehicles typically used to
serve residential areas.
   (H)   Prohibited home occupations. The following uses, by their nature of
operation, have a pronounced tendency to increase beyond the limits permitted
for home occupations. These uses have objectionable operational characteristics
that adversely impact residential neighborhoods and shall be prohibited as home
occupations:
      (1)   Service, repair or painting of any motorized vehicle, including,
but not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, boats, personal watercraft,
recreational vehicles and snowmobiles;
      (2)   Hair styling establishments;
      (3)   Dispatch centers where persons come to a site and are dispatched to
other locations;
      (4)   Medical or dental clinic;
      (5)   Rental businesses;
      (6)   Contracting, excavating, welding or machine shops;
      (7)   Commercial kennels and veterinary clinics;
      (8)   Tow truck services;
      (9)   Ceramic studios with kilns of volume six cubic feet or more;
      (10)   The sale, lease, trade or other transfer of firearms or ammunition
by a firearms dealer, except when the dealer is federally licensed to conduct
the activity; and
      (11)   Sale or use of hazardous materials in excess of consumer
quantities which are packaged for consumption by individual households for
personal care or household use.
   (I)   Reasonable accommodation for disabled persons. Persons with physical
or other legally recognized disabilities may request reasonable accommodation
by requesting a waiver of one or more of the foregoing requirements. The Zoning
Administrator may only grant waivers on the basis of the applicant’s physical
limitations to function within the requirements.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 168, passed 5-25-2004)
§ 152.069 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Council shall designate a Zoning Administrator having the following
duties:
   (A)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, all maps, amendments, conditional uses, variances, appeals and
applications thereto;
   (B)   Receive, file and forward all applications for amendments, variances,
conditional uses or other matters to the Commission, Council and Board of
Adjustment; and
   (C)   Notify the Zoning Officer of any appropriate actions or proceedings
against a violator as provided by law.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.070 ZONING OFFICER.
   The Zoning Officer is designated by the City Council and shall enforce this
chapter and, in furtherance of the authority, he or she may:
   (A)   Enter upon the land or within a building during reasonable working
hours as found necessary to fulfill his or her duties of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine
compliance with terms of this chapter;
   (C)   Institute in the name of the city any appropriate actions or
proceedings against a violator as provided by law; and
   (D)   Coordinate ordinance enforcement with the activities of the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.071 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT/PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   There shall be a Planning Commission/Board of Adjustment consisting of
five members appointed by the City Council for three-year terms. The Board of
Adjustment shall meet at least once each month if there are any petitions then
pending for action before the Board, in accordance with the terms of this
section.
   (B)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal, giving public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the
parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the
hearing any party may appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of
its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall
be held at the call of the Chairperson and at any other times as the Board may
determine. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Acting Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall
be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote indicating the fact and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be public record
and be immediately filed in the office of the Board.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall always act with due consideration to
promoting the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, encouraging the
most appropriate use of land and conserving property value, shall permit no
building or use detrimental to a neighborhood, and may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in each case.
   (E)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Officer;
and
      (2)   To hear requests for variances from the requirements of the zoning
ordinance including restrictions placed on nonconformities. Variances shall
only be permitted when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent
of the zoning ordinance and when the variances are consistent with the
comprehensive plan. Variances may be granted when the applicant for the
variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with
this chapter. PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES, as used in connection with the granting
of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance, the plight of the
property owner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by
the property owner, and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute
practical difficulties. The Board of Adjustment may not permit as a variance
any use that is not allowed under this chapter for property in the zone where
the affected person’s land is located. The Board of Adjustment may impose
conditions in the granting of variances, which must be directly related to and
must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
   (F)   In exercising the above mentioned powers the Board may reverse or
affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make the order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all the powers
of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   (G)   The majority vote of the members of the Board shall be sufficient to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning
Officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter which it is
required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in this
chapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 194, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 152.072 ZONING PERMIT.
   No structure shall hereafter be erected, or structurally altered until a
zoning permit shall have been issued indicating that the existing or proposed
structure and the use of the land comply with this chapter. All applications
for zoning permits pertaining to the erection or major alterations which will
affect the outside dimensions of a structure, shall be accompanied by three
copies of a site plan. If the site consists of land not a part of a subdivision
or land composed of partial lots, the site plan shall be attached to a survey
or a registered land surveyor showing the actual dimensions of the lot, lots or
parcel to be built upon. The site plan shall also show dimensions of existing
and/or proposed structures to be erected or structurally altered, their
location on the site in relation to the outside boundary, the required off-
street parking plan and any other information as may be necessary to provide
for the enforcement of these regulations. Site plans submitted for all uses
except one- and two-family dwellings shall contain lighting and landscape
plans. Construction on all structures or alterations for which a zoning permit
has been issued must be commenced within one year of the date of the zoning
permit and must be completed within two years of the date of the zoning permit.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.073 APPEALS.
   All decisions of the Board of Adjustment, whether variances, conditional use
permits, home occupation permits or other, shall be final, subject to the
appeal to the City Council, and the right of later judicial review. Any person
aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal the decision to
the City Council as follows. Any aggrieved party, to appeal, must file with the
City Clerk-Treasurer, a written notice of appeal within five days (excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) following the Board of Adjustment’s
written decision. The City Council shall act upon the appeal within 30 days
from receipt of same, and the City Council may limit the appeal to a review of
the records and proceedings held before the Board of Adjustment, or may by
majority vote schedule a public hearing on the appeal, to allow testimony and
providing reasonable notice. The decision of the City Council shall be by
majority vote, and the decision shall be made within 30 days from the City
Council hearing. Any party aggrieved by a decision or order of the Board of
Adjustment or City Council may seek judicial review of the decision, reviewed
by an appropriate remedy in the District Court, only if the party has appealed
the decision to the City Council as provided in this section. The written
decisions of the Board of Adjustment and the City Council shall be mailed to
the applicant and to any other interested parties who have requested written
notice of the decision.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
DISTRICT PROVISIONS
§ 152.085 DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Zoning districts. For the purpose of this chapter the city is hereby
divided into the following zoning districts:
      (1)   Residential districts:
         (a)   R-1 Single-Family Residential District;
         (b)   R-2 Single-Family Residential District;
         (c)   R-3 Single-Family Residential District;
         (d)   R-4 Mobile Homes District;
         (e)   R-5 Two-Family and Townhouse District; and
         (f)   R-6 Multiple-Family Residential District.
      (2)   Business districts:
         (a)   B-1 Limited Business District;
         (b)   B-2 General Business District; and
         (c)   B-3 Residential Light Commercial District.
      (3)   Industrial District;
      (4)   CD Conservancy District;
      (5)   MM Mineral Mining District;
      (6)   CLR Closed Landfill Restricted District; and
      (7)   S-1 Storage District.
   (B)   Opt-out of M.S. § 462.3593, as it may be amended from time to time.
Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, subd. 9, as it may be amended
from time to time, the city opts out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, as
it may be amended from time to time, which defines and regulates temporary
family health care dwellings.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 205, passed 6-23-2014; Ord. 206, passed 6-23-
2014; Ord. 212, passed 7-25-2016)
§ 152.086 ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
   The boundaries of the districts as established by this chapter are shown on
the map accompanying and made part of this chapter which is properly approved
and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. The district boundary lines on the map
are intended to follow street right-of-way lines, street centerlines or lot
lines unless the boundary line is otherwise indicated on the map. In the case
of unsubdivided property or in any case where street or lot lines are not used
as boundaries, the district boundary lines shall be determined by use of
dimensions or the scale appearing on the map.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.087 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
   (A)   Purpose. The R-1 Single-Family Residential District is intended to
provide a district which will allow residential development in those areas
where the development complies with the comprehensive plan and policies.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within any R-1 District, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings; and
      (2)   Public parks and playgrounds.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Within any R-1 Single-Family Use District, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses unless a conditional use
permit is approved:
      (1)   Recreation facilities, privately owned and designed to serve more
than one family, limited to nine or 18 hole golf courses which average 200
yards per hole or more; country clubs provided no building is less than 100
feet from all exterior boundary lines; tennis club provided all structures are
100 feet or more from all exterior boundary lines; and docking facilities for
storage and service of boats used on the abutting waterbody;
      (2)   The storage outside of principal structures of more than two of the
following: building for winter ice fishing; mobile camp trailer; camper;
utility tractor; boat over 16 feet; race car; provided the above named are
owned by the resident; and
      (3)   Kennels.
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within any R-1 District, the following uses
shall be permitted accessory uses:
      (1)   Private garages, parking spaces and carports for passenger cars and
not for more than two trucks;
      (2)   Home occupations as regulated herein;
      (3)   Decorative landscape features and recreation equipment;
      (4)   Keeping of not more than two boarders or roomers by resident
family;
      (5)   Signs as regulated herein;
      (6)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts;
      (7)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the
premises for a period not to exceed time normally necessary for the
construction; and
      (8)   Firewood for private use not to exceed 30-inch lengths.
   (E)   Lot area, height, lot widths and yard requirements.
      (1)   No structure shall exceed two stories, or 25 feet whichever least,
in height except as otherwise regulated by this chapter.
      (2)   A side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be
less than 30 feet in width.
      (3)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to
additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in other
sections of this chapter.
 
Front yard depth                    53 feet from centerline of right-of-way
Minimum habitable ground floor area 1,040 square feet
Minimum lot area                    43,560 square feet
Minimum lot width                   150 feet
Rear yard depth                     50 feet
Side yard depth                     16 feet
 
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.088 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2).
   (A)   Purpose. The R-2 Single-Family Residential District is intended to
provide a district which will allow residential development in those areas
where the development complies with the comprehensive plan and policies.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within the R-2 District, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings; and
      (2)   Public parks and playgrounds.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Within any R-2 Single-Family Use District, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses unless a conditional use
permit is approved:
      (1)   Two-family dwellings, provided that public sanitary sewer and water
service is available and used therefore and provided that the lot has a minimum
width of 100 feet and an area of 12,000 square feet;
      (2)   Cemeteries, provided the site does not include more than 40 acres
and is so designed as to provide the necessary rights-of-way to accommodate the
major thoroughfare and collector system;
      (3)   Churches including those related structures located on the same
site which are an integral part of the church proper;
      (4)   Public buildings and utility structures subject to the following:
         (a)   Water pump houses, iron removal structures and sanitary lift
stations which if not located below grade on a landscaped lot shall be in a
building which conforms to yard requirements and architectural style of the
neighborhood;
         (b)   Gas regulator stations, electric power regulator stations and
telephone regulator stations which are not located below grade on a landscaped
lot shall be a building which conforms to yard and architectural style of the
neighborhood. Should the structure require fencing, the fence shall conform to
all yard requirements;
         (c)   Water towers shall be in conformance with all yard requirements;
         (d)   Electric power transmission lines and transmission pipe lines
shall be so located as to share the public street right-of-way or be abutting
right-of-way for railroad and avoid diagonal divisions of land;
         (e)   Park buildings;
         (f)   Day nursery, provided play space of 60 square feet per child is
provided within a fenced area other than front yard; and
         (g)   The storage outside of a building of more than two of the
following: building for winter ice fishing; mobile camp trailer; camper;
utility tractor; boat over 16 feet; racer; provided the above named are owned
by the resident.
      (5)   Kennels; and
      (6)   Public or parochial schools, which having a curriculum equivalent
to a public elementary school or a public high school.
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within any R-2 District, the following uses
shall be permitted accessory uses: accessory uses as permitted and regulated in
§
152.087(D).
   (E)   Lot area, height, lot widths and yard requirements.
      (1)   No structure shall exceed two stories or 25 feet whichever is
least, in height except as otherwise regulated by this chapter.
      (2)   A side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be
less than 18 feet in width.
      (3)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to
additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in other
sections of this chapter.
 
Front yard depth                    53 feet from centerline of right-of-way
Minimum habitable ground floor area 864 feet
Minimum lot area                    10,800 square feet
Minimum lot width                   85 feet
Rear yard depth                     35 feet
Side yard depth                     6 feet
 
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.089 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3).
   (A)   Purpose. The R-3 Single-Family Residential District is intended to
provide a district which will allow residential development in those areas
where the development complies with the comprehensive plan and policies.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within any R-3 District, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings; and
      (2)   Public parks and playgrounds.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Within any R-3 Single-Family Use District, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses until a conditional use
permit is approved:
      (1)   Any use as permitted and regulated in §
152.088(C)(2) through (C)(6); and
      (2)   Two-family dwellings, provided that public sanitary sewer and water
service is available and use therefore and provided that the lot has a minimum
width of 90 feet and an area of 11,000 square feet.
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within any R-3 District, the following uses
shall be permitted accessory uses: accessory uses as permitted and regulated in
§
152.087(D).
   (E)   Lot area, height, lot widths and yard requirements.
      (1)   No structure shall exceed two stories or 25 feet whichever is
least, in height except as otherwise regulated by this chapter.
      (2)   A side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be
less than 15 feet in width. However, a fence is permitted in a side yard which
abuts a public right-of-way if the fence is at least seven feet from the public
right-of-way, is no more than four feet in height, and is constructed and
maintained in a manner so that the fence can be seen through, with little or no
loss of visibility (i.e., chain link). The provisions of §
152.036(B) and (C), pertaining to the front yard, remain applicable.
      (3)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to
additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in other
sections of this chapter.
 
Front yard depth                    53 feet from centerline of right-of-way
Minimum habitable ground floor area 720 square feet
Minimum lot area                    8,250 square feet
Minimum lot width                   65 feet
Rear yard depth                     35 feet
Side yard depth                     4 feet
 
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 191, passed 7-27-2010)
§ 152.090 MOBILE HOMES (R-4).
   (A)   Purpose. The R-4 Mobile Home Districts are intended to provide a
district which will allow mobile homes in those areas where the development
fits the comprehensive plan, where properly related to other land uses and
thoroughfares are immediately available.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within any R-4 District, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Public parks and playgrounds; and
      (2)   Mobile home park.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Within any R-4 Mobile Home District, no structure or
land shall be used for the following uses unless a conditional use permit is
approved:
      (1)   Recreation facilities, privately owned and designed to serve more
than one family limited to tennis courts provided all structures are 100 feet
or more from all exterior boundary lines; and docking facilities for storage
and service of boats used on the abutting waterbody; and
      (2)   Mobile home parks as regulated by this chapter.
   (D)   Mobile home park regulations.
      (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall develop or operate any mobile
home court without having a conditional use permit, pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   No person shall park or occupy a mobile home on any land situated
outside an approved mobile home court, subject to the following exceptions:
         (a)   Temporary maintenance of a mobile home for business purposes on
the business premises or adjacent property where the mobile home is used in
connection with work on the premises; and
         (b)   Permits for accepted mobile home use may be issued by the Zoning
Officer for a period not to exceed 90 days if the conditions stated herein
appear to his or her reasonable satisfaction, but any renewal of a permit shall
require approval of the City Council, it being the intent of the Council that
extensions should be granted only in unusual and emergency situations requiring
a brief extension.
      (3)   The following are prohibited with respect to a mobile home properly
located, either temporarily or permanently: construction of a permanent
foundation or permanent enclosure thereunder.
      (4)   A mobile home shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as
a permanent dwelling unless it is properly connected to a municipal sanitary
sewer system. All water and sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance
with the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. It is the
intention of the Council that the Council approve the water supply system and
sanitary sewer connections to mobile home courts as a part of their original
construction.
   (E)   Mobile home court requirements.
      (1)   A mobile home court shall contain area sufficient to accommodate at
least 100 mobile home lots, plus recreational areas and streets as required by
this chapter. Prior to occupancy of any mobile home in the court at least 50
mobile home stands must be fully developed as required by the provisions of
this chapter; including all required auxiliary buildings and other areas.
      (2)   All utilities, such as sewer, water, fuel, electric, telephone and
television antenna lead-ins, shall be buried to a depth specified by the City
Engineer, and there shall be no overhead wires. All utility connections shall
be approved by the city prior to connection. Plans for the disposal of surface
storm water shall be approved by the City Engineer.
      (3)   All land areas shall be adequately drained and properly maintained
free of dust, refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris. The proposed method of
garbage, waste and trash disposal must be approved by the city and must conform
to the regulations of the State Pollution Control Agency. Refuse collections
stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. The stands shall be so
designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and
container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them. The storage,
collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home court shall be so
conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding
areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
      (4)   All mobile home courts shall have one or more recreational areas
(tot-lots) which shall be easily accessible to all court residents.
Recreational areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and
should, where the topography permits, be centrally located. The recreational
area shall be a minimum of 10% of the land area of the entire court. All
equipment installed in an area shall be owned and maintained by the owner or
operator at his or her own expense.
      (5)   All water supply and sanitation facilities must conform to the
current recommendations of the Minnesota Department of Health. Fire hydrants
shall be provided as required by the City Engineer.
      (6)   All mobile home courts shall have an area or areas set aside for
dead storage. The storage area shall be screened.
      (7)   A landscaped area with minimum depth of 75 feet shall be maintained
around the perimeter of each mobile home court.
      (8)   Street rights-of-way shall not be less than 60 feet in width.
      (9)   A concrete or rolled bituminous curb and gutter shall be
constructed on each side of the road. The curb and gutter shall comply with all
applicable city ordinances.
      (10)   The corners of each lot shall be marked with surveyor’s irons, and
each lot shall be numbered. The mobile home court management shall supply
copies of the mobile home regulations (as codified in this section of this
Chapter 152) and specific covenants for the mobile home park to each mobile
home park resident.
      (11)   In addition to the required off-street parking for each mobile
home lot, the mobile home court shall provide and maintain a paved off-street
parking lot for guests of occupants.
      (12)   There shall be no outdoor camping anywhere in the mobile home
court and no tents shall be erected or occupied.
      (13)   Advertising of the mobile home court on the premises shall be
limited to one nameplate sign containing the court name, which plate shall not
exceed 25 square feet, with lighting, heights and location as approved by the
city with a 25-foot setback from any lot line.
   (F)   Minimum requirements.
 
Front yard setback         53 feet from centerline of right-of-way
Lot area per dwelling unit 7,200 square feet
Lot depth                  120 feet
Lot width                  60 feet
Rear yard setback          25 feet
Side yard setback          10 feet
 
      (1)   An accessory structure, including but not limited to, awnings,
storage cabinets, carports or porches, shall be considered to be part of the
mobile home for the purposes of all setback requirements.
      (2)   Outside detached storage sheds or cabanas shall no exceed 144
square feet in area and shall be placed in rear yard and shall be constructed
of material approved by the city. Attached entry ramp will not exceed 64 square
feet and shall be constructed of material and a facade approved by city.
      (3)   Each mobile home site shall have two paved (concrete or bituminous)
off-street parking spaces for automobiles. Each parking space shall be at least
300 square feet in size and shall not be located within five feet of the side
of any mobile home or within five feet of any lot line.
      (4)   Except for the areas used for the mobile home, patio, sidewalk and
off-street parking space, the entire remaining area of the mobile home lot
shall be sodded and maintained with grass.
      (5)   The mobile home stand shall be constructed in a way that it will
not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home, due to
frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting upon the
stand. (Piers shall also be considered suitable.)
      (6)   Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of
the mobile home stand and each anchor shall be able to sustain a minimum
tensile strength of 2,800 pounds.
      (7)   (a)   Centralized fuel system. Where a fuel source of constant and
adequate supply is accessible and within reasonable proximity to a mobile home
park, a centralized fuel system will be installed, maintained and made
accessible to all residences within a mobile home park.
         (b)   Alternate fuel systems. Private fuel containers and solar energy
resources appliances may be installed providing:
            1.   The installations and appliances meet all applicable codes and
safety requirements;
            2.   The installation does not emit any irritating noise, odor or
solar reflection which may affect other residents; and
            3.   The installation of appliances shall be screened from public
view in complimentary design to home, lot and park. Screening shall be
maintained on all alternate fuel containers or appliances.
      (8)   The property owner will grant to the city an open space easement
and permit the city to have an easement to enter upon as the grantee any of the
open space, street or recreational areas, in accordance with §
10.20 of this code of ordinances, provided within the mobile home court for the
purpose of permitting the city to service structures, repair or maintain as is
necessary and appropriate to adequately maintain the areas, in the event that
the owner of the property, his or her successors or assigns, fails to comply
with the standards and requirements as set forth within this chapter.
   (G)   Structural requirements.
      (1)   Every structure shall be developed and maintained in a safe,
approved and substantial manner. The exterior of each structure in a mobile
home court shall be kept in good repair, and shall be repainted or refinished
at those reasonable times and in a reasonable manner as may be required by the
city, it being the intent of this division (G) that the court shall not be
permitted to present a rundown or shabby appearance.
      (2)   All structures, other than the mobile home, shall require a zoning
permit.
      (3)   Mobile homes shall not be located, or permitted, to remain in the
city unless they:
         (a)   Conform to all requirements of the statutes of the state,
including particularly M.S. Chapter 327, as it may be amended from time to
time;
         (b)   Are in sanitary condition; and
         (c)   Are structurally sound, particularly with respect to the safety
and welfare of their occupants.
      (4)   Unoccupied mobile homes must be removed from the court within 90
days after they become unoccupied.
      (5)   The area beneath all mobile homes shall be enclosed with a normal
exterior material that shall be generally uniform through the entire mobile
home court except that the enclosure must be so constructed that it is subject
to reasonable inspection.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 137, passed 5-28-1996)
§ 152.091 TWO-FAMILY AND TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT (R-5).
   (A)   Purpose. The R-5 Residential District is intended to provide a
district which will allow two- family dwellings and townhouse dwellings by
conditional use permit in those areas where the development fits the city
comprehensive plan and where municipal community utilities are immediately
available.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within any R-5 Residential District, no structure or
land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Two-family dwellings;
      (2)   Private or parochial school which teaches a curriculum similar to
public schools provided that no building shall be located nearer than 25 feet
from any lot line;
      (3)   Churches including those related structures located on the same
site which are an integral part of the church proper, convents or homes for
persons related to a religious function on the same site provided no buildings
shall be located nearer than 25 feet from any lot line; and
      (4)   Public office buildings, parks and playgrounds.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Within any R-5 Residential District, no structure or
land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      (1)   Any use listed in §
152.088(C) and as regulated therein except as modified herein;
      (2)   Single-family detached dwellings;
      (3)   Accessory buildings other than garages;
      (4)   One-family townhouse subject to the following:
         (a)   The structure containing a townhouse shall have three to ten
dwelling units;
         (b)   The structure containing a townhouse shall conform to all yard
regulations;
         (c)   A fire wall shall be required to separate each two dwelling
units connected by a common wall from all other units; and
         (d)   All driveways and parking areas which accommodate three or more
cars shall be surfaced with a permanent hard surfaced material.
      (5)   Rest home or nursing home.
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within any R-5 District, the following uses
shall be permitted accessory uses:
      (1)   Permitted accessory uses as provided and regulated in §
152.087(D) except as modified herein; and
      (2)   Private garages, parking spaces and carports for passenger cars and
for one truck at not more than a 7,000 pound rated capacity.
   (E)   Lot area, height, lot width and yard requirements.
      (1)   No residential structure shall exceed two stories.
      (2)   A side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be
less than 20 feet in width.
      (3)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to
additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in other
sections of this chapter.
Front yard                              53 feet from centerline of right-of-way
Minimum lot area (single-family         7,200 square feet
detached)
Minimum lot area (two-family dwelling)  9,000 square feet
Minimum lot width (single-family        60 feet
detached)
Minimum lot width (two-family dwelling) 80 feet
Minimum square footage per family unit  4,500 square feet
(townhouses)
Rear yard                               30 feet
Side yard                               1 shall be 10 feet with the sum of the
                                        2, 16 feet or more
 
   (F)   Floor area requirement.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling shall contain at least 960 square
feet of floor area, 600 square feet of which shall be on the first floor.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings shall contain at least 800 square feet of
floor area per dwelling unit.
      (3)   Townhouse dwellings shall contain at least 720 square feet when one
story and at least 1,100 square feet when two story, minimum side setback shall
be 20 feet.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.092 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-6).
   (A)   Purpose. The R-6 Multiple-Family Residential Districts are intended to
provide a district which will allow multiple-family dwellings in those areas
where the development fits the comprehensive plan, where properly related to
other land uses and thoroughfares are immediately available.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within any R-6 District, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   All uses as permitted and regulated in §
152.091(B) except as herein modified;
      (2)   Multiple-dwelling unit structures up to three stories in height;
      (3)   Clinics for human care, nursing homes and sanitariums provided the
site shall contain not less than 500 square feet of lot area for each person to
be accommodated;
      (4)   Offices for persons engaged in one of the recognized professions,
finance, insurance, real estate, religious or philanthropic organizations;
      (5)   Funeral homes and mortuaries; and
      (6)   Y.M.C.A. and other similar non-profit organizations.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Within the R-6 Multiple-Family Use District, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses until a conditional use
permit is approved.
      (1)   Any use listed in §
152.091(C) and as regulated therein; and
      (2)   Laundromat.
   (D)   Accessory uses. Within any R-6 Multiple-Family District, the following
uses shall be permitted accessory uses: any use permitted in §
152.091(D) and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
   (E)   Height, lot widths and yard requirements.
      (1)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the
additional requirements, exceptions and modifications as set forth:
         (a)   Height shall be limited to 40 feet;
         (b)   Minimum lot width shall be 120 feet and lot area of 15,000
square feet or more;
         (c)   Front yard shall be 53 feet from centerline of right-of-way;
         (d)   Side yard shall be one-half height of building or 15 feet
whichever is greater; and
         (e)   Rear yard shall be 40 feet or more.
      (2)   Lot area per dwelling unit:
         (a)   One bedroom: five times minimum floor area;
         (b)   Two bedroom: five times minimum floor area;
         (c)   Three bedroom or more: five times floor area of two bedroom plus
500 square feet for each bedroom over two; and
         (d)   A credit for 300 square feet shall be given for each parking
space provided in the principal building.
      (3)   Floor area requirements for dwelling units:
         (a)   Each one bedroom apartment shall have not less than 600 square
feet of floor area;
         (b)   Each two bedroom apartment shall have not less than 750 square
feet of floor area; and
         (c)   Each three bedroom apartment shall have not less than 900 square
feet of floor area.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 150, passed 5-26-1998)
§ 152.093 SINGLE-FAMILY LAKESHORE RESIDENTIAL (R-7).
   (A)   Includes all provisions of §
152.089(A) through (E), except §
152.089(C)(2) (two-family dwellings will not be allowed as a conditional use).
   (B)   Additional permitted use:
      (1)   The use of a single camping unit, from the date of the granting of
a camping unit permit, for four years while a permitted residential structure
is in the planning phase through construction completion. A contractor
construction trailer will not be counted as the single permitted camping unit.
A tent is not to be considered a camping unit and is not permitted. A camping
unit is allowed on a seasonal basis only during this four-year period not to
exceed eight consecutive months for each occurrence. During the four-year
camping permitted time period, the following benchmarks must be attained
starting from the effective date of the permit for a camping unit:
         (a)   End of first year: sufficient land cleared for a permitted
residential structure;
         (b)   End of second year: completed installation of permitted water
and sewer service lines;
         (c)   End of third year: completed construction of slab on foundation
for a permitted residential structure; and
         (d)   End of fourth year: completed construction of a permitted
residential structure.
      (2)   This failure to comply with these benchmarks will constitute a
violation of the zoning regulations, as amended from time to time.
   (C)   Additional permitted accessory use: accessory uses as permitted and
regulated in §
152.100(E)(2)(b)2. and (E)(2)(b)3.
   (D)   The rezoning district map is amended to rezone the following property
from Single-Family Residential District (R-3) to Single-Family Lakeshore
Residential (R-7): Patriot’s Point Subdivision, Lots 1 through 26.
(Ord. 182, passed 11-27-2007)
§ 152.094 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-1).
   (A)   Purpose. To provide for and encourage compact center for retail sales
and services by grouping businesses in patterns of workable relationships; to
minimize the blighting influence on surrounding residential neighborhoods by
limitations and control of uses permitted; to exclude highway oriented and
other business that will tend to disrupt the shopping center or its circulation
patterns, or tend to disturb neighborhood stability.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within a B-1 Business District, no building or land
shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Retail shopping uses - stores and shops selling household goods
over the counter or selling personal services. Included are stores selling:
         (a)   Antiques;
         (b)   Apparel shops;
         (c)   Appliance sales and service;
         (d)   Art and school supplies;
         (e)   Auto accessories and parts when conducted entirely within an
enclosed building, but not including vehicle maintenance shops;
         (f)   Bakery or pastry shops selling retail only;
         (g)   Off-sale liquor;
         (h)   Bicycles;
         (i)   Barber or beauty shops;
         (j)   Book or stationery store;
         (k)   Building materials that are within completely enclosed
buildings;
         (l)   Candy, ice cream, soft drinks or confectionery stores excluding
drive-in type stores;
         (m)   Cameras, photographic supplies, photographic studios and video
and tape rentals;
         (n)   Carpets, rugs and floor covering;
         (o)   China and glassware;
         (p)   Clothing (including dressmaking, millinery and tailor shops);
         (q)   Costume and formal wear rental;
         (r)   Delicatessens;
         (s)   Dry cleaning, laundry collection stores, laundromats, tailor
shops;
         (t)   Dry goods;
         (u)   Florist shop;
         (v)   Food stores;
         (w)   Frozen foods and meat market, but not including locker plants or
meat slaughter houses;
         (x)   Furniture, upholstering, picture framing, interior decorating
studios;
         (y)   Garden supplies (year round operations only);
         (z)   Gifts and novelty stores;
         (aa)   Hardware and sporting goods;
         (bb)   Hobby supplies;
         (cc)   Jewelry, time pieces, silverware;
         (dd)   Leather goods and luggage;
         (ee)   Musical instruments, records, television, radio, hi-fi and the
like;
         (ff)   Office supplies and equipment;
         (gg)   Paint and wallpaper and related material;
         (hh)   Pets and pet supplies provided it is operated in a manner as to
cause no offensive noise or odor;
         (ii)   Post office;
         (jj)   Sewing center, machine sales, sewing classes, yard goods;
         (kk)   Shoe store and repair;
         (ll)   Sporting goods; and
         (mm)   Theaters, excluding drive-in type.
      (2)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (3)   Clubs or lodge;
      (4)   Medical and dental offices and laboratories;
      (5)   Hotels and motels;
      (6)   Offices, business and professional libraries;
      (7)   Public and private utility uses;
      (8)   Mortuary and funeral homes;
      (9)   Temporary sales, such as Christmas tree lots;
      (10)   Drug stores;
      (11)   Department stores;
      (12)   Discount stores;
      (13)   Variety stores;
      (14)   Service station (motor fuel station and automobile repair -
minor);
      (15)   Recreational facilities;
      (16)   Restaurants (Class 1) and catering;
      (17)   Tobacco and tobacco product sales; and
      (18)   Cannabinoid sales.
   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit. Within a B-1 Retail Business District,
no building or land shall be used for one or more of the following uses except
by conditional use permit:
      (1)   Accessory buildings and structures;
      (2)   On-sale liquor;
      (3)   Assembly, convention or lodge hall;
      (4)   Restaurants (Class 2) with live entertainment;
      (5)   Dwelling units provided the units do not occupy the first floor;
      (6)   Open sales lots provided:
         (a)   The lot is surfaced and graded according to a plan submitted by
the applicant and approved by the City Engineer;
         (b)   The assembly, repair or manufacture of goods shall not occur
within the open sales lot; and
         (c)   There is located thereon a building devoted to and used in the
sales which is at least as large in floor area as the occupation and use.
      (7)   Animal hospitals and pet shops;
      (8)   Schools for music, dance or business;
      (9)   Banks with drive-in facilities; and
      (10)   Drive-in photo processing pick-up.
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Within a B-1 Retail Business District, the
following shall be permitted accessory uses:
      (1)   Any incidental repair, processing or storage necessary to conduct a
permitted principal use, but not to exceed 30% of the floor space of the
principal building;
      (2)   Decorative landscape features;
      (3)   Off-street loading;
      (4)   Parking for permitted and conditional use;
      (5)   Signs as regulated herein; and
      (6)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the
premises for a period not to exceed completion of construction.
   (E)   Height, lot coverage and minimum lot area regulations.
      (1)   Height regulations. No building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered to exceed two stories or 25 feet in height.
      (2)   Yard regulations.
         (a)   Front yard regulations. There shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than 40 feet.
         (b)   Side yard regulations.
            1.   Buildings located on a corner lot shall have a side yard
setback of not less than 30 feet from the street;
            2.   Buildings located on interior lots shall have a side yard
setback of not less than ten feet; and
            3.   Except that no building shall be located within 75 feet of any
side lot line abutting a lot in any of the classes of residential districts.
      (3)   Rear yard regulations.
            1.   There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 30
feet; and
            2.   Except that no building shall be located within 75 feet of any
rear lot line abutting a lot in any of the classes of residential districts.
      (4)   Lot coverage regulations. Not more than 35% of the lot or plot area
shall be occupied by buildings.
      (5)   Lot area regulations. The minimum area of land to be included in a
B-1 Retail Business District shall be at least 20,000 square feet.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 116, passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 137, passed 5-
28-1996; Ord. 144, passed 2-11-1997; Ord. 172, passed 3-22-2005; Ord. 239,
passed 1-23-2023)
§ 152.095 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-2).
   (A)   Purpose. To provide centralized areas for businesses that are highway
or automobile oriented businesses, and for light-industrial and wholesale
enterprises.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   All uses permitted (whether by right of conditional use permit) in
District B-1;
      (2)   Live bait stores;
      (3)   Transport or motor freight terminals (interior storage only);
      (4)   Warehousing;
      (5)   Miscellaneous business uses including:
         (a)   Contractors and carpenters offices, and shops and building
material establishments, where dimension lumber, mill work, cabinets and other
building materials are kept for sale;
         (b)   Glass cutting, glazing and mirror shops;
         (b)   Greenhouses and nurseries;
         (d)   Laboratories, experimental and testing, provided no production
or manufacturing takes place;
         (e)   Secondhand and rummage stores;
         (f)   Plumbing, electrical, heating, air conditioning and roofing
supply shops;
         (g)   Printing and publishing of newspapers, periodicals, books and
including other press work;
         (h)   Open sales lots;
         (i)   Sign shops;
         (j)   Public and semi-public utility uses;
         (k)   Cabinets and furniture making and sales;
         (l)   Electronic sales, service and storage;
         (m)   Commercial sewing and fabric processing; and
         (n)   Recycling, recycling processing and manufacturing from
recyclable materials of a non-hazardous nature.
      (6)   Uses permitted under §
152.092(B).
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Automobile repair - minor;
      (2)   Commercial recreation;
      (3)   Car and/or truck washes;
      (4)   Motor vehicle and/or marine sales, new or used;
      (5)   Motor fuel station;
      (6)   Bulk fuel storage; and
      (7)   The sales and service of agricultural or farm equipment,
construction and/or industrial machinery and equipment, including body repair,
rebuilding, painting incidental and accessory to new and used sales.
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.
      (1)   Any incidental repair, processing or storage necessary to conduct a
permitted principal use, but no exceeding 30% of the floor space of the
principal building;
      (2)   Off-street parking;
      (3)   Fences; and
      (4)   Signs.
   (E)   Height, area and yard requirements.
      (1)   Minimum yard requirements:
         (a)   Front yard setback: 40 feet;
         (b)   Side yard:
            1.   Interior lot setback: 15 feet; and
            2.   Side street setback: 30 feet.
         (c)   Rear yard setback: 30 feet.
      (2)   No structure or building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
      (3)   A structure shall cover no more than 35% of the lot area.
      (4)   The minimum lot area is 20,000 square feet.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 133, passed 9-26-1995; Ord. 172, passed 3-22-
2005)
§ 152.096 RESIDENTIAL LIGHT COMMERCIAL (B-3).
   (A)   Purpose. To provide for and encourage location of sales and services
which are environmentally compatible with residential districts; to minimize
the blighting influence on surrounding residential neighborhoods by limitations
and control of uses permitted; to exclude highway oriented and any other
business that will tend to disrupt or disturb neighborhood stability.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within a B-3 Residential Light Commercial District, no
building or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Clinics;
      (2)   Hospitals and nursing/convalescent homes;
      (3)   Printing;
      (4)   Commercial advertising products;
      (5)   Trade and vocational schools;
      (6)   Public buildings; and
      (7)   Medical and dental offices and/or laboratories.
   (C)   Uses by conditional use permit. Within a B-3 Business District, no
building or land shall be used for one or more of the following uses except by
conditional use permit: manufacturing of:
      (1)   Clothing, tents and other textile items;
      (2)   Electronic equipment or subassemblies;
      (3)   Electric controls, timers and small electric motors;
      (4)   Fishing tackle and related products (does not include boats,
trailers or motors);
      (5)   Assembling small appliances;
      (6)   Toys;
      (7)   Soft drinks confectionery, ice cream and pastry products;
      (8)   Food products (frozen, dehydrated or canned);
      (9)   Wood cabinets and furniture products;
      (10)   Greenhouses;
      (11)   Warehousing of non-hazardous materials; and
      (12)   Permitted uses of an R-3 District.
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Same as Retail Business District (B-1).
   (E)   Height, lot coverage and minimum lot area regulations. Same as Retail
Business District (B-1).
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 144, passed 2-11-1997; Ord. 179, passed 1-23-
2007)
§ 152.097 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1).
   (A)   Permitted uses. Within any I-1 Industrial District, no structure or
land shall be used except for the sale, manufacturing, fabricating or
processing of the following articles or operations:
      (1)   Automobile repair - major;
      (2)   Belting and chain conveyors;
      (3)   Billboards and signs;
      (4)   Blacksmithing;
      (5)   Boat building, repair and storage;
      (6)   Builder’s or contractor’s yards, farm machine sales, feed sales,
bulk firewood sales, dirt, sand, gravel and rock sales, heavy equipment sales,
provided any operations are enclosed by a solid wall or fence not less than six
feet in height and not located less than 100 feet from any residential
district;
      (7)   Cabinet and carpentry shop, electrical, plumbing, heating and air
condition shops;
      (8)   Canvas and canvas goods;
      (9)   Concrete block plant, concrete mixing plant, asphalt mixing plant;
      (10)   Electric motors, generators, transformers and controls;
      (11)   Electric power generating plant;
      (12)   Heat treating and plating;
      (13)   Housing, manufacture;
      (14)   Products made of glass, cellophane, leather, plastic and wood;
      (15)   Motor fuel stations;
      (16)   Railroad sidings, spurs, depots and yards;
      (17)   Stone, marble and granite grinding and cutting;
      (18)   Trade schools;
      (19)   Truck storage or maintenance shops;
      (20)   Warehousing, including commercial storage and noncommercial or
personal storage;
      (21)   Television towers and radio towers;
      (22)   Wood fuel processing; and
      (23)   Saw mills, planing mills or kilns.
   (B)   Conditional use permit. Within any I-1 District, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      (1)   Acetylene manufacturing;
      (2)   Acid manufacturing;
      (3)   Asbestos manufacturing;
      (4)   Automobile reduction yard;
      (5)   Boiler shops, machine shops, roundhouses where hammers or presses
of 20-ton rated capacity are used;
      (6)   Concrete block plants, ready-mix;
      (7)   Disinfectant and insecticide or poison manufacturing;
      (8)   Dye and dye stuff manufacturing;
      (9)   Explosive materials;
      (10)   Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacturing;
      (11)   Flammable liquid storage;
      (12)   Foundry, casting lightweight non-ferrous metals;
      (13)   Junk yard;
      (14)   Lime or lime products;
      (15)   Planing mill, lumber mill and veneer manufacturing;
      (16)   Ready-mix and concrete block plants;
      (17)   Waste incinerators;
      (18)   Structures in excess of 40 feet in height; and
      (19)   Adult entertainment uses.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses. Within any I-1 Industrial District, the
following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
      (1)   Signs as regulated in this chapter;
      (2)   Residential structures for security when related to a principal
use; and
      (3)   Exterior storage.
   (D)   Lot area, heights, lot width and yard requirements.
      (1)   Side yards abutting a street on a corner lot shall not be less than
20 feet in width.
      (2)   Where a use has railroad trackage abutting the side or rear of a
site, a variance may be granted to the side or rear yard requirements to
provide for a railroad loading facility.
      (3)   Front yard shall not be less than 35 feet.
      (4)   Side yard shall not be less than 20 feet.
      (5)   Lot area shall not be less than 15,000 square feet.
      (6)   Lot width shall not be less than 100 feet.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 131, passed 7-25-1995; Ord. 163, passed 7-22-
2003)
§ 152.098 CONSERVANCY DISTRICT (CD).
   (A)   Purpose. The Conservancy District is established to preserve and
perpetuate in an open state, certain areas, such as wetlands, marshes,
woodlands and other areas of aesthetic and scenic value which, because of their
physical features, are desirable as water retention areas, natural habitat for
plant and animal life, green space or are being used for public purposes.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a right in the CD
Conservancy District:
      (1)   Outdoor recreational uses operated by a governmental agency or
conservation group, homeowners or private association and facilities for making
same useful to public or association. Public lands, schools, parks and
municipal buildings;
      (2)   Open space areas connected with residential, commercial and
industrial planned unit development;
      (3)   Conservation uses including drainage control, forestry, wildlife
sanctuaries and facilities for making same available and useful to public;
      (4)   Cemeteries; and
      (5)   Nature study areas and arboretums.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Farm residences; single-family non-farm residences;
general farming and related buildings; horticulture; field crops; dairying;
accessory buildings; kennel. A conditional use permit for a single-family non-
farm residence will not be required if a lot area is 35 acres or more and has a
minimum lot width of at least 600 feet.
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Private garages; home occupations; carports;
fences; residential recreation equipment; off-street parking; nameplate signs;
gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted
within a building; decorative landscape features; and the keeping of not more
than two boarders or roomers by a resident family.
   (E)   Minimum lot area and yard requirements.
      (1)   Lot size requirements.
 
Minimum lot area  5 acres
Minimum lot width 100 feet
 
      (2)   Yard regulations.
 
Front yard 75 feet from centerline of public road
Rear yard  50 feet
Side yards 40 feet or 75 feet corner lot from centerline of a public road
 
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 175, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 184, passed 3-11-
2008)
§ 152.099 MINERAL MINING DISTRICT (MM).
   (A)   Purpose. To identify areas of existing and potential mineral mining,
processing, storage and loading, tailings and waste disposal and accessory and
support activities required for proper operation of mining activities located
outside of the limits of the open pit and ore formation and to assure the
compatibility of these uses to other uses within the city.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Mineral mining including all ancillary activities
necessary for management, operation and uses involved in the mineral
extraction, processing, transportation and disposal of waste as regulated by
the state.
   (C)   Conditional uses. All mineral mining activity shall conform to
regulations of the state.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.100 SHORELAND MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Statutory authorization and policy.
      (1)   Statutory authorization. This shoreland section is adopted pursuant
to the authorization and policies contained in M.S. Chapter 103F, as it may be
amended from time to time, Minnesota Regulations parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900,
and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 394 (for
counties) or Chapter 462 (for municipalities), as they may be amended from time
to time.
      (2)   Policy.
         (a)   The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city affects the
public health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution
of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in
the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the
wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands responsibility to local
governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of
the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of
shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources.
         (b)   This responsibility is hereby recognized by the city.
   (B)   General provisions and definitions.
      (1)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this section shall apply to the
shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in §§
152.030 through
152.053 of this chapter. Pursuant to Minnesota Regulations parts 61200.2500 to
6120.3900, no lake, pond or flowage less than ten acres in size in
municipalities or 25 acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated in
a local government’s shoreland regulations. A body of water created by a
private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of
the governing body, be exempt from this section.   
      (2)   Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and
shape of lots; the use, size, type and location of structures on lots; the
installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems, the
grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation;
and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this
section and other applicable regulations.
      (3)   Enforcement. The city is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this section. Any violation of the provisions of this section or
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or
conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
defined by law. Violations of this section can occur regardless of whether or
not a permit is required for a regulated activity pursuant to division (C)(1)
below.
      (4)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall
be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
      (5)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
section is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall not be affected thereby.
      (6)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this
section to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this section imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this section shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this section are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
      (7)   Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning
as they have in common usage and so as to give this section its most reasonable
application. For the purpose of this section, the words “must” and “shall” are
mandatory and not permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall
be measured horizontally.
         ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. Any building or improvement
subordinate to a principal use which, because of the nature of its use, can
reasonably be located at or greater than normal structure setbacks.
         BLUFF. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment
having the following characteristic (an area with an average slope of less than
18% over a distance for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the
BLUFF):
            1.   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
            2.   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water
level of the waterbody;
            3.   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25
feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater; and
            4.   The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
         BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the
top of a bluff.
         BOATHOUSE. A structure designed and used solely for the storage of
boats or boating equipment.
         BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high
water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
         COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. Typically uses that provide
transient, short-term lodging spaces, rooms or parcels and their operations are
essentially service-oriented. For example, hotel/motel accommodations, resorts,
recreational vehicle and camping parks, and other primarily service-oriented
activities are COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
         COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for the sale,
lease, rental or trade of products, goods and services.
         COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
         CONDITIONAL USE. A land use or development as defined by ordinance
that would not be appropriate generally but may be allowed with appropriate
restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that certain
conditions as detailed in the zoning regulations exist, the use or development
conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of the community and the use is
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
         DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached
railing, seats, trellises or other features, attached or functionally related
to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three feet
above ground.
         DUPLEX, TRIPLEX AND QUAD. A dwelling structure on a single lot, having
two, three and four units, respectively, being attached by common walls and
each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living and
sanitation facilities.
         DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by one or
more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and
recreational vehicle sites.
         DWELLING UNIT. Any structure or portion of a structure, or other
shelter designed as short- or long-term living quarters for one or more
persons, including rental or timeshare accommodations such as motel, hotel and
resort rooms and cabins.
         EXTRACTIVE USE. The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of
sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals and peat
not regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may be amended from time to
time.
         FOREST LAND CONVERSION. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare
for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.
         GUEST COTTAGE. A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain
sleeping spaces and kitchen and bathroom facilities in addition to those
provided in the primary dwelling unit on a lot.
         HARDSHIP. The same meaning as that term is defined in M.S. Chapter 394
(for counties), as it may be amended from time to time, or M.S. Chapter 462
(for municipalities), as it may be amended from time to time.
         HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance between the highest
adjoining ground level at the building or ten feet above the lowest ground
level, whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof or average
height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.   
         INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage or transfer of goods, products, commodities
or other wholesale items.
         INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or shrubs
in a contiguous patch, strip, row or block.
         LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered
land survey, Auditor’s plot or other accepted means and separated from other
parcels or portions by the description for the purpose of sale, lease or
separation.
         LOT WIDTH. The shortest distance between lot lines measured at the
midpoint of the building line.
         NONCONFORMITY. Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in
existence, recorded or authorized before the adoption of official controls or
amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become established
under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the official
controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded or
authorized.
         ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters and wetlands,
and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominately terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
         PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development characterized by a
unified site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a
parcel, whether for sale, rent or lease, and also usually involving clustering
of these units or sites to provide areas of common open space, density
increases, and a mix of structure types and land uses. These developments may
be organized and operated as condominiums, time-share condominiums,
cooperatives, full free ownership, commercial enterprises, or any combination
of these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units, residential condominiums,
townhouses, apartment buildings, campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks,
resorts, hotels, motels and conversions of structures and land uses to these
uses.
         PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, subds. 15 and
15a, as they may be amended from time to time.
         RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A use where the nature of
residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development is
not service-oriented. For example, residential apartments, manufactured home
parks, time-share condominiums, townhouses, cooperatives and full fee ownership
residences would be considered as RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. To
qualify as a RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, a development must contain
at least five dwelling units or sites.
         SEMIPUBLIC USE. The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization
to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the
regular constituency or the organization.
         SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management of
areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such
as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive
soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding or occurrence of flora or fauna
in need of special protection.
         SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage
treatment system or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage
treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line or other
facility.
         SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A septic tank and soil absorption system or
other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and
regulated in division (E)(8) below.
         SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main,
and all other construction, devices, appliances or appurtenances used for
conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.
         SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
structure setback.
         SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from public
waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or
flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a
floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater.
The limits of SHORELANDS may be reduced whenever the waters involved are
bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser
distances and when approved by the Commissioner.
         SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing structure
or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National
Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic
Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the
provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to time. A HISTORIC
SITE meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it
is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the
Minnesota State Archaeologist or the Director of the State Historical Society.
All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be SIGNIFICANT
HISTORIC SITES.      
         STEEP SLOPE. Land where agricultural activity or development is either
not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the
site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil
surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction
techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Where specific information is not available, STEEP SLOPES are
lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over horizontal distances of
50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
         STRUCTURE. Any building or appurtenance, including decks, except
aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone,
telegraph, gas lines, towers, poles and other supporting facilities.
         SUBDIVISION. Land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent or
lease, including planned unit developments.
         SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for commercial
purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral
part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts and restaurants
with transient docking facilities are examples of that use.
         TOE OF THE BLUFF. The lower point of a 50-foot segment with an average
slope exceeding 18%.
         TOP OF THE BLUFF. The higher point of a 50-foot segment with an
average slope exceeding 18%.
         VARIANCE. The same meaning as that term is defined or described in
M.S. Chapter 394 (for counties), as it may be amended from time to time or M.S.
Chapter 462 (for municipalities), as it may be amended from time to time.
         WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. A small, above-ground
building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks and retaining
walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water
feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal
structure setback. Examples of these structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses and detached
decks.
         WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition).
   (C)   Administration.
      (1)   Permits required.
         (a)   A permit is required for the construction of buildings or
building additions (and including those related activities such as construction
of decks and signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment
systems, and those grading and filling activities not exempted by division (E)
(3) below. Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer on the
forms provided. The application shall include the necessary information so that
the Zoning Officer can determine the site’s suitability for the intended use
and that a complaint sewage treatment system will be provided.
         (b)   A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall
stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system, as defined
by division (E)(8) below shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Certificate of zoning compliance. The Zoning Officer shall issue a
certificate of zoning compliance for each activity requiring a permit as
specified in division (C)(1) above. This certificate will specify that the use
of land conforms to the requirements of this chapter. Any use, arrangement or
construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a
violation of this section and shall be punishable as provided in division (B)
(3) above and §
152.999.
      (3)   Variances.
         (a)   Variances may only be granted in accordance with M.S. Chapter
394 (for counties), as it may be amended from time to time or M.S. Chapter 462
(for municipalities), as it may be amended from time to time, as applicable. A
variance may not circumvent the general purposes and intent of this section. No
variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the
zoning district in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be
imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect
adjacent properties and the public interest. In considering a variance request,
the Board of Adjustment must also consider whether the property owner has
reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the property is used
seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being requested solely on the
basis of economic considerations, and the characteristics of development on
adjacent properties.
         (b)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for
variances in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of
business. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources
has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the
approved variance required in division (C)(4)(b) below shall also include the
Board of Adjustment’s summary of the public record/testimony and the findings
of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance.
         (c)   For existing developments, the application for variance must
clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for
the intended use of the property. The variance, is issued, must require
reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment system.
      (4)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
         (a)   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider
variances, amendments or conditional uses under local shoreland management
controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated
representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearings. Notices of
hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats must include copies of the
subdivision/plat.
         (b)   A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final
decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s
designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action.
   (D)   Designation of types of land use.
      (1)   Shoreland management classification. In order to guide the wise
development and utilization of shorelands of protected waters for the
preservation of water quality, natural characteristics, economic values and the
general health, safety and welfare, certain public waters in the city have been
given a shoreland management classification, consistent with the criteria found
in Minnesota Regulations part 6120.3300 and the Protected Waters Inventory Map
for St. Louis County, Minnesota.
      (2)   Classifications. These protected waters of the city have been
classified as follows:
Natural Environment Lakes      DNR I.D.#
   Whitewater Lake          69-376 P
Recreational Development Lakes DNR I.D.#
   Colby Lake               69-249 P
Tributary Streams*             Legal Desc.
   Partridge River          Sections 6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16 in 58-14
   Second Creek             Sections 19, 20, 30 in 58-14 beginning at County
                               Road 666 in Section 20
   Unnamed stream           Sections 33, 59-14 and Sections 4 and 5, 58-14
   Wyman Creek              Section 23, 24, 26, 27, 34 in 59-14 and Sections
                               3 and 4, 58-14
   Unnamed to Colby Lake    From Section 31, T59, R14 to Section 6, T58, R14
                               to Section 6, T58, R14
*   All protected watercourses in the city shown on the Protected Waters
Inventory Map for St. Louis County, a copy of which is hereby adopted by
reference, shall be considered tributary.
The following water classifications are not present in the jurisdiction of the
city: general development lakes; remote rivers; forested rivers; transition
rivers; agricultural rivers; and urban rivers.
 
      (3)   Land use district descriptions.
         (a)   Criteria for designation. The land use districts in the
delineation of land use district’s boundaries on the official zoning map, must
be consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive land
use plan (when available) and the following criteria, considerations and
objectives.
         (b)   General considerations and criteria for all land uses.
            1.   Preservation of natural areas;
            2.   Present ownership and development of shoreland areas;
            3.   Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities;
            4.   Topographic characteristics;
            5.   Vegetative cover;
            6.   In-water physical characteristics, values and constraints;
            7.   Recreational use of the surface water;
            8.   Road and service center accessibility;
            9.   Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they involve
water and related land resources;
            10.   The land requirements of industry which, by its nature,
requires location in shoreland areas; and
            11.   The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having
significant historical or ecological value.
      (c)   Factors and criteria for planned unit developments.
            1.   Existing recreational use of the surface waters and likely
increases in use associated with planned unit developments;
            2.   Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density;
            3.   Suitability of lands for the planned unit development
approach;
            4.   Level of current development in area; and
            5.   Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped lands.
   (E)   Zoning and water supply/sanitary provisions.
      (1)   Lot area and width standards. The lot area (in square feet) and lot
width standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex and quad residential lots
created after the date of enactment of this section for the lake and river/
stream classifications are the following.
         (a)   Unsewered lakes.
            1.   Natural environment.
 
        Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots
        Area    Width Area    Width
Duplex  120,000 300   160,000 400
Quad    200,000 500   320,000 800
Single  80,000  200   80,000  200
Triplex 160,000 400   240,000 600
 
            2.   Recreational development.
 
        Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots
        Area    Width Area    Width
Duplex  80,000  225   80,000  265
Quad    160,000 375   160,000 490
Single  40,000  150   40,000  150
Triplex 120,000 300   120,000 375
 
            3.   General development.
 
        Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots
        Area   Width  Area    Width
Duplex  40,000 180    80,000  265
Quad    80,000 340    160,000 490
Single  20,000 100    40,000  150
Triplex 60,000 260    120,000 375
 
         (b)   Sewered lakes.
            1.   Natural environment.
 
        Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots
        Area    Width Area   Width
Duplex  70,000  225   35,000 220
Quad    130,000 425   65,000 410
Single  40,000  125   20,000 125
Triplex 100,000 325   52,000 315
 
            2.   Recreational development.
 
        Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots
        Area   Width  Area   Width
Duplex  35,000 135    26,000 135
Quad    65,000 255    49,000 245
Single  20,000 75     15,000 75
Triplex 50,000 195    38,000 190
 
            3.   General development.
 
        Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots
        Area   Width  Area   Width
Duplex  26,000 135    17,500 135
Quad    49,000 255    32,500 245
Single  15,000 75     10,000 75
Triplex 38,000 195    25,000 190
 
         (c)   River/stream lot width standards. There is no minimum lot size
requirements for rivers and streams. The lot width standards for single,
duplex, triplex and quad residential developments for the six river/stream
classifications are:
 
        Remote Forested Transition Agricultural Tributary
                                                No Sewer Sewer
Duplex  450    300      375        225          150      115
Quad    750    500      625        375          250      190
Single  300    200      250        150          100      75
Triplex 600    400      500        300          200      150
 
         (d)   Additional special provisions.
            1.   Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities
exceeding those in the tables in divisions (E)(1)(b) and (E)(1)(c) above can
only be allowed if designed and approved as residential planned unit
developments under division (H) below. Only land above the ordinary high water
level of public waters can be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width
standards must be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building
line. The sewer lot area dimensions in division (E)(1)(b) above can only be
used if publicly owned sewer system service is available to the property.
            2.   Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes and quads on natural
environment lakes must also meet the following standards:
               a.   Each building must be set back at least 200 feet from the
ordinary high water level;
               b.   Each building must have common sewage treatment and water
systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building;
               c.   Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be
centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and
               d.   No more than 25% of a lake’s shoreline can be in duplex,
triplex or quad developments.
            3.   One guest cottage may be allowed on lots meeting or exceeding
the duplex lot area and width dimensions presented in divisions (E)(1)(a), (E)
(1)(b) and (E)(1)(c) above, provided the following standards are met:
               a.   For lots exceeding the minimum lot dimensions of duplex
lots, the guest cottage must be located within the smallest duplex-sized lot
that could be created including the principal dwelling unit;
               b.   A guest cottage must not cover more than 700 square feet of
land surface and must not exceed 15 feet in height; and
               c.   A guest cottage must be located or designed to reduce its
visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation,
topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer leaf-on conditions.
            4.   Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as
recreation areas for use by owners of nonriparian lots within subdivisions are
permissible and must meet or exceed the following standards:
               a.   They must meet the width and size requirements for
residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access
lots; and
               b.   If docking, mooring or over-water storage of more than six
watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the
lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by the percent of the
requirements for riparian residential lots for each watercraft beyond six,
consistent with the following table:
 
Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements
Ratio of Lake Size to Shore Length  Required Increase in Frontage (Percent)
(Acres/Mile)
Less than 100                       25
100—200                           20
201—300                           15
301—400                           10
Greater than 400                    5
 
               c.   They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the
subdivision or by all purchasers of nonriparian lots in the subdivision who are
provided riparian access rights on the access lot; and
               d.   Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments must
be developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot
and what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft
launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring or docking. They must also
include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly
conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment of normal
property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of the nonsignificant
conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing or picnicking. The covenants
must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total
number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked or stored over
water, and must require centralization of all common facilities and activities
in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize topographic and
vegetation alterations. They must also require all parking areas, storage
buildings and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as
much as practical from view from the public water, assuming summer leaf-on
conditions.
      (2)   Placement, design and height of structures.
         (a)   Placement of structures on lots. When more than one setback
applies to a site, structures and facilities must be located to meet all
setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a
proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to
conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided
the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff
impact zone. Structures shall be located as follows.
            1.   Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks (in feet) from
ordinary high water level.*
Classes of Public Waters Structures        Sewage Treatment System
                         Unsewered Sewered
Classes of Public Waters            Structures        Sewage Treatment System
                                    Unsewered Sewered
Lakes
   General development           75        50      50
   Natural environment           150       150     150
   Recreational development      100       75      75
Rivers
   Agriculture, urban and tributa100       50      75
   Forested and transition       150       150     100
   Remote                        200       200     150
*   One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with
division (E)(2)(b) below may be set back a minimum distance of ten feet from
the ordinary high water level.
 
            2.   Additional structure setbacks. The following additional
structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the waterbody:
 
Setback From:                                                Setback (in feet)
Right-of-way line of federal, state or county highway        50
Right-of-way line of town road, public street or other roads 20
or streets not classified
Top of bluff                                                 30
Unplatted cemetery                                           50
 
            3.   Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory facilities,
except stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.
            4.   Uses without water-oriented needs. Uses without water-oriented
needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if
located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set back
double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially
screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer
leaf-on conditions.
         (b)   Design criteria for structures.
            1.   High water elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance
with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do
not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is
placed or flood-proofed must be determined as follows:
               a.   For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least
three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the
ordinary high water level, whichever is higher;
               b.   For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at
least three feet above the flood of record, if data is available. If data is
not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the
ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine
effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows and to
establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three approaches, technical
evaluations must be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with
Minnesota Rules parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200 governing the management of
floodplain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood
protection elevation determined must be used for placing structures and other
facilities; and
               c.   Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest
floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this division (E)(2)(b)1.c.
if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation,
electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if long
duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice
action and wind-driven waves and debris.
            2.   Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have one
water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback in
division (E)(2)(a) above if this water-oriented accessory structure complies
with the following provisions:
               a.   The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in
height, except for boat houses which must not exceed 14 feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square
feet. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point;
               b.   The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary
high water level must be at least ten feet;
               c.   The structure or facility must be treated to reduce
visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation,
topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer leaf-on conditions;
               d.   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must
not be enclosed or used as a storage area;
               e.   The structure or facility must not be designed or used for
human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment
facilities; and
               f.   As an alternative for general development and recreational
development water bodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for
watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating and water-oriented
sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square feet provided the
maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured parallel to the
configuration of the shoreline.
            3.   Stairways, lifts and landings. Stairways and lifts are the
preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up
and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet
the following design requirements:
               a.   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public
open-space recreational properties, and planned unit developments;
               b.   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must
not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be
used for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties and
planned unit developments;
               c.   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or
landings;
               d.   Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed
above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they
are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion;
               e.   Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
               f.   Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths for
physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore
areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of divisions (E)
(2)(b)3.a. to (E)(2)(b)3.f. are complied with in addition to the requirements
of Minnesota Regulations Chapter 1340.
            4.   Significant historic sites. No structure may be placed on a
significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site
unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a
public repository.
            5.   Steep slopes. The Zoning Officer must evaluate possible soil
erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a
permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways,
structures or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary,
conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to
preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles and other
facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer leaf-on
vegetation.
         (c)   Height of structures. All structures in residential districts,
except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, must not exceed 25
feet in height.
      (3)   Shoreland alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography
will be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients,
preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping
and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
         (a)   Vegetation alterations.
            1.   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of
structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and
parking areas regulated by division (E)(4) below are exempt from the vegetation
alteration standards that follow.
            2.   The removal of natural vegetation (i.e., trees, shrubs and
plants) within the shore and bluff impact zones is restricted and limited to
the following:
               a.   The trimming and pruning of trees, shrubs and plants;
               b.   The random pattern removal of 25% of trees (greater than
two inches in diameter at breast height), shrubs and plants. Note: this means
that no more than 25% of the trees may be removed between the principal
structure and the waterbody within the impact zone, and 25% vegetative removal
standard throughout the shore impact zone. The random pattern removal means
that clear cutting is not permitted with the exception that a clear cut path of
no greater width than ten feet for access to the shoreline is permitted. This
path clearing is to be included in determining the not to exceed total clearing
of 25%;
               c.   Authorized removal of trees, shrubs and plants shall be
accomplished through human means (i.e., hands, ax, chain saw, saw and the
like), and shall not be done by heavy equipment; and
               d.   If for any reason the above 25% maximum is exceeded (such
as the removal of dead, diseased, dangerous and storm or fire damaged trees,
plants or shrubs) then the vegetation must be replaced except under the
following conditions:
                  i.   The vegetation removed is replaced with trees, shrubs
and plants that have similar, or more, beneficial ecological, erosion
preventative and screening values than previously existed;
                  ii.   Forest management activity where the intent is to have
an ongoing timber producing area and not to convert the area to residential,
commercial, recreational or other more intensive use will use best management
practices as developed by the state; and
                  iii.   The removal of more than 25% of trees is permitted
when the trees were planted as part of a plantation and thinning is needed to
ensure continued viability of the plantation.
         (b)   Topographic alterations/grading and filling.
            1.   Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the
construction of structures, sewage treatment systems and driveways under
validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the
issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and
filling standards in this section must be incorporated into the issuance of
permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems and driveways.
            2.   Public roads and parking areas are regulated by division (E)
(4) below.
            3.   Notwithstanding divisions (E)(3)(b)1. and (E)(3)(b)2. above, a
grading and filling permit will be required for:
               a.   The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on
steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
               b.   The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material
outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
            4.   The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to
during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits,
conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals:
               a.   i.   Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8
wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity
would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland:*
                     A.   Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
                     B.   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood
damage;
                     C.   Fish and wildlife habitat;
                     D.   Recreational use;
                     E.   Shoreline or bank stabilization; and
                     F.   Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as
historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals or
others.
                  ii.   * This evaluation must also include a determination of
whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews or
approvals by other local, state or federal agencies such as a watershed
district, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the United States
Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant will be so advised.
               b.   Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bar ground is exposed for the shortest time
possible;
               c.   Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary,
for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be
established as soon as possible;
               d.   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments
before they reach any surface water feature must be used;
               e.   Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion
control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the
local soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil
Conservation Service;
               f.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner
that creates an unstable slope;
               g.   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes
must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and
must not create finished slopes of 30% or greater;
               h.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff
impact zones;
               i.   Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of
public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner under M.S. §
103G.245, as it may be amended from time to time;
               j.   Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent
or nearby properties; and
               k.   Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated
grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the
finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the
landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water
level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does
not exceed three feet.
            5.   Connections to public waters. Excavations where the intended
purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons
and harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for
excavations may be given only after the Commissioner has approved the proposed
connection to public waters.
      (4)   Placement and design of roads, driveways and parking areas.
         (a)   Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to
take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum
screening from view from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a
qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and
constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with
the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation
district, or other applicable technical materials.
         (b)   Roads, driveways and parking areas must meet structure setbacks
and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist,
they may be placed within these areas, and must be designed to minimize adverse
impacts.
         (c)   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this division (E)(4)
(c) above are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions
of division (E)(3)(b) above must be met.
      (5)   Storm water management. The following general and specific
standards shall apply.
         (a)   General standards.
            1.   When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter and retain storm
water runoff before discharge to public waters.
            2.   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that
will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be
stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to
retain sediment on the site.
            3.   When development density, topographic features and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm water
runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed
facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation and infiltration rather than buried pipes and
human-made materials and facilities.
         (b)   Specific standards.
            1.   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25% of the
lot area.
            2.   When constructed facilities are used for storm water
management, documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that they
are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of
the local soil and water conservation districts.
            3.   New constructed storm water outfalls to public waters must
provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface
debris before discharge.
      (6)   Special provisions for commercial, industrial, public/semipublic,
agricultural, forestry and extractive uses and mining of metallic minerals and
peat.
         (a)   Standards for commercial, industrial, public and semipublic
uses.
            1.   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public,
or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public
waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those
uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards:
               a.   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks
and other zoning standards in this section, the uses must be designed to
incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and
structures;
               b.   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons
must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstruction of
navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
               c.   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use
signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the
following general standards:
                  i.   No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs
may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety
messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a
permit issued by the County Sheriff;
                  ii.   Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore
impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to
convey needed information. They must only convey the location and name of the
establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs
must not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices,
must not be located higher than ten feet above the ground, and must not exceed
32 square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be
shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across the public waters; and
                  iii.   Other outside lighting may be located within the shore
impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate
potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent
direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of
navigational lights.
            2.   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or
parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with
public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high
water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water
vegetation or topography, assuming summer leaf-on conditions.
         (b)   Agriculture use standards.
            1.   General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, sod farming and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep
slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation
or operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems)
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation districts or the United States Soil Conservation Service, as
provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore impact zone for parcels
with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50
feet from the ordinary high water level.
            2.   Animal feedlots must meet the following standards:
               a.   New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland of
watercourses or in bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum setback of 300
feet from the ordinary high water level of all public waters basins; and
               b.   Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are
located within 300 feet from the ordinary high water level or within a bluff
impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing
ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact zones.
         (c)   Forest management standards. The harvesting of timber and
associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of
the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions
of Water Quality in Forest Management Best Management Practices Minnesota.
         (d)   Extractive use standards.
            1.   Site development and restoration plan. An extractive use site
development and restoration plan must be developed, approved and followed over
the course of operation of the site. The plan must address dust, noise,
possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated
vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be
taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly
erosion, and must clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after
extractive activities end.
            2.   Setbacks for processing machinery. Processing machinery must
be located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high
water levels of public waters and from bluffs.
         (e)   Mining of metallic minerals and peat. Mining of metallic
minerals and peat, as defined in M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may be amended
from time to time, shall be a permitted use provided the provisions of M.S. §§
93.44 to 93.51, as they may be amended from time to time, are satisfied.
      (7)   Conditional uses. Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas
shall be subject to the review and approval procedures, and criteria and
conditions for review of conditional uses established community-wide. The
following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply within shoreland
areas:
         (a)   Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and
the topographic, vegetation and soils conditions on the site must be made to
ensure:
            1.   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction;
            2.   The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed
from public waters is limited;
            3.   The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment; and
            4.   The types, uses and numbers of watercraft that the project
will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to
safely accommodate these watercraft.
         (b)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. The city, upon
consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this section,
shall attach conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section. These conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
            2.   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the
requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and
            3.   Special provisions for the location, design and use of
structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas,
and vehicle parking areas.
      (8)   Water supply and sewage treatment.
         (a)   Water supply. Any public or private supply of water for domestic
purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota
Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
         (b)   Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows.
            1.   Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where available.
            2.   All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s standards for individual sewage treatment
systems contained in the document titled, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems
Standards, Chapter 7080, a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this section.
            3.   On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back from the
ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in division
(E)(2)(a) above.
            4.   a.   All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment
systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in divisions (E)(8)
(b)1. through (E)(8)(b)4. If the determination of a site’s suitability cannot
be made with publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the
responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings and
percolation tests from on-site field investigations.
               b.   Evaluation criteria:
                  i.   Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water
table or bedrock;
                  ii.   Soil conditions, properties and permeability;
                  iii.   Slope; and
                  iv.   The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions
and rock outcrops.
            5.   Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and
upgraded in accordance with division (F)(3) below.
   (F)   Nonconformities. All legally established nonconformities as of the
date of this section may continue, but they will be managed according to
applicable state statutes and other regulations of this community for the
subjects of alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of
use, and intensification if use; except that the following standards will also
apply in shoreland areas.
      (1)   Construction on nonconforming lots of record.
         (a)   Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on the date
enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of
division (E)(1) above may be allowed as building sites without variances from
lot size requirements provided the use is permitted in the zoning district, the
lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it
became substandard, was created compliant with official controls in effect at
the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements of this section are
met.
         (b)   A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any
use, sewage treatment system or zoning permit is issued for a lot. In
evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider sewage
treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall
deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.
         (c)   If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same
ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of division (E)(1)
above the lot must nor be considered as a separate parcel of land for the
purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one or more
contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the
requirements of division (E)(1) above as much as possible.
      (2)   Additions/expansions to nonconforming structures.
         (a)   All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an
existing nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height and other
requirements of division (E) above. Any deviation from these requirements must
be authorized by a variance pursuant to division (C)(3) above.
         (b)   Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure
not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of
the following criteria and standards are met:
            1.   The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were
established;
            2.   A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no
reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high
water level setback of the structure;
            3.   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level
does not exceed 15% of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary
high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more
restrictive; and
            4.   The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed
or screened.
      (3)   Nonconforming sewage treatment systems.
            1.   A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of
division (E)(8) above must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or
variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the
property. For the purposes of this division (F)(3), a sewage treatment system
shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage
treatment system’s improper setback from the ordinary high water level.
            2.   The governing body of the city has by formal resolution
notified the Commissioner of its program to identify nonconforming sewage
treatment systems. The city will require upgrading or replacement of any
nonconforming system identified by this program within a reasonable period of
time which will not exceed two years. Sewage systems installed according to all
applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under M.S. § 105.485
(now M.S. §§ 103F.201-.221, as they may be amended from time to time) in effect
at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are
determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits,
seepage pits or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil
treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency’s Chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment
systems, shall be considered nonconforming.
   (G)   Subdivision/platting provisions.
      (1)   Land suitability. Each lot created through subdivision, including
planned unit developments authorized under division (H) below, must be suitable
in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability
analysis by the local unit of government shall consider susceptibility to
flooding existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe
limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography,
inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic
conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife
habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of the
natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of future
residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
      (2)   Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions must conform to all
official controls of this community. A subdivision will not be approved where a
later variance from one or more standards in official controls would be needed
to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by publicly
owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless
domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent
with divisions (E)(2) and (E)(8) above can be provided for every lot. Each lot
shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of division (E)(1)
above, including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is free of
limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment
systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be approved.
      (3)   Information requirements. Sufficient information must be submitted
by the applicant for the community to make a determination of land suitability.
The information shall include at least the following:
         (a)   The surface water features required in M.S. § 505.021, subd. 8,
as it may amended from time to time, to be shown on plats, obtained from United
States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;
         (b)   Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building
and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current
existing sources or from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation
tests or other methods;
         (c)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent
of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic
conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments and aquatic vegetation;
and proposed methods for controlling storm water runoff and erosion, both
during and after construction activities;
         (d)   Location of 100-year floodplain areas and floodway districts
from existing adopted maps or data; and
         (e)   A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level,
the “toe” and the “top” of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances
from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.
      (4)   Dedications. When a land or easement dedication is a condition of
subdivision approval, the approval must provide easements over natural drainage
or ponding areas for management of storm water and significant wetlands.
      (5)   Platting. No permit for construction of buildings or sewage
treatment systems shall be issued for lots created after these official
controls were enacted unless the lot was approved as part of a formal
subdivision.
      (6)   Controlled access or recreational lots. Lots intended as controlled
accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by nonriparian
lots within a subdivision must meet or exceed the sizing criteria in division
(E)(1)(d) above.
   (H)   Planned unit developments (PUDs).
      (1)   Types of PUDs permissible. Planned unit developments (PUDs) are
allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redeveloped of previously built
sites or conversions of existing buildings and land.
      (2)   Processing of PUDs. Planned unit developments must be processed as
a conditional use, except that an expansion to an existing commercial PUD
involving six or less new dwelling units or sites since the date this section
was adopted is permissible as a permitted use provided the total project
density does not exceed the allowable densities calculated in the project
density evaluation procedures in division (H)(5) below. Approval cannot occur
until the environmental review process (EAW/EIS) is complete.
      (3)   Application for a PUD. The applicant for a PUD must submit the
following documents prior to final action being taken on the application
request:
         (a)   A site plan and/or plat for the project showing locations of
property boundaries, surface water features, existing and proposed structures
and other facilities, land alterations, sewage treatment and water supply
systems (where public systems will not be provided), and topographic contours
at ten-foot intervals or less. When a PUD is a combined commercial and
residential development, the site plan and/or plat must indicate and
distinguish which buildings and portions of the project are residential,
commercial or a combination of the two;
         (b)   A property owners association agreement (for residential PUDs)
with mandatory membership, and all in accordance with the requirements of
division (H)(6) below;
         (c)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other
instruments that:
            1.   Properly address future vegetative and topographic
alterations, construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft and
construction of commercial buildings in residential PUDs; and
            2.   Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance of open
space in accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in division (H)(6)
below.
         (d)   When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the project and
the floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied; and
         (e)   Those additional documents as requested by the city that are
necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed and will function.
      (4)   Site “suitable area” evaluation. Proposed new or expansions to
existing planned unit developments must be evaluated using the following
procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/
dwelling site density evaluation in division (H)(5) below.
         (a)   The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating one or
more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high
water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:
 
Shoreland Tier Dimensions
                                       Unsewered (feet) Sewered (feet)
All river classes                      300              300
General development lakes - first tier 200              200
General development lakes - second and 267              200
additional tiers
Natural environment lakes              400              320
Recreational development lakes         267              267
 
         (b)   The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by
excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs or land below the ordinary
high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project
are then subjected to either the residential or commercial planned unit
development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of
dwelling units or sites.
      (5)   Residential and commercial PUD density evaluation. The procedures
for determining the “base” density of a PUD and density increase multipliers
are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any
other tier further from the waterbody, but must not be transferred to any other
tier closer.
         (a)   Residential PUD “base” density evaluation.
            1.   The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single
residential lot size standard for lakes or, for rivers, the single residential
lot width standard times the tier depth, unless the local unit of government
has specified an alternative minimum lot size for rivers which shall then be
used to yield a base density of dwelling units or sites for each tier.
            2.   Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for
the residential planned unit developments are then compared with the tier,
density and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in division (H)
(6) below.
         (b)   Commercial PUD “base” density evaluation.
            1.   Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling
units or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and
sites. Computation of inside living area sizes need not include decks, patios,
stoops, steps, garages or porches and basements, unless they are habitable
space.
            2.   Select the appropriate floor area ration from the following
table:
Commercial Planned Unit Development
Floor Area Ratios*
Public Waters Classes
                    Sewered General    Second and
                    Development Lakes; Additional Tiers on
                    First Tier on      Unsewered General
*Average Unit Floor Unsewered General  Development Lakes;  Natural Environment
Area (Square Feet)  Development Lakes; Recreational Lakes; Lakes; Remote River
                    Urban,             Transition and      Segments
                    Agricultural,      Forested River
                    Tributary River    Segments
                    Segments
Commercial Planned Unit Development
Floor Area Ratios*
Public Waters Classes
                    Sewered General    Second and
                    Development Lakes; Additional Tiers on
                    First Tier on      Unsewered General
*Average Unit Floor Unsewered General  Development Lakes;  Natural Environment
Area (Square Feet)  Development Lakes; Recreational Lakes; Lakes; Remote River
                    Urban,             Transition and      Segments
                    Agricultural,      Forested River
                    Tributary River    Segments
                    Segments
200                 .040               .020                .010
300                 .048               .024                .012
400                 .056               .028                .014
500                 .065               .032                .016
600                 .072               .038                .019
700                 .082               .042                .021
800                 .091               .046                .023
900                 .099               .050                .025
1,000               .108               .054                .027
1,100               .116               .058                .029
1,200               .125               .064                .032
1,300               .133               .068                .034
1,400               .142               .072                .036
1,500               .150               .075                .038
*   For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios
listed for 200 square feet. For areas greater than shown, use the ratios
listed for 1,500 square feet. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios
listed at 400 square feet. Manufactured home sites in recreational camping
areas shall use a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if
unknown, the ratio listed for 1,000 square feet.
 
            3.   Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area
ration to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling
units or sites.
            4.   Divide the total floor area by tier computed in division (H)
(5)(b)3. above by the average inside living area size determined in division
(H)(5)(b)1. above. This yields a base number of dwelling units and sites for
each tier.
            5.   Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for
the commercial planned unit development are then compared with the tier,
density and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in division (H)
(6) below.
            6.   Density increase multipliers.
               a.   Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base
densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in
division (E) above are met or exceeded and the design criteria in division (H)
(6) below are satisfied. The allowable density increases in division (H)(5)
(b)6.b. below will only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high
water level are increased to at least 50% greater than the minimum setback, or
the impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative
management, topography or additional means acceptable to the local unit of
government and the setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum setback.
               b.   Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density increases
for residential or commercial planned unit developments:
 
Density Evaluation Tiers Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier (Percent)
First                    50
Second                   100
Third                    200
Fourth                   200
Fifth                    200
 
      (6)   Maintenance and design criteria.
         (a)   Maintenance and administration requirements.
            1.   Before final approval of a planned unit development, adequate
provisions must be developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of
open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development.
            2.   Open space preservation: deed restrictions, covenants,
permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally
effective and permanent means must be provided to ensure long-term preservation
and maintenance of open space. The instruments must include all of the
following protections:
               a.   Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUDs);
               b.   Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routing
maintenance prohibited;
               c.   Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles
and other materials prohibited; and
               d.   Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited.
            3.   Development organization and functioning: unless an equally
effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all
residential planned unit developments must use an owners association with the
following features:
               a.   Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site
purchaser and any successive purchasers;
               b.   Each member must pay a pro rata share of the association’s
expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites;
               c.   Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing
conditions: and
               d.   The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes
and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.
         (b)   Open space requirements. Planned unit developments must contain
open space meeting all of the following criteria:
            1.   At least 50% of the total project area must be preserved as
open space;
            2.   Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way or land covered by
road surfaces, parking areas or structures, except water-oriented accessory
structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be included in the
computation of minimum open space;
            3.   Open space must include areas with physical characteristics
unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing
significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;
            4.   Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use
by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling
units or sites, and by the general public;
            5.   Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems if
the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems;
            6.   Open space must not include commercial facilities or uses, but
may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities;
            7.   The appearance of open space areas, including topography,
vegetation and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of restrictive deed
covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance or other
equally effective and permanent means; and
            8.   The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks,
must be included as open space. For residential PUDs, at least 50% of the shore
impact zone area of existing developments or at least 70% of the shore impact
zone area of new developments must be preserved in its natural or existing
state. For commercial PUDs, at least 50% of the shore impact zone must be
preserved in its natural state.
         (c)   Erosion control and storm water management. Erosion control and
storm water management plans must be developed and the PUD must:
            1.   Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the
likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction.
This must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare
ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities,
vegetated buffer strips or other appropriate techniques must be used to
minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control plans
approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if project
size and site physical characteristics warrant; and
            2.   Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably
expected quantities and qualities of storm water runoff. Impervious surface
coverage within any tier must not exceed 25% of the tier area, except that for
commercial PUDs 35% impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first
tier of general development lakes with an approved storm water management plan
and consistency with division (E)(3) above.
         (d)   Centralization and design of facilities. Centralization and
design of facilities and structures must be done according to the following
standards:
            1.   Planned unit developments must be connected to publicly owned
water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and sewage
treatment systems must be centralized and designed and installed to meet or
exceed applicable standards or rules of the Minnesota Department of Health and
divisions (E)(2) and (E)(8) above. On-site sewage treatment systems must be
located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area
free of limiting factors must be provided for a replacement soil treatment
system for each sewage system;
            2.   Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one or more
groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be designed
and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the
relevant shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high water level;
elevation above the surface water features; and maximum height. Setbacks from
the ordinary high water level must be increased in accordance with division (H)
(5)(c) above for developments with density increases;
            3.   Shore recreation facilities, including, but not limited to,
swimming areas, docks and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, must be
centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation of suitability
must include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth
to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant factors. The number of spaces
provided for continuous beaching, mooring or docking of watercraft must not
exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier
(notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing commercially used
harbor). Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and
unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or
sites located in other tiers;
            4.   Structures, parking areas and other facilities must be treated
to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color or other means acceptable to
the local unit of government, assuming summer leaf-on conditions. Vegetative
and topographic screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to
be provided;
            5.   Accessory structures and facilities, except water-oriented
accessory structures, must meet the required principal structure setback and
must be centralized; and   
            6.   Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be
allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in division (E)(2)
above and are centralized.
      (7)   Conversions. Local governments may allow existing resorts or other
land uses and facilities to be converted to residential planned unit
developments if all of the following standards are met.
         (a)   Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the same
procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all new
construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the development and
these standards must be identified.
         (b)   Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment,
structure color, impervious coverage, open space and shore recreation
facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the
conditional use permit.
         (c)   Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated and
reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These improvements must
include, where applicable, the following:
            1.   Removal of extraneous buildings, docks or other facilities
that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones;
            2.   Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve
vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from
the water; and
            3.   a.   If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff
impact zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that preclude
exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial alterations.
               b.   The conditions must also provide for future relocation of
dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and
elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced.
         (d)   1.   Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that
exceed standards in division (H)(5) above may be allowed to continue but must
not be allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the
future.
            2.   Efforts must be made during the conversion to limit impacts of
high densities by requiring seasonal use, improving vegetative screening,
centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatment
systems, or other means.
(Ord. 121, passed 5-25-1993; Ord. 137, passed 5-28-1996; Ord. 155, passed 10-
26-1999; Ord. 172, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 152.101 ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose and findings.
      (1)   Purpose.
         (a)   It is the purpose of this section to regulate adult oriented
establishments to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to:
            1.   Prevent additional criminal activity within the city;
            2.   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent
adverse effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
            3.   To locate adult oriented establishments away from residential
areas, schools, churches, parks and playgrounds; and
            4.   Prevent concentration of adult oriented establishments within
certain areas of the city.
         (b)   The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including adult oriented materials. Similarly, it is
not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults
to adult oriented materials protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to
the Constitution of the United States or to deny access by distributors and
exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended market.
      (2)   Findings.
         (a)   The City Council makes the following findings about the effect
adult oriented establishments have on the character of the city’s
neighborhoods.
         (b)   In making these findings, the City Council accepts the
recommendations of staff who have reviewed the many reports, studies, judicial
decisions and experiences of other cities around the state and country
concerning the “secondary effects” on the areas in which the activities are
located or take place, including: The Report of the Attorney General Working
Group on Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989,
prepared by then Minnesota State Attorney General Hubert H. Humphrey, III; the
City of St. Cloud, Minnesota; the City of St. Paul, Minnesota; the City of Los
Angeles, California; the City of Austin, Texas; and, various other cities
throughout the country that have studied the impact of adult oriented
businesses. These studies have concluded that adult uses and sexually oriented
businesses have adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods. Based on
these studies the City Council concludes the following.
            1.   Adult uses and sexually oriented business can contribute to an
increase in crime in the area where the businesses are located. This can be a
burden to the city crime prevention programs and law enforcement services.
            2.   Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can significantly
contribute to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods and can increase
neighborhood blight. These businesses also can impair the character and quality
of the residential housing in the area where the businesses are located. This
situation could reduce the amount of desirable housing and cause residents to
flee the neighborhood.
            3.   The concentration of adult uses and sexually oriented
businesses in one area can greatly affect the area where the businesses are
concentrated. A cycle of decay can result from the influx and concentration of
adult uses and sexually oriented businesses. Others may perceive the presence
of the businesses as an indication that the area is deteriorating and results
in other businesses and residents moving or fleeing from the area. Lower
property values that can result from the concentration of the businesses, erode
the city’s tax base and contribute to blight.
            4.   Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can have a
dehumanizing and destructive influence on young people and students attending
schools and can diminish or destroy the enjoyment and family atmosphere of
persons using parks, playgrounds and other public recreational areas. They can
interfere with or even destroy the spiritual experience of persons attending
church, synagogue or other places of worship, and can interfere with or even
destroy the opportunity for solemn and respectful contemplation at cemeteries
and similar facilities.
            5.   It is necessary to provide for the special and express
regulations of business establishments or commercial enterprises that operate
as adult body painting studios, adult book stores, adult cabarets, adult car
washes, adult companionship establishments, adult hotels or motels, adult
massage parlors or health clubs, adult motion picture arcades or theaters,
adult modeling studios, adult novelty businesses, adult saunas and similar
adult oriented services operating under various names to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to guard against inception and transmission of disease.
            6.   Businesses such as the types described in division (A)(2)(b)5.
above, and all other similar establishments whose services include sessions
offered to adults conducted in private by members of the same or opposite sex,
and employing personnel with no specialized training, are susceptible to
operations contravening, subverting or endangering the morals of the city by
being the site of acts of prostitution, illicit sex and occasions of violent
crimes, and thus requiring close inspection, permitting and regulations.
            7.   Control and regulation of businesses of these types, in view
of the abuses often perpetrated, require intensive efforts by the Police
Department and other departments of the city. It is necessary for the city to
provide services to all of the city without concentrating the public services
in one area. The concentrated use of city services detracts from and reduces
the level of services available to the rest of the city. Thus, these types of
establishments can diminish the ability of the city to protect and promote the
general health, welfare, morals and safety of the city.
            8.   The limitation on the hours of operation and the regulation of
exterior appearance, including signage, of adult oriented business activities
is necessary to protect and secure neighboring uses, to control adverse noise
and traffic impacts associated with those activities, and otherwise address,
mitigate and, if possible, eliminate the adverse impacts and secondary effects
of sexually oriented business activities on the areas in which the activities
are located or taking place.
            9.   The City Council adopts the following land use and permitting
regulations, recognizing that it has an interest in the present and future
character of the city’s residential and commercial neighborhoods. These
regulations are to lessen the detrimental and adverse effects adult uses and
sexually oriented businesses have on adjacent land uses and to protect and
promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADULT USES. Adult body painting studios, adult book stores, adult
cabaret, adult car wash, adult hotels or adult motels, adult motion picture
theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult
health/sport clubs, adult sauna/steam room/bathhouses, adult companionship
establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public
at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation of display, depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
which the public could see. This definition does not apply to the practice of
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry by
state licensed or registered persons. Activities defined as obscene by M.S. §
617.241, as it may be amended from time to time, are not lawful and are not
included in the definitions of adult uses.
      ADULT USES (ACCESSORY). The offering of goods and/or services classified
as adult uses on a limited scale that are incidental to the primary activity
and goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of these items
include adult magazines, adult movies, adult novelties and the like. ACCESSORY
USES that use less than 200 square feet or 10% of the total floor area (square
footage), whichever is less, are exempted from obtaining a license under this
section and the requirement of being located in the I Industrial Zoning
District.
      ADULT USES (PRINCIPAL). The offering of goods and/or services classified
as adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and
include, but are not limited to, the following.
         (a)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business that
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent
or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when the body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.
         (b)   ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment, building or business
engaging in the barter, rental or sale of items or merchandise consisting of
printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tapes, video tapes, computer
or video disks, motion picture film or any other similar materials, if the shop
is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the
public, excluding any minor because of age, if more than 200 square feet or 10%
of the useable floor area of the establishment, building or business, whichever
is less, has products or materials distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing or related to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
         (c)   ADULT CABARET. An establishment, building or business that
provides dancing or other live entertainment if the establishment excludes
minors by virtue of age and if the dancing or live entertainment is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance or
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical area.
         (d)   ADULT CAR WASH. A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle
that allows employees, agent, independent contractors or persons to appear in a
state of partial or total nudity in terms of specified anatomical areas.
         (e)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENTS. An establishment or
business, if the establishment excludes minors because of age, or which
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if the
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specific sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
         (f)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. A building or space in which an
admission is charged for the entrance, or food or non-alcoholic beverages are
sold or intended for consumption, and in which may be observed live
presentations of entertainment distinguished by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
         (g)   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.
            1.   An establishment, building or business engaged in any of the
following activities or which uses any of the following procedures or
practices, either:
               a.   Any business conducted exclusively for the patronage of
adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage either
by law or by the operators of the business; or
               b.   Any other business that offers its patrons services,
products or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting,
exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
            2.   Specifically included in the term, but without limitation, are
adult book stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture
theaters, adult massage parlors, adult health clubs, adult saunas, adult
companionship establishments, adult cabarets, adult car washes, adult novelty
businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels
or motels and adult body painting studios.
         (h)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage and in which material is presented that is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
         (i)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A massage parlor or
health/sport club that restricts minors because of age or law, which provides
the services of massage if the service is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
         (j)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business, building or
establishment in an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons
used for the presenting of visual media material if the business as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or law, or if the material
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
         (k)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment or business whose major
business is the provision to customers of figure models who are provided with
the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to those
customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by the customers.
         (l)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any building or place to which the
public is allowed or invited in which coin- or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, computers or other production devices that show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at once, and characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
         (m)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business premises within an
enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting
visual media material if the business as a prevailing practice excludes minors
by virtue of age, or if the material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
         (n)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business that has as a principal
activity the sale of materials or devices that stimulate human genitals or
devices designed for sexual stimulation or which depict or related to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
         (o)   ADULT SAUNA/STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE. A business that excludes
minors because of age, and which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for bathing, pleasure, relaxation or reducing, and which utilizes steam or
hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by
the sauna/steam room/bathhouse is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      LICENSED FAMILY DAYCARE, LICENSED GROUP FAMILY DAYCARE, LICENSED CHILD
CARE CENTER. A facility holding a license from the county or the state pursuant
to M.S. Chapter 245A, as it may be amended from time to time, and/or Minnesota
Rules Chapter 9502 or Chapter 9503, as amended.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area
with less than fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with
less than fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of the
coverage male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
      PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building or space that is principally used as a place
where people of the same faith or religion regularly assemble for worship.
      PUBLIC LIBRARY. Any library that provides free access to all residents of
a city or county without discrimination and is organized under M.S. Chapter
134, as it may be amended from time to time.
      PUBLIC PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach or recreation or
community center in the city owned, leased or used wholly or in part by a city,
county, state, school district or federal government for recreational purposes.
      SCHOOL. A building or space that is principally used as a place where 25
or more persons receive a full course of educational instruction. Any post-
secondary or post high school educational building, including any college or
any vocational-technical college, shall not be deemed a SCHOOL for purposes of
this section.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any adult body painting studios, adult book
stores, adult cabaret, adult car wash, adult hotels or adult motels, adult
motion pictures theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage
parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult sauna/steam room/bathhouse, adult
companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult novelty
businesses, adult motion picture arcade, adult modeling studios and other
premises, enterprises or establishments, businesses or places open to some or
all members of the public at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation or display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas which the public could see. This
definition does not apply to the practice of medicine, surgery, osteopathy,
chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry by state licensed or registered
persons. Activities defined as obscene by M.S. § 617.241, as it may be amended
from time to time, are not lawful and are not included in the definitions of
adult uses.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covering human genitals, pubic
region or pubic hair, buttock, anus or female breast or breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or any combination of the foregoing;
and
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
         (a)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or
fondling of unclothed genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast,
flagellation or torture in a sexual relationship, and any of the following
sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus; buggery; coprophagy; coprophilia;
cunnilingus; fellatio; necrophilia; pederasty; pedophilia; piquerism; sapphism;
sodomy; zooerasty;
         (b)   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence;
         (c)   Use or acts of human or animal ejaculation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation;
         (d)   Fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic regions or pubic
hair, buttocks, female breasts;
         (e)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any person;
         (f)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being;
         (g)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation; or
         (h)   Any combination of the above.
   (C)   Application of this section.
      (1)   Except as may otherwise be permitted in this section, no structure
shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no
structure or land shall be used, for any purpose nor in any manner which is not
in conformity with this section.
      (2)   No adult oriented business shall engage in any activity or conduct,
or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct, in or about an
establishment which is prohibited by any ordinance of the city, the laws of the
state or the United States of America. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as authorizing or permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated
by other statutes or ordinances, including, but not limited to, statutes or
ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material
generally, or the exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials to
minors.
   (D)   Licensing.
      (1)   License required. No person, firm or corporation shall own or
operate an adult oriented business in the city without having first secured a
license as provided herein.
      (2)   Exemption. Access uses that use less than 200 square feet or 10% of
the total floor area (square footage), whichever is less, of the establishment,
space, structure or building in which it is located are exempted from obtaining
a license.
      (3)   Applications.
         (a)   An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by
the city.
         (b)   This application shall include:
            1.   The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the
applicant, if an individual; and if a corporation, partnership, limited
liability corporation (LLC) or similar entity, the names, residences, phone
numbers and birth dates of those owners holding more than 5% of issued and
outstanding stock of the corporation or ownership interest in a partnership,
LLC or similar entity;
            2.   The names and addresses of all creditors of the applicant,
owner, lessee or manager insofar as the same have furnished or extended credit
for the purposes of constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, furnishing
or acquiring the premises, personal effects, equipment or anything incident to
the establishment, maintenance and operation of the business;
            3.   The name, address, phone number and date of birth of all
employees, and of the operator, manager or lessee of the operation, if
different from the owner(s);
            4.   A statement detailing each misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor or
felony relating to a sex related offense and/or the operation of adult uses and
related activities of which the manager, operator, lessee, employees and/or
applicant and, for a corporation, the owners of more than 5% of the issued and
outstanding stock of the corporation or ownership interest in a partnership,
LLC or similar entity, have been convicted, and whether the applicant has ever
applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in other
counties or cities;
            5.   The activities and type of business to be conducted;
            6.   The address and legal description of the building,
establishment or premises where the adult oriented business is to be located;
            7.   A building plan of the premises detailing internal operations
and activities, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business;
            8.   A description or building plan that details all proposed
interior and exterior changes to an existing building or structure;
            9.   Intended hours of operations;
            10.   Provisions made to restrict access by minors;
            11.   The license fee required by this section must accompany the
application; and
            12.   Each application shall contain a provision on the application
in bold print stating that any withholding of information or the providing of
false or misleading information will be grounds for the denial or revocation of
a license. Any changes in the information provided on the application or
provided during the investigation shall be reported to the City Clerk-Treasurer
by the applicant or licensee. If the changes take place during the
investigation, the data shall be provided to the City Council. Failure to
report the changes by the applicant(s) or the licensee may result in the denial
or revocation of a license.
      (4)   License fees.
         (a)    The annual fee, investigative fee and late fees for an adult
business license shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
         (b)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment
in full of the required application and investigation fees for the license. All
fees shall be paid at the time of application.
         (c)   All permits/licenses shall expire on the last day of December in
each year. The city shall issue each license for one year, except if part of
the license year has elapsed when the application is made, the city may issue a
license for the remainder of the year for a prorated fee. In computing the fee,
the city shall count any unexpired fraction of a month as one month. License
fees shall be considered past due as of January 1 if not paid. Late fees will
be assessed on all past due license applications.
         (d)   No part of any annual fee, investigative fee and/or late fee
paid as required by this section shall be refunded.
      (5)   Granting of license. The city shall investigate all facts set out
in the application, including a background check by the Police Chief of the
applicant or licensee, the manager, operator and each cabaret dancer. The City
Council shall act to approve or disapprove the license application within 60
days from the date the application was submitted. If the application is
deficient, the Council shall act on the application within 120 days from the
date that the deficiency has been corrected.
      (6)   Persons ineligible for license. The city shall not grant a license
to, nor may one be held by, any person who:
         (a)   Is under 21 years of age;
         (b)   Has been convicted of a felony or any obscenity crime as defined
by M.S. §§ 617.23 through 617.299 inclusive, as they may be amended from time
to time, or as defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith;
         (c)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license
is issued;
         (d)   Has not paid the license and investigative fees required by this
section;
         (e)   Is not a citizen of the United States; or
         (f)   Has had an adult use or similar permit or license revoked under
an ordinance or statute similar to this section.
      (7)   Place ineligible for license.
         (a)   No license shall be granted for adult oriented business on any
premises where a licensee has been convicted of a violation of this section, or
where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause until one year has
elapsed after the conviction or revocation.
         (b)   Except uses lawfully existing at the time of this section, no
license shall be granted for any adult oriented business that does not meet all
city ordinance requirements, all building and fire codes requirements and all
provisions of state and federal law.
      (8)   Nonconforming uses.
         (a)   No adult oriented business shall be expanded or enlarged except
in conformity with the provisions of this section.
         (b)   A nonconforming adult oriented business shall be required to
apply for and receive an adult oriented establishment license from the city.
The city does not require a public hearing before issuing a license for the
nonconforming adult oriented business.
      (9)   Conditions of license generally.
         (a)   The city shall issue the license to the applicant. The license
shall not be transferred to another holder.
         (b)   The license shall be issued only for the premises or location
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another location
or place without the approval of the City Council.
         (c)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions of the
following divisions (D)(9)(d) through (D)(9)(f) below and all other provisions
of this section and of any applicable city, state and federal law.
         (d)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
licensee, the expiration date and the address of the business. All licensed
premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance of the business so that it maybe easily read at any time.
         (e)   No minor shall be allowed in or on the premises of an adult
oriented business.
         (f)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of its place
of business and shall maintain conditions consistent with this section and all
federal, state and local rules and regulations generally.
      (10)   Additional conditions for adult cabarets.
         (a)   Dancer’s license. No person shall dance at an adult cabaret
without a valid dancer’s license issued by the city.
         (b)   Dancer’s license application and issuance.
            1.   Application for dancers’ licenses shall be made to the city.
            2.   An application for dancers’ licenses shall be verified and
shall contain or set forth the following information:
               a.   The applicant’s names, home addresses (current and former),
home telephone number, date of birth and aliases (past and present); and
               b.   The business name and address where the applicant intends
to dance.
            3.   Application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $5;
            4.   Within five days of receipt of an application for dancer’s
license, the city shall issue the license; and
            5.   A dancer’s license shall entitle a dancer to dance only at the
business indicated on the dancer’s license application.
         (c)   Dancer’s license; renewal, revocation. A dancer’s license may be
renewed by following the application procedure in division (G) below.
         (d)   Additional conditions.
            1.   No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit
or allow any dancer or other live entertainer to perform nude.
            2.   No dancer, live entertainer or performer, patron or any other
person shall be nude in an adult cabaret.
            3.   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under 18
years old.
            4.   All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform
intended for that purpose and which is raised at least two feet from the level
of the floor.
            5.   No dancer or performer shall perform any dance or live
entertainment closer than ten feet to any patron.
            6.   No dancer or performer shall fondle or caress any patron and
no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or performer.
            7.   No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or
performer.
            8.   No dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from
any patron.
   (E)   Inspection.
      (1)   Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department and Building
Inspection Division to inspect the premises of an adult oriented business for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or
open for business.
      (2)   Refusal to permit inspections. A person who operates an adult
oriented business or his or her agent or employee commits an offense if he or
she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health officials,
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department and Building
Inspection Division at any time it is occupied or open for business. Refusal to
permit inspections may result in the suspension, revocation or non-renewal of
the license as provided in division (G) below.
      (3)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of
an adult motel, which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation.
   (F)   Location conditions of license. The city shall permit adult oriented
establishments to be located only in the I Industrial Zoning District, with a
conditional use permit, and subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   No adult oriented establishment shall be located closer than 300
feet from any other adult use principal or sexually oriented business in the
city. Measurements shall be made in a straight horizontal line, without regard
to city or county boundaries, intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest point of the actual business premises of the adult use or sexually
oriented business to the nearest point of the actual business premises of any
other adult use or sexually oriented business.
      (2)   No adult oriented establishment shall be located closer than 500
feet from any residential lot line, place of worship, school, public park,
licensed family daycare home, public library or licensed child care or daycare
center in the city or county. Measurements shall be made in a straight
horizontal line, without regard to city or county boundaries, intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point of the actual business premises
of the adult use or sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of
the premises or building used as a dwelling or residence, place of worship,
school, public park, licensed family daycare home, licensed group family
daycare home, public library or licensed child care or daycare center.
      (3)   No adult oriented establishments shall be located closer than 500
feet from any residential lot line, any residential zoning district or any
residential planned unit development (PUD). Measurements shall be a straight
horizontal line, without regard to city or county boundaries, intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point of the actual business premises
of the adult oriented establishment to the nearest property line of the
premises or building use as a dwelling or residence, residential zoning
district or PUD.
      (4)   No adult oriented establishments shall be located closer than 500
feet from any state or federal trunk highway or any major city thoroughfare.
      (5)   The city prohibits any building owner or operator from having more
than one of the following uses, tenants or activities in the same building
structures: adult body painting studio; adult book store; adult cabaret; adult
car wash; adult companionship establishment; adult entertainment facility;
adult hotel or motel; adult modeling studio; adult sauna/steam room/bathhouse;
adult motion picture theater; adult mini-motion picture theater; adult massage
parlor; adult health/sports club; adult novelty business; any business or
establishment in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas that the public can see.
      (6)   An adult oriented establishment shall not sell or dispense non-
intoxicating or intoxicating liquors, nor shall it be located within 500 feet
of a building that contains a business that sells or dispenses 3.2% malt liquor
beverage or intoxicating liquors. An adult use oriented establishment shall not
allow the consumption of non-intoxicating or intoxicating liquors anywhere on a
parcel containing that use or business.
      (7)   No adult oriented establishment’s entertainment shall engage in any
activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or
conduct in or about the adult use establishment that is prohibited by any
ordinance of city, the laws of the state or the United States of America.
Nothing in the section shall be construed as authorizing or permitting conduct
that is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances prohibiting the
exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material generally, or the
exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials to minors.
      (8)   No adult use oriented establishment shall be conducted in any
manner that permits the perception or observation from any property not
approved as an adult use of any materials depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by any visual or
auditory media, including display, decoration, sign, show window, sound
transmission or other means.
      (9)   All adult use oriented establishments shall prominently display a
sign at the entrance and located within two feet of the door opening device of
the adult use establishment or section of the establishment devoted to adult
books or materials which states:
“This business sells or displays material containing adult themes. Persons
under 18 years of age shall not enter.”
      (10)   No adult oriented establishments (principal) shall be open to the
public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on the days of Monday
through Saturday. No adult oriented establishments (principal) shall be open to
the public on Sunday.
      (11)   Adult use accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and
external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.
      (12)   An adult oriented establishment shall prevent off-site viewing of
its merchandise, which if viewed by a minor would be in violation of M.S.
Chapter 617, as it may be amended from time to time, or other applicable
federal or state statutes or local ordinances.
      (13)   All entrances to the establishment with the exception of the
emergency fire exits which are not useable by patrons to enter the business
shall be visible from a public right-of-way.
      (14)   The layout of the display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the
store can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise offered
for sale or viewing including, but not limited to, books, magazines,
photographs, video tapes or any other material.
      (15)   Illumination of the premises exterior shall be adequate to observe
the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
      (16)   No adult oriented establishment may be granted a conditional use
permit under this section unless it is applied for and received a license
pursuant to this section. Applications for an adult oriented establishment
license and a conditional use permit may happen concurrently or a special use
permit may be granted under the section subject to the applicant receiving a
license pursuant to this section. An applicant for a special use permit under
this section shall also include a copy of the application for the license under
division (D) above with the application under this section.
   (G)   Expiration, suspension, revocation or non-renewal of license.
      (1)   Expiration. Each license shall expire at the end of the calendar
year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in division (D)
above. Applications for renewal must be made at least 60 days before the
expiration date.
      (2)   Suspension, revocation or non-renewal. The city may revoke, suspend
or not renew a license upon recommendation of the City Police Chief that shows
that the licensee, its owners, managers, operator, employees, agents or any
other interested parties have engaged in any part of the following conduct:
         (a)   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation about securing the
license;
         (b)   Licensee or employees has or have knowingly allowed possession,
use or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;
         (c)   Knowing permitted gambling by any person on the adult oriented
establishment premises. Knowingly operated the adult oriented establishment
during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
         (d)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an adult oriented
establishment in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action
by law enforcement officers;
         (e)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on
the licensed premises;
         (f)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult oriented
establishment premises as authorized by this section; and
         (g)   Conviction of a felony or any offensive involving moral
turpitude.
      (3)   Notice. A suspension, revocation or non-renewal by the city shall
be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing before the
City Council. The notice shall give at least ten days’ notice of the time and
place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the
licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee personally, or by leaving
the same at the licensed business premises with the person in charge thereof.
      (4)   Decision. At the conclusion of the hearing the City Council may
order:
         (a)   The revocation, suspension or non-renewal be affirmed; or
         (b)   The revocation, suspension or non-renewal be lifted and that the
license be returned to the certificate holder.
      (5)   Appeals. After denial of an application, or denial of renewal of an
application or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant of
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of the administrative action in any
court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly
reviewed by the court.
   (H)   Sign restrictions.
      (1)   The following sign regulations shall apply to all adult oriented
establishments in the city. These regulations are to protect children from
exposure to sexually oriented or shocking signs and materials and to preserve
the value of property near adult oriented establishments.
      (2)   These regulations are aside from any other provisions of the city’s
regulations.
         (a)   All signs shall be flat wall mounted signs. No signs shall be
freestanding, located on the roof or contain any flashing lights, moving
elements or electronically or mechanical changing messages. No signs shall
contain any message or image which ideas specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
         (b)   The amount of allowable sign area shall be one square foot of
sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, not to exceed 50 square feet.
         (c)   No merchandise, photos or pictures of the products or
entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area
where they can be viewed from the sidewalk or public right-of-way adjoining the
building or structure in which the adult use or sexually oriented business is
located.
         (d)   No signs shall be placed in any window. A two foot square sign
may be placed on the door to state the hours of operation and admittance to
adults only.
   (I)   Severability. In the event any section, division, clause, phrase or
portion of this section is for any reason held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and any holding shall
not affect the validity of the remainder of this section. It is the legislative
intent of the City Council that this section would have been adopted if the
illegal provision had not been included or any illegal application had not been
made.
(Ord. 163, passed 7-22-2003)
§ 152.102 CLOSED LANDFILL RESTRICTED (CLR).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The Closed Landfill Restricted (CLR) District is intended to apply
to former landfills that are qualified to be under the closed landfill program
of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA). The purpose of the district
is to limit uses of land within the closed landfill, both actively filled and
related lands, to minimal uses in order to protect the land from human activity
where response action systems are in place and, at the same time, are
protective of human health and safety. This district shall only apply to the
closed landfill’s land management area, the limits of which are defined by the
MPCA. This district shall apply whether the landfill is in public (MPCA,
county, city, township), Indian tribal or private ownership.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the land management area for the city
landfill, a qualified facility under the MPCA’s closed landfill program, is
described as:
The north one-half of the southeast quarter (N 1/2 - SE 1/4) and the south one-
half of the northeast quarter (S 1/2 - NE 1/4) lying west of the centerline of
County Highway 666, consisting of 67.23 acres;
and
That part of the south one-half of the northeast quarter of the southeast
quarter (S 1/2 - NE 1/4 - SE 1/4) lying west of the centerline of County
Highway 666, consisting of 8.6 acres;
and
The south one-half of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter (S 1/2 -
NE 1/4 - SE 1/4), consisting of 15.3 acres;
and
That part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter (SE 1/4 - SE 1/4)
lying north of the northerly line of the Duluth, Messabe and Iron Range Railway
and lying west of the centerline of Highway 666, consisting of 1.4 acres;
and
That part of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter (SW 1/4 - SE 1/4)
lying north of the northerly line of the Duluth, Messabe and Iron Range
Railway, consisting of 0.5 acres.
All in Section Four, Township 58 North, Range 14 West, St. Louis County,
Minnesota.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the CLR
District: closed landfill management use and solar energy farm use.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses allowed in this district include
outdoor equipment or small buildings used in concert with gas extraction
systems, other response action systems, monitoring wells or any other equipment
designed to protect, monitor or otherwise ensure the integrity of the landfill
monitoring or improvement systems. Fences and gates shall apply under these
provisions.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Conditional uses shall be limited to uses that do not damage the
integrity of the land management area and that continue to protect any person
from hazards associated with the landfill.
      (2)   Any application for a conditional use must be approved by the
Commissioner of the MPCA and the City Planning Commission. The approved use
shall not disturb, or threaten to disturb, the integrity of the landfill cover,
liners, any other components of any containment system, the function of any
monitoring system that exists upon the described property or other areas of the
land management area that the Commissioner of the MPCA deems necessary for
future response actions.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures. All other uses and structures not
specifically allowed as conditional uses, or that cannot be considered as
accessory uses, shall be prohibited in the CLR District.
   (F)   Rezoning. The rezoning district map is amended to rezone the following
property from Mineral Mining District (MM), to Closed Landfill Restricted
(CLR):
The north one-half of the southeast quarter (N 1/2 - SE 1/4) and the south one-
half of the northeast quarter (S 1/2 - NE 1/4) lying west of the centerline of
County Highway 666, consisting of 67.23 acres;
and
That part of the south one-half of the northeast quarter of the southeast
quarter (S 1/2 - NE 1/4 - SE 1/4) lying west of the centerline of County
Highway 666, consisting of 8.6 acres;
and
The south one-half of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter (S 1/2 -
NE 1/4 - SE 1/4), consisting of 15.3 acres;
and
That part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter (SE 1/4 - SE 1/4)
lying north of the northerly line of the Duluth, Messabe and Iron Range Railway
and lying West of the centerline of Highway 666, consisting of 1.4 acres;
and
That part of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter (SW 1/4 - SE 1/4)
lying north of the northerly line of the Duluth, Messabe and Iron Range
Railway, consisting of 0.5 acres.
All in Section Four, Township 58 North, Range 14 West, St. Louis County,
Minnesota.
   (G)   Amendment. Any amendment to this section, including specifically the
description of permitted uses, accessory uses, conditional uses or prohibited
uses and structures, or the description of the Closed Landfill Restricted
District as set forth in the zoning map, must be approved by the Commissioner
of the MPCA and the City Council.
(Ord. 206, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 152.103 STORAGE DISTRICT (S-1).
   (A)   Purpose. To provide for storage.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Within an S-1 Storage District, no structure or land
shall be used except for the following uses:
      (1)   Storage of personal property within storage buildings;
      (2)   Outside storage of personal property; and
      (3)   Fencing, with no height restriction.
   (C)   Minimum requirements.
 
Front lot fence setback 20 feet
Front lot setback       20 feet
                        2,800 square feet of ground coverage including
Maximum building size   buildings, driveway whether asphalt or gravel and any
                        cement areas
Minimum building size   576 square feet
Rear lot setback        5 feet
Sidelot setbacks        5 feet
 
   (D)   Reoning. Rezoning district map is amended to rezone the following
property from General Business District (B-2), to Storage District (S-1):
That part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter, Section Nine,
Township 58 North, Range 14 West, described as follows:
Commencing at the southwest corner of said NW 1/4 - SW 1/4; thence North 00
degrees 05 minutes 59 seconds east, along the west line of said NW 1/4 - SW 1/
4 and the west line of the Memorial Cemetery recorded in Book 13 Plats, Page 13
a distance of 410.00 feet to the point of beginning at the northwest corner of
said Memorial Cemetery; thence south 89 degrees 54 minutes 01 second east,
along the north line of said Memorial Cemetery a distance of 853.00 feet to the
northeast corner of said Memorial Cemetery; thence north 00 degrees 05 minutes
59 seconds west a distance of 1075.75 feet to the point of intersection with a
line drawn parallel with and distant 75.00 feet southeasterly of the centerline
of County Road 666 (Kensington Drive); thence north 72 degrees 56 minutes 44
seconds east, along said parallel line a distance of 470.55 feet to the east
line of said NW 1/4 - SW 1/4; thence north 00 degrees 14 minutes 37 seconds
east, along said east line a distance of 79.13 feet to the centerline of said
County Road 666 (Kensington Drive); thence southwesterly, along a non-
tangential curve in said centerline and concave to the northwest having a
radius of 2864.79 feet, central angle of 01 degree 33 minutes 16 seconds (the
chord of said curve at this point bears south 72 degrees 10 minutes 06 seconds
west), a distance of 77.72 feet; thence south 72 degrees 56 minutes 44 seconds
west, continuing along said centerline a distance of 919.95 feet; thence
southwesterly, continuing along said centerline along a tangential curve
concave to the northwest having a radius of 8594.37 feet, central angle of 02
degrees 46 minutes 53 seconds, a distance of 417.20 feet to the west line of
said NW 1/4 - SW 1/4; thence south 00 degrees 05 minutes 59 seconds west, along
said west line a distance of 506.76 feet to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 205, passed 6-23-2014)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 152.115 GENERALLY.
   The performance standards established in this subchapter are designed to
encourage a high standard of development by providing assurance that
neighboring land uses will be compatible. The performance standards are also
designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause urban blight. All
future development shall be required to meet these standards. The standards
shall also apply to existing development where so stated. The Zoning Officer
shall be responsible for enforcing the standards.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.116 EXTERIOR STORAGE.
   (A)   In residential districts. All materials and equipment should be stored
within a building or fully screened so as to not be visible from adjoining
properties except for the following:
      (1)   Off-street parking of passenger automobiles and trucks (less than
26,000 pounds gross weight);
      (2)   Off-street parking of boats, canoes, watercraft, campers, travel
trailers and recreational vehicles, as follows:
         (a)   No more than a total of three of the following: a boat, canoe or
watercraft of less than 26 feet in length; an unoccupied camper, travel trailer
or recreational vehicle of less than 40 feet in length; provided that no
personal property is parked closer than 12 feet from any public street curb or
edge of a public drivable surface; and
         (b)   No boat, canoe or other watercraft equaling or exceeding 26 feet
in length is permitted in an R District; and
         (c)   No unoccupied camper, travel trailer or recreational vehicle
equaling or exceeding 40 feet in length is permitted in an R District.
      (3)   Building or construction material for up to one year; and
      (4)   Licensed fish houses if stored in rear yard.
   (B)   In all districts. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require a
conditional use permit for any exterior storage if it is demonstrated that the
storage is a hazard to the public health, safety, convenience, morals or has a
depreciating effect upon nearby property values, or impairs scenic views, or
constitutes threat to living amenities.
   (C)   Fuel/wood/storage. In all R and B Districts, outside fuel wood shall
be stored according to the following conditions.
      (1)   Outside fuel wood shall not be stored in front yards, except on a
temporary basis, not to exceed 45 days. In addition, on a corner lot, outside
fuel wood shall not be stored, except on a temporary basis not to exceed 45
days, on the side yard and back yard abutting a street unless the fuel wood is
set back from the street, the distance that the house or garage is set back
from that street.
      (2)   Fuel wood shall not encroach upon rights-of-way or sidewalks.
      (3)   Except for temporary storage not to exceed 45 days outside fuel
wood shall not exceed four feet in length.
      (4)   Outside fuel wood piles shall not exceed six feet in height.
      (5)   Outside fuel wood piles shall be neat in appearance, free from
unreasonable infestation of rodents or other pests, and shall be securely piled
in a safe manner so as to prevent falling over. The determination as to this
condition shall initially be made by the Zoning Officer, who shall give ten
days’ written notice of the determination prior to issuing any citation. The
notice shall also provide that the owner may appeal the determination to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment by filing written notice of appeal with the office
of City Clerk-Treasurer within the ten-day period.
      (6)   Any property owner may request a conditional use permit, as
provided for in §
152.066, to request relief from the strict compliance with any provisions of
this division (C).
      (7)   Any fuel wood storage in existence as of the effective date of this
section, which does not comply with the provisions of this section, must be
removed or other wise placed in compliance with these provisions on or before
August 1, 1986.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 172, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 152.117 REFUSE.
   (A)   In all districts. All waste material, debris, refuse or garbage shall
be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container
designed for those purposes. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for
keeping the land free of refuse and weeds. Existing uses shall comply with this
division (A) within six months following enactment of this chapter. All
exterior storage not included as permitted accessory use, a permitted use or
included as part of a special use permit, or otherwise permitted by provisions
of this chapter, shall be considered as refuse.
   (B)   Incinerators. Any structure or equipment for the burning of trash
shall be of a design authorized by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency; upon
advice from the Zoning Officer, the City Council may require a special use
permit for any incinerator.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.118 SCREENING.
   (A)   Screening shall be required in residential zones where:
      (1)   Any off-street parking area contains more than four parking spaces
and is within 30 feet of an adjoining residential zone; and
      (2)   Where the driveway to a parking area of more than six parking space
is within 15 feet of an adjoining residential use or zone.
   (B)   Where any business or industrial use (structure, parking or storage)
is adjacent to property zoned or developed for residential use, that business
or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential
property. Screening shall also be provided where a business, parking lot or
industry is across the street from a residential zone, but no on that side of a
business or industry considered to be the front (as determined by the Zoning
Officer).
   (C)   All exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are:
      (1)   Merchandise being displayed for sale;
      (2)   Materials and equipment being used for construction on premises;
      (3)   Merchandise located on service station pump islands; and
      (4)   Fuel wood storage.
   (D)   The screening required in this section shall consist of a fence or
wall not less than five feet high but shall not extend within 15 feet of any
street. The screening shall be placed along property lines or in case of
screening along a street, 15 feet from the street right-of-way with landscaping
between the screening and the pavement. A fence shall block direct vision.
Planting of a type approved by the Planning Commission may also be required in
addition to or in lieu of fencing.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.119 GLARE.
   Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign or other
structure, shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining
residential zone or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare,
where from floodlights or from high-temperature processes such as combustion or
welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The source of
lights shall be hooded or controlled. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not
be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or
combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one
foot candle (meter reading) as measured from the centerline of the street. Any
light or combination of lights which cast light on residential property shall
not exceed 0.4 foot candles (meter reading) as measured from the property.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.120 SIGNS, ADVERTISING LIGHTS AND DEVICES.
   (A)   General provisions. Signs, advertising lights and devices shall be
governed by the following provisions and any other regulations as may be
hereafter established in the furtherance or clarification thereof.
      (1)   This section shall not apply to any display of directional signs,
street name signs or other signs which have been authorized and erected by a
governmental body or to on-site private instructional signs less than four
square feet in areas intended to aid persons on private parcels of land.
      (2)   Signs are prohibited within the public right-of-way except that the
City Council may grant a special permit for temporary signs and decorations to
be placed on a right-of-way for a period of time not to exceed 90 days, subject
to the laws of the state.
      (3)   Illuminated flashing signs shall not be permitted within any zoning
district.
      (4)   One nameplate sign per lot in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and Industrial
Districts pertaining to a permitted use may be erected not to exceed 30% of the
authorized aggregate square footage of advertising sign space for that lot.
      (5)   For the purpose of selling or leasing property, a sign or signs not
in excess of 25 square feet of sign may be placed within the front yard of the
property to be sold or leased. The sign or signs shall not be less than 15 feet
from the front lot line unless flat against the structure. Failure to remove
the sign within ten days of sale or lease of property and to maintain the sign
shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
      (6)   For the purpose of selling or promoting a residential project of
six or more dwelling units, a sign not to exceed 100 square feet may be erected
upon the project site and maintained until each of the units has been rented or
leased.
      (7)   The area within the frame shall be used to calculate the square
footage except that the width of a frame exceeding 12 inches shall constitute
advertising space, or should the letters or graphics be mounted directly on a
wall or fascia or in a way as to be without a frame, the dimensions for
calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six inches beyond
the periphery formed around the letters or graphics in a plane figure bounded
by straight lines connecting the outermost points thereof, and each surface
utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a
separate sign, and symbols, flags, pictures, wording, figures or other forms of
graphics painted on or attached to windows, walls, awnings, freestanding
structures, suspended by balloons or kites or on persons, animals or vehicles
shall be considered as a sign to be included in calculating the overall square
footage.
      (8)   Signs existing on the effective date of this chapter which do not
conform to the regulations set forth in this chapter are a nonconforming use or
structure and as such shall be under the regulations set forth in §
152.032.
      (9)   The top of any sign, including its superstructure, if any, shall be
no higher than six feet above the roof of the building to which the sign may be
attached or 35 feet above ground level, whichever height is less; except that
the height of any nameplate sign which is attached to or an integral part of a
functional structure, such as a water tower, smoke stack, radio or television
transmitting tower, beacon or similar structure, shall be no higher than the
structure.
      (10)   Signs, including any superstructure, standing or erected free of
any building or other structure, shall not exceed an overall height of 25 feet
from ground level.
   (B)   Signs in R Districts. Within the R District, the following signs are
permitted.
      (1)   One double surfaced nameplate sign for each dwelling which shall
not exceed one square foot in area per surface. The sign may indicate the name
of occupant and address.
      (2)   One double surface nameplate sign for each dwelling group of six or
more units, which shall not exceed six square feet in area per surface. The
sign may indicate the names and addressed of the buildings or project, or may
be a directory for occupants or state any combination of the above information.
      (3)   One double surfaced nameplate sign for each permitted use other
than residential which shall not exceed 12 square feet in area per surface plus
one-half square foot per surface for each one foot of setback greater than 20
feet.
      (4)   Symbols, statues, sculptures and integrated architectural features
on nonresidential buildings may be illuminated by floodlights, provided the
direct source of lights is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent
residential property.
   (C)   Signs in B-1 Districts. Within the B-1 District, nameplate signs or
business signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Within the B-1 Business District, the aggregate square footage of
sign per lot shall not exceed the sum of three square feet per front foot of
building, with the least width of the lot fronting on a public right-of-way, 50
(or more) feet in width being the front for applying this section, plus one
square foot for each foot of side yard abutting along a public right-of-way 50
feet or more in width.
      (2)   No individual sign shall exceed 250 square feet in area except as
provided in division (A)(6) above.
   (D)   Signs in the B-2 and I Districts. Within the B-2 and I Districts,
nameplate signs, business signs are permitted, subject to the following
regulations.
      (1)   The aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed
the sum of four square feet per front foot of building, plus two square feet
per front foot of property not occupied by a building, plus one square foot for
each foot of public right-of-way other than the front 50 feet or more in width
abutting the lot, plus a 10% increase in permitted sign space for each 15 feet
the sign is set back of the front yard, up to a 100% increase.
      (2)   The least width of such a corner lot shall be the front for
purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   A part of the aggregate square footage up to 100 square feet may be
used for an advertising sign where the sign is not the principal use.
   (E)   Signs in the B-3 Business District. Within the B-3 District, nameplate
signs, business and directional signs are permitted, subject to the following
regulations.
      (1)   Within the B-3 District, the aggregate square footage of sign per
lot shall not exceed the sum of two square feet per front foot of building,
plus one square foot of lot width (the least lot width shall prevail).
      (2)   No individual sign shall exceed 180 square feet in area or the
criteria of division (A)(6) above, the lesser square footage shall prevail.
      (3)   The least width of a corner lot shall be the front for purpose of
this section or as determined by the Zoning Officer.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.121 OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   No reduction in number. Existing off-street parking spaces and
loading spaces upon the effective date of this chapter shall not be reduced in
number unless the number exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a
similar new use.
      (2)   Damage or destruction of building, structure or use. Should a
building, structure or use in existence upon the effective date of this section
be damaged or destroyed by fire or other cause, it may be re-established
according to §
152.032(E) but in so doing the number of off-street parking or loading spaces
which existed must be retained and should plans be proposed for enlarging the
floor area, seating capacity or other facilities which would affect the parking
or loading requirements, the parking or loading spaces shall be enlarged
accordingly.
      (3)   Provision of off-street parking areas. The owner or occupants of
all land parcels and premises in the city shall provide off-street parking
areas as are set forth in this section under appropriate respected zoning
districts.
      (4)   Yards. Parking areas shall be subject to front yard setback
requirements in accordance with the district in which the parking areas are
located.
      (5)   Floor area. The term FLOOR AREA for the purpose of calculating the
number of off-street parking spaces required shall be all of the floor area of
the various floors of a structure measured to the centers of all partitions,
except those areas used for dead storage, building maintenance, office of
building management, toilets or rest rooms, window showcases, dressing rooms,
employees’ café, conference rooms or for building utilities.
      (6)   Benches in places of public assembly. In stadiums, sports arena,
churches and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy
benches, pew or other similar seating facilities, each 22 inches of the seating
facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining
requirements for off-street parking facilities under this chapter.
      (7)   Parking spaces. Each parking space shall be unobstructed and not
less than ten feet wide and 20 feet in length per car and have an adequate
system of access.
      (8)   Use of residential parking facilities. Off-street residential
parking facilities may be utilized for the parking of passenger automobiles and
trucks not to exceed a gross weight of six tons.
      (9)   Joint parking facilities. In all business and industrial districts,
required off-street parking facilities may be combined and provided in one area
provided that the facilities shall not thereby be diminished.
      (10)   Zoning permit issued prior to the effective date of this section.
Buildings or structures for which a zoning permit has been issued prior to the
effective date of this section but for which work has not been completed shall
be exempt from the hereinafter stated parking requirements if the structure or
building is completed within six months after the effective date of this
chapter.
      (11)   Handicapped parking. Handicapped parking must meet state
regulations.
   (B)   Design and maintenance of off-street parking areas.
      (1)   Drainage. Driveways shall not exceed a grade of 4% and all parking
lots except those for less than four vehicles shall be graded according to a
drainage plan which has been approved by the City Engineer. Catch basins, sumps
and under-ground storm sewers may be required and all lots and driveways shall
be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage.
      (2)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking
area shall be shaded or diffused so as to reflect the light away from the
adjoining property and away from abutting traffic.
      (3)   Distance from the parking area property line. All off-street
parking areas shall be so designed and constructed that no part of any vehicle
ever parked therein shall be nearer than one foot from the parking area
property line.
      (4)   Fences in certain parking areas. When a required off-street parking
area for six cars or more is located adjacent to any R District, there shall be
constructed and maintained a wall of suitable material of not less than three
and one-half feet nor more than six feet in height along the lot line to
capture the vehicle light beams and muffle the vehicle noise.
   (C)   Required off-street parking. The following minimum areas shall be
provided and maintained by ownership, easement or lease, for and during the
life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings. At least two parking spaces for each
dwelling unit. A garage may fulfill this requirement. However, a zoning permit
shall not be granted to convert a garage to living space unless other
acceptable provisions are made to provide the required parking space;
      (2)   Two-family dwelling. At least two parking spaces per dwelling unit,
but not more than one two car garage per dwelling unit;
      (3)   Boarding and rooming houses. At least two parking spaces for each
three persons for which accommodations are provided for sleeping;
      (4)   Multiple dwelling. At least two and one-half parking spaces per
dwelling unit in the R-3 Districts;
      (5)   Motel, tourist home, motor hotel, bed and breakfast. At least one
parking space for each dwelling unit or lodging room. Plus one additional space
for each eight units;
      (6)   School, elementary and junior high. At least one parking space for
each classroom plus one additional space for each 100 student capacity;
      (7)   School, high school through college. At least one parking space for
each ten students based on design capacity, plus one additional space for each
two classrooms;
      (8)   Church, clubs. At least one parking space for each three and one-
half seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall;
      (9)   Theater, ballfield, stadium. At least one parking space for each
eight seats of design capacity;
      (10)   Hospital. At least one and one-half parking spaces for each
patient bed;
      (11)   Sanitarium, convalescent home, rest home, nursing home or
institution. At least one parking space for each six beds for which
accommodations are offered, plus one additional parking space for each 15 beds;
      (12)   Medical or dental clinic. At least three parking spaces for each
staff doctor or dentist or one space for each 150 square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is greater;
      (13)   Restaurants (Class 2). At least one parking space for each 30
square feet of gross floor area in building allocated to drive-in operation;
      (14)   Bowling alley. At least five parking spaces for each alley, plus
additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses such as a
restaurant;
      (15)   Motor fuel station. At least four off-street parking spaces plus
two off-street parking spaces for each service stall;
      (16)   Restaurants (Class 1). At least one space for each three seats
based on capacity design or where there is no design layout, one space for each
35 square feet of gross floor area;
      (17)   Banks, offices, municipal building and/or public office buildings.
At least one parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area;
      (18)   Undertaking establishments. One parking space for each five seats
or 35 square feet of seating area where there are no fixed seats, plus one
parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area not used for seating;
      (19)   Furniture store, appliance store, wholesale and warehouse. At
least one parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area;
      (20)   Open sales lots, lumber yards, auto sales. One parking space for
each 2,000 square feet of land up to the first 8,000 square feet plus one
parking space for each 4,000 square feet of land up to a parcel of 24,000
square feet, plus one parking space for each 6,000 square feet thereafter;
      (21)   Auto repair, boat and marine sales, garden store, carpenter shop.
Four parking spaces plus one for each 500 square feet of floor area over the
first 1,000 square feet;
      (22)   Skating, dance hall, private clubs, ice arena. Ten parking spaces
plus one for each 200 square feet of floor area devoted to the principal use;
      (23)   Other retail commercial uses. One parking space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area; and
      (24)   Manufacturing, fabricating or processing of a product or material.
Four off-street parking spaces plus one for each 400 square feet of floor area.
   (D)   Off-street loading and unloading areas.
      (1)   Location. All loading berths shall be off-street and shall be
located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. A loading berth
shall not be located less than 25 feet from the intersection of two street
rights-of-way, nor less than 50 feet from a residential district unless within
a building. Loading berths shall not occupy the required front yard setback
space.
      (2)   Size. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a required
loading berth shall not be less than ten feet in width, 25 feet in length and
14 feet in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space.
      (3)   Access. Each required loading berth shall be located with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic.
      (4)   Surfacing. All loading berths and accessways shall be improved with
a durable material to control the dust and drainage according to a plan
approved by the City Engineer.
      (5)   Accessory use. Any space allocated as a loading berth or access
drive so as to comply with the terms of this chapter shall not be used for the
storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or be included as a part of the space
requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.122 DRAINAGE.
   No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in
water run-off causing flooding, erosion or deposit of minerals on adjacent
properties. The run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain,
watercourse, ponding area or other public facilities. Any change in grade
affecting water run-off onto adjacent property must be as approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.123 EXPLOSIVES.
   No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials
or products such at TNT or dynamite which could decompose by detonation shall
be permitted except those as are specifically licensed by the City Council.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.124 DWELLING UNITS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Dwelling units for watchman and family shall be considered as accessory uses
and shall conform to all applicable regulations for the district in which
located except as herein modified.
   (A)   A dwelling unit in the business district located in a commercial
structure shall not occupy the front half of the ground floor or basement.
   (B)   A dwelling unit in a commercial or industrial building shall not
contain more than one bedroom.
   (C)   A dwelling unit which is a part of the principal building shall be
provided with one outside entrance.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.125 RESTAURANTS (CLASS 2).
   (A)   The entire area shall have a drainage system approved by the City
Engineer.
   (B)   The entire area other than that occupied by structures or planting
shall be surfaced with a material which will control dust and drainage.
   (C)   A box curb at least six inches above grade shall separate the public
walk area from the lot except at approved entrance or exit drives.
   (D)   (1)   A fence of acceptable design not over six feet in height or less
than four feet shall be constructed along the property line abutting
residential district and the fence shall be adequately maintained.
      (2)   The fence shall not be required within the required front yard.
   (E)   The lighting shall be accomplished in a way as to have no direct
source of light visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent land in
residential use.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.126 RADIATION AND ELECTRICAL EMISSIONS.
   No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond
enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic
household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment other than that of the creator of the disturbances.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.127 OTHER NUISANCE CHARACTERISTICS.
   No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, liquid or solid wastes,
heat, glare, dust or other adverse influences shall be permitted in any
district that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property. All wastes in all districts shall be disposed of in a manner
that is not dangerous to public health and safety nor will damage public waste
transmission or disposal facilities. Minimum standards shall comply to State
Pollution Control Agency standards.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.128 AUTOMOBILE SALES AND SHOW ROOMS.
   The building and premises for automobile sales and show rooms shall meet the
following requirements.
   (A)   Setbacks and lot requirements.
      (1)   Building setbacks. Building setbacks shall be as required under §
152.095(E).
      (2)   Parking. A minimum 25-foot wide landscaped yard shall be required
and maintained between any public street right-of-way and parking lots
(including maneuvering area).
      (3)   Contiguous site. Motor vehicle sales shall be on one lot or
contiguous lots not separated by a public street, alley or other use.
      (4)   Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet at the minimum
required front yard setback.
      (5)   Lot area. A minimum lot area of one acre shall be required.
   (B)   Access driveways.
      (1)   Distance of driveway from street intersection. The distance of the
driveway from the street intersection shall be not less than 50 feet; provided,
however, that if, in the opinion of the City Engineer, present or future
traffic conditions warrant greater distances, the greater distances shall be
required.
      (2)   Minimum distance between driveways. Minimum distance between
driveways shall be 25 feet at the curb cut.
      (3)   Minimum driveway angle to street. Minimum driveway angle to street
shall be 60 degrees unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Minimum distance between driveway and adjacent property. Minimum
distance between driveway and adjacent property shall be five feet at the curb
cut.
      (5)   Widths of driveways and curb cuts. No driveway shall exceed 25 feet
in width and no curb cut shall exceed 35 feet in width.
   (C)   Landscaping, screening and curbing.
      (1)   Screening. A screen shall be erected and maintained along all
property lines separating the site from any residential district. The screening
required in this section shall consist of a fence or wall not less than five
feet nor more than seven feet in height or an equivalent as is approved by the
Zoning Officer. Screening shall also include landscaping (trees, shrubs, grass
and the like) of a type (layout, species, height, size and density) approved by
the Planning Commission. All waste material, debris, refuse, junk or damaged
vehicles shall be kept in an enclosed building or area completely screened from
public streets and adjacent property.
      (2)   Landscaping. A landscaped yard shall be provided and maintained on
all areas of the site not devoted to the building or parking areas. The
landscaped yard areas may be required at various locations on the site.
      (3)   Curbs. Interior curbs shall be constructed within the property to
separate driving and parking surfaces from landscaped areas. Interior curbs
required by this section shall be a normal six inches in height.
      (4)   Surfacing. The entire site on which motor vehicle sales is located,
other than that devoted to buildings and structures or landscaped areas, shall
be paved or blacktopped and maintained to control dust and drainage and the
paving or blacktopping shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
      (5)   Lighting. All outdoor illumination on sales lots shall be provided
with lenses, reflectors or shades, which will concentrate the light upon the
premises so as to prevent glare or direct rays of light there from being
visible upon any adjacent highway or street or any private property occupied
for residential purposes. No flashing lights shall be permitted on any sales
lots. Lighting from any source on the property shall not exceed 0.5 foot
candles as measured from the centerline of any adjacent street nor 0.4 foot
candles at any property line which is not also a public right-of-way line.
   (D)   Parking.
      (1)   Customer parking. A minimum of five customer parking spaces shall
be provided for every acre of total site area.
      (2)   Customer service parking. A minimum of five customer service
parking spaces shall be provided for every acre of total site area.
      (3)   Employee parking.
         (a)   A minimum of two employee parking spaces shall be provided for
every three employees.
         (b)   The foregoing required parking spaces shall be shown and
designated on the site plan.
   (E)   Parking for outside sales and storage. The maximum area permitted for
outside storage of automobiles, new or used, shall not exceed two square feet
of outside storage area to each one square foot of enclosed ground floor area.
Not more than one automobile shall be stored on each 400 square feet of outside
storage area.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991)
§ 152.129 STANDARDS REGULATING OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOL LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A zoning permit shall be required for any swimming pool or other
outdoor bathing facility except for any pool or bathing facility that is two
feet or less in depth.
      (2)   An application for a zoning permit shall show:
         (a)   Type and size of pool or bath facility; and
         (b)   Site plan:
            1.   Location of pool or bathing facility;
            2.   Location of house, garage, fencing and other features on the
lot;
            3.   Location of structures on all adjacent lots;
            4.   Location of filter unit, pump and wiring involving type;
            5.   Location of back-flush and drainage outlet;
            6.   Grading plan, finished elevations and final treatment
(decking, landscaping and the like) around pool;
            7.   Location of existing overhead or underground wiring, utility
easements, trees and similar features; and
            8.   Location of any water heating unit.
   (B)   In single-family district.
      (1)   Pools shall not be located within ten feet of any side or rear lot
line nor within six feet of any principal structure or front footing. Pools
shall not be located within any required front yard.
      (2)   Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines nor over
underground utility lines of any type.
      (3)   Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility,
walkway, drainage or other easement.
      (4)   In the case of underground pools, due precautions shall be taken
during the construction period to avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to
adjacent or nearby property.
      (5)   All access for construction shall be via the owners’ land and due
care shall be taken to avoid damage to public streets and adjacent private or
public property.
      (6)   To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool
drainage shall be on the owners property or into approved public drainageways.
Water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private land.
      (7)   The filter unit, pump, heating unit and any other noise-making
mechanical equipment shall be located at least 50 feet from any adjacent or
nearby residential structure and not closer than ten feet to any lot line.
      (8)   Lighting for the pool shall be directed into or onto the pool and
not onto adjacent property.
      (9)   Water in the pool shall be maintained in a suitable manner to avoid
health hazards of any type.
      (10)   A safety fence of at least five feet in height shall completely
enclose the pool.
      (11)   All wiring, installation of heating units, grading, installation
of pipes and all other installations and construction shall be subject to
inspection by public inspectors.
      (12)   Any proposed deviation from these standards and requirements shall
require a conditional use permit in accordance with normal zoning procedures.
   (C)   In multiple-family areas. Pools in multiple-family areas (residential
structures containing three or more dwelling units) shall conform to the
standards set for single-family districts with the following added
restrictions.
      (1)   No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be less
than 50 feet from any lot line.
      (2)   No pump, filter, heating units or other apparatus used in
connection with or to service a swimming pool shall be located less than 50
feet from any lot line.
      (3)   All deck areas, adjacent patios or other similar areas used in
conjunction with the swimming pool shall be located not closer than 30 feet to
any adjacent single-family lot line. Adequate screening including both fencing
and landscape treatment shall be placed between the areas and adjacent single-
family lot lines.
   (D)   In all areas.
      (1)   Safety fencing shall be considered an integral part of any pool and
shall be installed prior to considering the pool complete.
      (2)   Nuisances such as undue noise, lighting onto adjacent property,
health and safety hazards, damage to nearby vegetation and the like shall not
be permitted.
      (3)   Filling of pools via fire hydrants and other public means shall
require approval of Superintendent of Utilities.
      (4)   Drainage of pools onto public streets or other public drainageways
shall require approval of the Superintendent of Utilities.
      (5)   Prior to issuance of a zoning permit for any pool, the owners of
all adjacent property shall be notified.
      (6)   Indoor pools shall comply to the State Building Code.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 173, passed 6-28-2005)
§ 152.130 MOTOR FUEL STATIONS.
   The building and premises for motor fuel stations shall meet the following
requirements.
   (A)   Setbacks and lot requirements.
      (1)   The setback of any overhead canopy or weather protection,
freestanding or projecting from the station structure shall be not less than
ten feet from the street right-of-way line nor less than 20 feet from an
adjacent property line.
      (2)   The total height of any overhead canopy or weather protection shall
not exceed 20 feet in height.
      (3)   Open dead storage of motor vehicles, other than motor vehicles for
rent, shall not be permitted for a period of more than 48 hours.
      (4)   All goods for sale by a motor fuel station convenience store, other
than those generally required for the operation and maintenance of motor
vehicles, shall be displayed within the principal motor fuel station structure.
      (5)   Each motor fuel station shall be architecturally designed so as to
be as compatible as possible with the general architectural intent of the area
in which it is located.
      (6)   For the purposes of architectural appropriateness each and every
side of a motor fuel station shall be considered as front face.
 
            Lot Width Front Yard Adjacent to Adjacent to Rear Yard Pump Setback
                                 Another Lot Street
Interior    150 feet  60 feet    30 feet     60 feet     30 feet   25 feet
lot station
Corner lot  200 feet  60 feet    30 feet     60 feet     30 feet   30 feet
station
                                 Either side
                                 yard, 60
With                             feet; not
trailer or                       adjacent to
motor       200 feet  60 feet    street or   (see side yard)
vehicle                          rear yard,
rentals                          50 feet;
                                 other yard,
                                 30 feet
 
   (B)   Access driveways and parking areas.
      (1)   Access and parking areas shall be designated so as to provide an
adequate means of access to a public street. The driveway access shall not
exceed 22 feet in width at the public street right-of-way line and shall be so
limited so as to cause the least interference with the traffic movement.
      (2)   All public parking areas shall have access off driveways and not
directly off a public street. All outside parking spaces shall be clearly
marked on the pavement.
      (3)   Motor fuel stations and motor fuel station convenience stores: a
minimum of four outside parking spaces, plus three additional outside parking
spaces for each enclosed service stall shall be provided. One additional
outside parking space shall be provided for each 150 square feet of floor space
devoted to retail sales in a motor fuel station convenience store.
      (4)   The distance from a driveway to the intersection of two streets
shall not be less than 30 feet measured along the curb line with the property
line and the point of tangency of the curb lines with the curb return of the
driveway; provided, however, that if, in the opinion of the City Engineer,
present or future traffic conditions warrant greater distances, the greater
distances shall be required subject to approval by the City Council.
      (5)   The minimum distance between driveways shall be 25 feet measured at
the property or street right-of-way line; provided however, that if, in the
opinion of the City Engineer, present or future traffic conditions warrant
greater distances, the greater distances shall be required subject to approval
by the City Council.
      (6)   The minimum driveway angle to the street shall be 45 degrees unless
otherwise recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
      (7)   The distance from a driveway to the property line of an adjacent
property shall not be less than five feet measured along the curb line between
the point of intersection of the curb line with the property line extended and
the point of tangency of the curb line with the curb return of the driveway
unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City
Council.
   (C)   Landscaping and sign requirements.
      (1)   A minimum ten-foot landscaped yard shall be planted and maintained
behind the property line along all adjacent public streets.
      (2)   A landscaped yard not less than five feet wide shall be maintained
along exterior property lines except at driveway entrances.
      (3)   The entire motor fuel station site, other than that part devoted to
landscaping and structures shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous
surfacing to control dust and provide adequate drainage, and the surfaces shall
be designed to meet the requirements of a minimum four-ton axle load.
      (4)   Whenever a motor fuel station abuts an R District, a fence or
compact evergreen hedge not less than 50% opaque nor less than six feet high
shall be erected and maintained along the side and rear property line that
abuts the R District. Application of this provision shall not require a fence
within 15 feet of any street right-of-way line.
      (5)   All trash, waste materials and obsolete automobile parts shall be
stored within a separate enclosure behind the principal structure of the motor
fuel station.
      (6)   All interior curbs shall be constructed within the property lines
to separate driving and parking areas from landscaped areas. The curbing shall
be constructed of concrete and shall be of a six- inch non-surmountable design.
      (7)   All rental campers, trailers or motor vehicles shall be stored
within the rear and/or side yard not adjacent to the street. The rentals shall
not be stored within the front yard setback nor the side yard adjacent to the
street.
      (8)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in other sections of this
chapter, the following requirements shall be observed for signs for motor fuel
stations.
         (a)   Motor fuel stations shall have no more than one pedestal type
business identification sign not to exceed 25 feet in height erected within any
yard except that no part of the sign shall be less than ten feet from a
property line measured as a horizontal distance.
         (b)   No part of the sign surface shall be less than 16 feet vertical
distance from the grade of the nearest driveway or parking area.
         (c)   The pedestal shall not be less than five feet from a driveway at
its nearest point.
         (d)   The sign shall have no more than three faces and shall not
exceed more than 100 square feet per face.
   (D)   Lighting. All outdoor illumination shall be provided with lenses,
reflectors or shade which will concentrate the light upon the premises so as to
prevent any undue glare or rays of light therefrom being directly visible upon
any adjacent street, roadway or adjacent property.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.131 RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   Recreational fires are not permitted in any R District unless the following
conditions can be met.
   (A)   No fire ban has been initiated by appropriate federal, state or local
authorities.
   (B)   Only above-ground fireplace type structures made of metal or other
non-combustible material which are completely enclosed may be used. In R-
1 areas, metal fire rings are also permissible.
   (C)   The area of the fire, whether enclosed or in a fire ring, may not
exceed three feet in diameter, must be least 25 feet from any structure, and
cannot produce excessive smoke so as to be a nuisance to the other property
owners.
   (D)   Fires will not be allowed to smolder with no flame present and only
clean, dry wood may be used.
   (E)   No fire will be permitted within 20 feet in any direction of any above
or below ground natural gas, electrical, cable television or other utility
service line.
   (F)   Mobile cooking devices such as charcoal grills, wood smokers, hibachis
and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as recreational fires.
   (G)   Recreational burning is prohibited between 12:00 a.m. midnight and 9:
00 a.m.
(Ord. 172, passed 3-22-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any firm, person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
these regulations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof be subject to fine and/or imprisonment. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists
or participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of §
152.101 is guilty of a misdemeanor and for each violation is subject to the
maximum penalty prescribed by state law for a misdemeanor. Each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 110, passed 4-23-1991; Ord. 163, passed 7-22-2003)
CHAPTER 153: LONG-TERM RENTALS
Section
   
153.01   Purpose and findings
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Registration requirements
   
153.04   Exemptions
   
153.05   Manner of registration renewal
   
153.06   Transfer of property
   
153.07   Posting of registration
   
153.08   Fees
   
153.09   Maintenance of records
   
153.10   Maintenance of standards
   
153.11   Inspections and investigations
   
153.12   Conduct on registered premises
   
153.13   Failure to grant registration, revocation, suspension or failure to
renew registration
   
153.14   Summary action
   
153.15   Applicable laws
   
153.16   Violations, injunctive relief
   
153.17   Written notices
   
153.18   Effective date
§ 153.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City Council of the City of Hoyt Lakes finds that there is a need
for periodic municipal inspection of residential rental units in the city to
ensure that such units meet city and state safety, health, fire and zoning
codes and to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the community at
large and the residents of rental units within this city.
   (B)   The City Council of the City of Hoyt Lakes finds that a municipal
registration program is appropriate to effectively enforce residential rental
unit maintenance standards and correct or prevent law violations, nuisances,
and other disturbances and disorders involving residential rental units within
this city.
   (C)   The City Council of the City of Hoyt Lakes finds that an effective
means of implementing the foregoing findings is registration of all residential
rental units within the city and inspection of such units from time to time as
determined appropriate in the exercise of discretion by staff and personnel of
the city and in response to complaints involving such units.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR OR CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The Hoyt Lakes City Administrator, or
the Deputy Hoyt Lakes City Clerk in the absence of the City Administrator, or
such person as the City Administrator designates, in writing, to carry out the
responsibilities of the City Administrator as provided by this chapter.
   DWELLING. Any building or other permanent or temporary structure, including
a manufactured or mobile home which is wholly or partly used, or intended to be
used, for living or sleeping by human occupants.
   LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGER. A natural person residing within 30 miles of the
City of Hoyt Lakes who is authorized by the rental unit owner to make decisions
for the owner about rental, occupancy and maintenance of the rental unit.
   REGISTRATION HOLDER. A person or entity to whom registration for a rental
unit is issued under this chapter.
   RENT, LEASE, LET, or SUBLET. The leasing of a rental unit to a non-owner for
a fixed or non-fixed period of time of more than 30 days, and shall include
lease to buy, contract for deed, installment sales, purchases, and other
similar arrangements whereby nonpayment of a periodic payment means the
occupants may be evicted without the necessity of either a statutory mortgage
foreclosure procedure, a statutory termination of contract for deed procedure,
or a statutory repossession procedure.
   RENTAL UNIT/RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. Any house, apartment, condominium,
townhouse, room, or group of rooms, constituting or located within, a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit.
   SHALL and MUST. As used in this chapter are each mandatory.
   SHOULD and MAY. As used in this chapter are each permissive or directory.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.03 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person or entity may hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied or
rent, lease, let or sub-let a rental unit, to another person or entity for
occupancy unless that rental unit is registered for occupancy pursuant to a
valid and current rental unit registration issued by the Hoyt Lakes City
Administrator.
   (B)   Each rental unit must have an owner, or local property manager
designated by the owner, who resides within 30 miles of the City of Hoyt Lakes.
   (C)   Any person or entity desiring to rent, let, lease or sub-let any
rental unit shall apply for registration by using forms furnished by the city
for that purpose. The forms must provide information required by the City
Administrator, including, but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Name, address, phone number of the property owner.
      (2)   Name, address, phone number of a designated local property manager.
      (3)   The street address of the rental property.
      (4)   The number and types of units within the rental property (dwelling
units or sleeping rooms).
      (5)   The maximum number of occupants permitted for each dwelling unit or
sleeping room.
      (6)   The name, phone number, and address of the person authorized to
make, or order, made repairs or services for the property if in violation of
city or state codes, if the person is different than the owner or local
property manager.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to campus dormitory and campus residence units
owned, operated or managed by a governmental entity or agency, hospital units
or rooms, nursing homes, retirement homes or other similar rental space which
is otherwise registered by the State of Minnesota or the City of Hoyt Lakes.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.05 MANNER OF REGISTRATION RENEWAL.
   Registration shall be required each calendar year and may be issued on a
calendar year basis prior to January 1 of each successive year. The city will
annually mail registration renewal forms to rental unit owners or their
designated local property managers on or about October 1 of each year.
Registration renewal forms must be delivered to the City Administrator no later
than the fifteenth day of November each year. Failure of the city to mail
renewal forms and failure of an owner or local property manager to receive a
renewal form, does not excuse or waive the registration required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.06 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.
   Every new owner of a rental unit, whether fee owner or contract purchaser,
shall furnish to the City Administrator the new owner’s name, address, and
phone number, and the name, address, and phone number of the new owner’s
designated local property manager before taking possession of the rental
property upon closing of the transaction. No new registration fee is be
required of the new owner during the year in which such possession takes place,
provided that the previous owner has paid all registration fees and has
complied with all requirements of this chapter and any violations of health,
zoning, fire or safety codes of the city and county. If any change in the type
of occupancy as originally registered is contemplated by the new owner, a new
registration application will be required.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.07 POSTING OF REGISTRATION.
   Each rental unit registration holder must post the rental unit registration
in a conspicuous spot near the front entry to the rental unit in a public
corridor, hallway or lobby. Failure to post the registration and keep the
registration posted is a misdemeanor, but is not grounds for termination of
registration.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.08 FEES.
   The fees for rental unit registration, registration renewal, late fees and
inspection may be set by ordinance or resolution of the City Council adopted
from time to time.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.09 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   All records, files and documents pertaining to rental unit registration and
rental unit inspections may be maintained by the City Administrator and will be
available to the public as allowed, permitted or required by state law or city
ordinance.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.10 MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS.
   Every rental unit must be maintained in compliance with the building code,
dwelling maintenance standards, nuisance ordinance, and noise ordinance of the
City of Hoyt Lakes, St. Louis County, and State of Minnesota respectively as
now in force and hereafter amended, revised or replaced, and in compliance with
all other standards, ordinances, laws and regulations governing use, occupancy,
construction and maintenance of property and conduct of persons in or on that
property.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.11 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Fire Department personnel, East Range Police Department officers, the
City Zoning Officer, City Rental Inspector, City Administrator and their
respective designees and representatives, are hereby authorized to make
inspections reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   All persons authorized herein to inspect shall have the authority to
enter, at all reasonable times, any rental unit or structure containing a
rental unit, registered or required to be registered, for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter.
   (C)   Written notice of a violation of this chapter may be given to the
registration holder by certified mail directed to the address of the
registration holder as shown by the Administrator’s registration application
file. Said notice may contain a compliance order stating that compliance with
this chapter shall be made immediately and, in that case, the notice shall
advise the registration holder that the property may be re-inspected in not
less than 15 days, unless extended by the Administrator, based on good cause.
   (D)   A registration holder may appeal to the City Administrator the
requirements of any compliance order by filing a written appeal with the office
of the City Administrator no later than ten days after the date of issuance of
the compliance order. The City Administrator should schedule a hearing within
ten days after filing of the notice of appeal. Enforcement of the compliance
order shall be stayed pending the decision of the City Administrator on the
appeal. The City Administrator may reschedule the hearing as the Administrator
determines is necessary.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.12 CONDUCT ON REGISTERED PREMISES.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the registration holder to require and
ensure that occupants of the registered premises conduct themselves in such a
manner as to not cause the premises to be disorderly or to be used, occupied or
maintained in violation of law or ordinance. For purposes of this section, a
rental unit is disorderly and in violation of law or ordinance when any of the
following activities occur in, on or at the registered premises:
      (1)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of the Hoyt Lakes City Code
relating to nuisances as it now exists or as hereafter amended.
      (2)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of Hoyt Lakes City Code 130,
the noise ordinances as it now exists or as hereafter amended.
      (3)   Conduct which constitutes disorderly conduct in violation of M.S. §
609.72 as it now exists or as hereafter amended.
      (4)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of laws relating to
possession of controlled substances pursuant to M.S. Chapter 152 as it now
exists or as hereafter amended.
      (5)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of any city ordinance or
state law relating to minors possessing or consuming alcohol, or relating to
providing, furnishing or serving alcohol to minors, or relating to sale of
alcoholic beverages.
      (6)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of state laws or city
ordinances relating to prostitution, indecent exposure or acts related to
prostitution as defined by state law.
      (7)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of city ordinances and state
laws relating to weapons or fire arms.
      (8)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of city ordinances or state
laws relating to assault, specifically including domestic assaults and criminal
sexual conduct.
      (9)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of ordinances or laws
relating to contributing to the need for protection, services or delinquency of
a minor as defined in M.S. § 260.315 as it now exists or as hereafter amended.
      (10)   Conduct which constitutes a violation of any other federal, state
or local ordinance or regulation and which is reasonably likely to threaten,
annoy or harass tenants or visitors to rental units, or to residents, visitors
or occupants of neighboring properties.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall administer this section of the chapter
and may delegate administration to a designee authorized in writing by the City
Administrator.
   (C)   If the Administrator determines that a violation of this section has
occurred, then the Administrator will give notice of the violation to the
registration holder and the renters of the rental unit, if known, and will
direct that the registration holder take steps to prevent further violations.
   (D)   If another violation of this section occurs within 90 days of the
incident for which notice was given as provided in division (C) above, then the
City Administrator will give notice of the violation to the registration holder
and the renters of the rental unit, if known, and will direct that the
registration holder take steps to prevent further violations. The City
Administrator will also, at that time, request that the registration holder
submit to the City Administrator, within ten days of the City Administrator’s
mailing of the notice of violation provided in this section, a report itemizing
all actions taken by the registration holder in response to all notices of
violations as to the rental unit within the preceding 90 days.
   (E)   If a third violation of this section occurs within 90 days after the
last of any two or more previous violations for which notices were given
pursuant to this section, and the registration holder has not sufficiently
taken action to prevent further violations, then the rental unit registration
for the premises may be denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed.
      (1)   Action to deny, revoke, suspend or not renew a rental unit
registration may be initiated by the City Administrator who shall give to the
registration holder a written notice of hearing before the City Administrator
to consider such denial, revocation, suspension or non-renewal.
      (2)   A notice of intent to deny, revoke, suspend or not renew
registration shall specify all violations of this section and shall state the
date, time, place and purpose of the hearing provided by this division.
      (3)   The hearing held pursuant to this division shall occur no later
than 30 days after notice.
      (4)   Following the hearing, the City Administrator may deny, revoke,
suspend or not renew registration for all or any part of the registered
premises or may grant conditional registration upon such terms and conditions
as the Administrator finds necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.
   (F)   No adverse registration action may be imposed where the violation of
this section occurred during the pendency of unlawful detainer eviction
proceedings brought under M.S. Chapter 566, as it may be amended from time to
time, or within 30 days of notice given by the registration holder to a tenant
to vacate the premises at which the violation occurred. Unlawful detainer
eviction proceedings or a notice to vacate the premises, will not, however, bar
adverse registration action unless diligently pursued by the registration
holder. Action to deny, revoke, suspend or not renew registration for violation
of this section may be postponed or dismissed by the City Administrator at any
time if it appears to the Administrator that the registration holder has taken
appropriate remedial action.
   (G)   The standard of proof to be used in determinations by the City
Administrator as to conduct constituting violations under this section is a
fair preponderance of evidence in support of such a determination. It is not
necessary that criminal charges be brought to support a determination of
violation of this section or a determination that conduct constituting a
violation of this section has occurred. It is necessary, in determining a
violation of this section, that law enforcement officers be called to the
rental unit in response to a complaint and that a police report and
investigation of the same be prepared.
   (H)   For the purpose of this chapter, a violation under this section
includes violations by the rental unit renters or occupants, or by their
visitors or guests, in or at the rental unit of the renters or tenants, or in,
at or upon its curtilage, including anywhere on the property grounds and
premises of an apartment building, home or mobile home park at which the rental
unit is situated.
   (I)   Failure of a registration holder to respond to notices provided in
this section is not, by itself alone, a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.13 FAILURE TO GRANT REGISTRATION, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR FAILURE TO
RENEW REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to not register a rental unit unless it
complies with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any registration issued under this chapter is subject to the right,
which is hereby expressly reserved by the city, to deny, suspend, revoke or not
renew the same should the registration holder or their agents, employees,
representatives or lessees directly or indirectly operate or maintain the
rental dwellings contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the city or any special permit issued by the city, or the laws of
the State of Minnesota. Provided, however, registration shall not be denied,
suspended, revoked or not renewed if the registration holder complies with a
compliance order or orders in a reasonably timely manner as determined by the
City Administrator.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall notify the applicant that registration
has been denied, or the registration holder that registration is being
suspended, revoked or not renewed. The suspension, revocation or non-renewal
shall occur 35 days after the date of the notification order, or at such later
date as set out in the notification.
   (D)   A determination by the City Administrator to deny, suspend, revoke or
not renew registration of a rental unit may be appealed to the City Council by
filing with the City Administrator a written notice of appeal within 15 days of
the date on which the City Administrator mails such determination to the
applicant or registration holder. In that event, the appeal will be heard by
the City Council at its next meeting occurring at least 15 days after the
filing of the notice of appeal.
   (E)   At any appeal of a determination by the City Administrator under this
chapter, the registration holder or applicant, local property manager for the
registration holder or applicant, or an attorney representing them, may appear
and make a presentation to the City Council. The City Administrator shall
present to the City Council the basis for the determination being appealed.
After the hearing, the Council may uphold, reverse or modify the decision of
the City Administrator based upon the provisions of this chapter and upon the
protection of the public health, sanitation, safety or general welfare of the
community at large or the residents of rental units within the city. The City
Council shall issue written findings and determination within 31 days of the
hearing, unless the Council extends that time for good cause.
   (F)   A decision of the City Council made as provided in this section may be
appealed by Writ of Certiorari to the Court of Appeals of the State of
Minnesota pursuant to its Rules of Civil Appellate Procedure.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.14 SUMMARY ACTION.
   (A)   As a condition of receiving rental unit registration, each
registration holder is presumed to agree and consent that when the conduct of
any registration holder or registration holder’s agent, representative,
employee or lessee, or the condition of their rental unit, or the property in
or on which it is located, is detrimental to the public health, sanitation,
safety and general welfare of the community at large, or residents of the
rental units so as to constitute a nuisance, fire hazard, or other unsafe or
dangerous condition and thus give rise to an emergency, the City Administrator
shall have the authority to summarily condemn or close individual rental units
or such areas of the rental dwelling as the Administrator deems necessary.
Notice of summary condemnation shall be posted at the units or areas affected
and shall describe the units or areas affected. No person shall remove the
posted notice, other than the Fire Chief, East Range Police Chief, City
Administrator, or their designated representative. Any person aggrieved by the
decision or the action of the City Administrator or Fire Marshall set out in
this division, may appeal the decision following the procedures set out in this
chapter. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as provided in this
chapter, however, the date of the hearing may be expedited with the consent of
the registration holder.
   (B)   The decision of the City Administrator set forth in this division is
not voided by the filing of such appeal. Only after the hearing by the City
Council has been held will the decision or action of the City Administrator be
affected.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.15 APPLICABLE LAWS.
   Registration holders are subject to all of the ordinances of the city and
State of Minnesota relating to rental dwellings, and this chapter shall not be
construed or interpreted to supersede or limit any other applicable ordinance
or law.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.16 VIOLATIONS, INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter prevents the city from taking enforcement
action under any of its fire, housing, zoning, health safety or other codes,
ordinances and state laws for violations thereof, or to seek injunctive relief
and criminal prosecution for violations of any ordinance, code or law. Nothing
contained in this chapter prevents the city from seeking injunctive relief
against a property owner or designated property manager who fails to comply
with the terms and conditions of this chapter or to obtain an order closing
such rental units until violations of this particular chapter have been
remedied by the property owner or designated property manager.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Each separate day on which
a continuing violation occurs is a separate violation.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.17 WRITTEN NOTICES.
   Notices from the city required by this chapter shall be effective if
personally delivered or if mailed to the addressee by first class mail to the
address shown in the city file pertaining to the rental unit involved in the
notice.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 153.18 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The initial registration provisions of this chapter do not become effective
until April 1, 2023 to allow rental unit owners to complete the process of
registration. The initial registration covers a period of time from the date of
issue through December 31, 2023.
(Ord. 236, passed 11-28-2022)
CHAPTER 154: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Section
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Exemptions
   
154.04   Registration required
   
154.05   Application
   
154.06   Lodging tax
   
154.07   Expiration of license
   
154.08   Renewal of license
   
154.09   Licensed premises
   
154.10   Recreational vehicles
   
154.11   License not transferable
   
154.12   Registered agent required
   
154.13   Responsibility of owners
   
154.14   Disorderly conduct prohibited
   
154.15   License revocation
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the short-term rental of
dwelling units within the city is conducted, operated and maintained in a
manner so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City of Hoyt Lakes, and so as to not become a nuisance to the
surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for
residential purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit equipped and intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages pertinent to the use of
the property on which it is displayed.
   OPERATE. To charge a rental charge for the use of a unit in a dwelling.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this Section, to the same extent as if such person were
the owner.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. The term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE means any of the
following:
      (1)   TRAVEL TRAILER. Vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses, permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer of the
trailer.
      (2)   PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
      (3)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary building to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of the self-propelled
vehicle.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The rental or lease of a dwelling unit, in whole or in
part, for 30 days or less.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE. The license issued by the city for the rental or
lease of a dwelling unit, in whole or in part, for 30 days or less.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse or any other discarded solid organic or
inorganic materials.
   TENANT. Any person who is occupying a dwelling unit in whole or in part
under any agreement (written or oral), lease, or contract.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to hospital units or rooms, nursing homes,
retirement homes, hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, or other similar rental
space that is otherwise licensed by the State of Minnesota or the City of Hoyt
Lakes.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.04 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No owner shall undertake the short-term rental of any dwelling unit to a
tenant or tenants unless properly permitted by state, county, and any other
governmental regulations, and as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.05 APPLICATION.
   An owner desiring to undertake or allow the short-term rental of a dwelling
unit in the city shall apply for a short-term rental license. The application
shall be submitted by the owner. The registration application shall be on a
form prescribed by the city and shall include all required information.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.06 LODGING TAX.
   Short-term rentals are subject to lodging tax as provided for in the City of
Hoyt Lakes Ordinance
Chapter 34. A short-term rental license holder is required to file monthly
lodging tax reports to the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.07 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Short-term rental licenses shall expire annually on December 31 of each year
unless suspended or revoked as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.08 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Applications for renewal of an existing short-term rental license must be
made at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the current short-term rental
license. All such applications shall be made to the city on forms provided by
the city.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.09 LICENSED PREMISES.
   Short-term rentals shall only be licensed for dwelling units located on
conforming lots as defined in the City of Hoyt Lakes Zoning Ordinance. All
licensed premises must be hooked up and paid to current for city water and
sewer services.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.10 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   The short-term rental of recreational vehicles parked or otherwise located
on property outside of designated campsites within the city is prohibited.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.11 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No short-term rental license shall be transferable to another person or
another dwelling unit. Every person holding a short-term rental license shall
give notice in writing to the city within five business days after having
legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any dwelling
unit for which a short-term rental license has been issued. Such notice shall
include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or
control of such dwelling unit.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.12 REGISTERED AGENT REQUIRED.
   No short-term rental license shall be issued without the designation of a
local agent. The agent must Live and work within 30 miles of the dwelling unit.
The agent may, but is not required to be, the owner. One person may be the
agent for multiple dwelling units. At all times, the agent shall have on file
with the city a primary phone number as well as current address. The agent or a
representative of the agent shall be available 24 hours a day during all times
that the dwelling unit is being rented as the primary number to respond
immediately to complaints and contacts relating to the dwelling unit. The city
shall be notified in writing within five business days of any change of agent.
The agent shall be responsible for the activities of tenants and the
maintenance and upkeep the dwelling unit and shall be authorized and empowered
to receive notice of a violation of the provisions of city ordinances and state
law, to receive orders, and to institute remedial action to affect such orders,
and to accept service of process pursuant to law.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.13 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.
   No owner shall undertake or allow the short-term rental of a dwelling unit
that does not comply with all applicable city ordinances, the laws of the State
of Minnesota, and this section. It shall be the owner’s responsibility to
ensure compliance with the following:
   (A)   Maintenance standards. Every dwelling unit used for short-term rental
shall conform to all building and zoning requirements of the City of Hoyt Lakes
and laws of the State of Minnesota.
   (B)   Parking. All short-term rentals shall have its own designated off-
street parking and parking shall not block other property’s access if a shared
driveway.
   (C)   Signs prohibited. On-premise signs are prohibited.
   (D)   Tenants. Owner or registered agents shall maintain a list of all
current and prior tenants of each dwelling unit, including dates stayed at the
dwelling units. The owner or registered agent shall make the list available to
city staff and/or law enforcement upon request.
   (E)   Emergency contact. The owner shall post within the dwelling unit the
name, address, email and primary and secondary telephone number of the owner or
any registered agent that can be utilized 24 hours a day by tenants or their
guests.
   (F)   Noise standards. Quiet hours shall be between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
Any outdoor amplified sound during this time that can be heard by neighboring
property owners is prohibited.
   (G)   Solid waste. Owner shall ensure that appropriate solid waste and/or
recycling bins are available for use by tenants and guests and shall not be
stored in public view.
   (H)   Posted notice. Owner shall post within the dwelling unit, notice of
all use restrictions as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.14 DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   Disorderly conduct is prohibited on all licensed premises. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to ensure that all tenants occupying the licensed
premises and their guests conduct themselves in such a manner as not to cause
the licensed premises to be disorderly. For purposes of this section,
disorderly conduct refers to any disorderly conduct violation under Minnesota
Statutes or City of Hoyt Lakes Ordinances.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.15 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Every short-term rental license is subject to revocation for violations of
this section or any other provision of Minnesota or City of Hoyt Lakes
Ordinances.
   (A)   Violations. Violations of this section shall be reported to the City
Clerk’s Office. The City Administrator shall review the violation and provide
written notice to the license holder of the violation and any necessary
remedial actions.
   (B)   Revocation. If a license holder fails to correct a violation or
receives three violations within any 12-month period, the City Administrator
shall recommend revocation of the short-term rental license to the City
Council. The City Council and City Administrator shall provide written notice
to the owner and any registered agent of the revocation. The notice shall
inform the owner and agent of the right to appeal the decision to the Hoyt
Lakes City Council.
   (C)   Appeal. A license holder aggrieved by the revocation of a short-term
rental license may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the City Clerk’s office within ten days after date of issuance of
the written revocation notice, a written statement requesting a hearing before
the City Council and setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. A hearing
shall be held within 30 days of receipt of the request. Notice of the hearing
shall be given by the City Clerk’s Office in writing, setting forth the time
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
license holder at his/her last known address at least five days prior to the
date set for hearing.
   (D)   Effect of revocation. If a short-term rental license is revoked, it
shall be unlawful for anyone to thereafter allow any new short-term rental
occupancies of the dwelling unit until such time as a valid short-term rental
license is issued by the city. No person who has had a license revoked under
this section shall be issued a short-term rental license for one year from the
date of revocation.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who undertakes or allows any violation of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 237, passed 11-28-2022)
CHAPTER 155: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
Section
   
155.01   Statutory authorization and purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Jurisdiction and districts
   
155.04   Requirements for all floodplain districts
   
155.05   Floodway district
   
155.06   Flood fringe district
   
155.07   General floodplain district
   
155.08   Subdivision standards
   
155.09   Public and private utilities, service facilities, roads, bridges, and
railroads
   
155.10   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles
   
155.11   Administration
   
155.12   Nonconformities
   
155.13   Violations and penalties
   
155.14   Amendments
§ 155.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. This floodplain chapter is adopted pursuant
to the authorization and policies contained in M.S. Chapter 103F; Minnesota
Rules, parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200; the rules and regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in 44 CFR §§ 59 to 78; and the planning and
zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 462.
   (B)   Purpose.
      (1)   This chapter regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the
City of Hoyt Lakes. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic
inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.
      
      (2)   This chapter is adopted in the public interest to promote sound
land use practices, and floodplains are a land resource to be developed in a
manner which will result in minimum loss of life and threat to health, and
reduction of private and public economic loss caused by flooding.
      (3)   This chapter is adopted to maintain eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program.
      (4)   This chapter is also intended to preserve the natural
characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
   (C)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
other private agreements. The standards in this chapter take precedence over
any less restrictive, conflicting local laws, ordinances, or codes. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
   (D)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This chapter does not imply that
areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. Not all flood risk is
mapped. Larger floods do occur and the flood height may be increased by man-
made or natural causes, such as ice jams or bridge openings restricted by
debris. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the City of Hoyt
Lakes or its officers or employees for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
   (E)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined, words or phrases used in this chapter must be
interpreted according to common usage and so as to give this chapter its most
reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure, as defined in this chapter, that is on the
same parcel of property as, and is incidental to, the principal structure or
use; an ACCESSORY STRUCTURE specifically excludes structures used for human
habitation.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. BASE FLOOD is synonymous with the term "regional
flood" used in Minnesota Rules, part 6120.5000.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the base flood, regional flood,
or one-percent annual chance flood. The term BASE FLOOD ELEVATION is used in
the flood insurance study.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides, regardless of the depth of
excavation below ground level.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE. 
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct flowing water either continuously
or periodically.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A land use or development that would not be appropriate
generally, but may be allowed with appropriate restrictions upon a finding that
certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist, the use or
development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of the community, and
the use is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FARM FENCE. An open type of fence of posts and horizontally run wire,
further specified in M.S. § 344.02, Subd. l(a-d).
   FLOOD. A temporary rise in the stream flow or water surface elevation from
any source that results in the inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the 1% annual chance floodplain located outside
of the floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made
available digitally is called a DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The study referenced in §
155.03(B), which is an examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards, and if appropriate, corresponding surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation, and determination of mudslide (i.e. mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOODPLAIN. The beds, channel and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse, or other source which have been or hereafter may be inundated by
the base flood.
   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding,
primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which must be reserved to carry or
store the base flood discharge without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one-half foot.
   GENERAL FLOODPLAIN. Those floodplains designated on the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps referenced in §
155.03(B) but that do not have a delineated floodway.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of 44 CFR § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of an adopted floodplain management regulation,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The main building or other structure on a lot that is
utilized for the property's principal use.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a REACH.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. Those
vehicles not meeting this definition shall be considered a STRUCTURE for the
purposes of this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, the term
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel
vehicle."
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE). An elevation that is two feet
above the elevation of the base flood.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area having special flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow), or flood- related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or
FIRM as Zone A, AO, Al-30, AE, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, A99,
AH, VO, Vl-30, VE, V, M, or E.
   STAGE INCREASE. Any increase in the water surface elevation during the one-
percent annual chance flood caused by encroachments on the floodplain.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT, and means the date
the permit was issued, provided the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that
is principally above ground, as well as a MANUFACTURED HOME. RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES not considered travel ready, as detailed in §
155.10(B)(2), shall also be considered a STRUCTURE for the purposes of this
chapter.
   SUBDIVISION. Land that has been divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or
lease, including planned unit developments.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the START OF CONSTRUCTION of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred SUBSTANTIAL
DAMAGE, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
“historic structure.” For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure” is
defined in 44 CFR § 59.1.
   VARIANCE. Defined in 44 CFR § 59.1 and M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6(2).
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in
violation of until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously
or intermittently in a definitive direction. The term applies to either natural
or artificially constructed channels.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.03 JURISDICTION AND DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Lands to which chapter applies. This chapter applies to all lands
within the jurisdiction of the City of Hoyt Lakes within the Special Flood
Hazard Areas (SFHAs) identified on the Flood Insurance Rate maps identified in
§
155.03(B). Areas within the SFHA are within one of three districts: the
Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Floodplain.
      (1)   The Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Floodplain Districts are
overlay districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in
addition to any other requirements. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive
standards will apply.
      (2)   These regulations apply to all areas within the SFHA. If areas
below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) extend beyond the mapped SFHA based on
actual field conditions, the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) shall be the governing
factor in locating the outer boundaries of the 1% annual chance floodplain and
these regulations apply to the outer boundary of the 1% annual chance
floodplain.
   Figure 1: The mapped floodplain may not always align with on-the-ground
contour elevations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a42b482c0c282ddf37f3403a8547843a6f3c29d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1145.gif]
 
      ( 3)   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commission
and to submit technical evidence.
   (B)   Incorporation of maps by reference. The following maps together with
all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of the official zoning map and this chapter. The attached material includes the
Flood Insurance Study for St. Louis County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas,
dated March 25, 2025, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map panel numbers
27137C1850E, 27137C1875E, 27137C2125E, 27137C2150E, 27137C2400E, 27137C2425E,
all dated March 25, 2025, all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. These materials are on file in the City Hall.
   (C)   Districts.
      (1)   Floodway District. Those areas within Zone A determined to be
located in the floodway based on the delineation methods in §
155.07(D).
      (2)   Flood Fringe District. Those areas within Zone A determined to be
located in the flood fringe based on the delineation methods in §
155.07(D).
      (3)   General Floodplain District. Those areas within Zone A that do not
have a floodway delineated as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps referenced
in §
155.03(B).
   (D)   Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels referenced in §
155.03(B) may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate
boundaries of the City of Hoyt Lakes at the time of adoption of this chapter.
If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of Hoyt Lakes
after the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands
will be subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of
annexation. Annexations into panels not referenced in §
155.03(B) require ordinance amendment in accordance with §
155.14.
   (E)   Municipal boundary adjustments. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels
referenced in §
155.03(B) apply countywide. If at any point any lands come under the
jurisdiction of another local government, the following shall apply:
      (1)   City adjustments of corporate boundaries, including but not limited
to annexations and detachments, shall shift floodplain administrative authority
of all affected lands immediately upon the date of the boundary adjustment
occurring. Cities retain jurisdiction for all incorporated lands, and the
county retains jurisdiction under this chapter on all unincorporated lands.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator to verify compliance with all applicable standards outlined in
this chapter prior to the following uses or activities:
      (1)   The erection, addition, modification, maintenance, rehabilitation,
repair, or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal
maintenance requires a permit to determine if such work, either separately or
in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement,
as specified in §
155.12(A)(3).
      (2)   The construction of a fence, pool, deck, or placement of anything
that may cause a potential obstruction. Farm fences, as defined in §
155.02 of this chapter, are not considered to be an obstruction, and as such,
do not require a permit.
      (3)   The change or expansion of a nonconforming use.
      (4)   The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire,
tornado, or any other source.
      (5)   The placement of fill, excavation, utilities, on-site sewage
treatment systems, or other service facilities.
      (6)   The storage of materials or equipment, in conformance with §
155.04(B)(2).
      (7)   Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including stabilization
projects or the construction of new or replacement dams, culverts and bridges).
A local permit is not required if a public waters work permit has been obtained
from the Department of Natural Resources, unless a significant area above the
ordinary high water level is also to be disturbed.
      (8)   Any other type of development, as defined in §
155.02 of this chapter.
   (B)   Minimum development standards.
      (1)   All developments must:
         (a)   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Be constructed with materials and equipment resistant to flood
damage;
         (c)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage;
         (d)   Be constructed with heating, ventilation, duct work, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities elevated at least up to the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE).
Water, sewage, electrical, and other utility lines below the RFPE shall be
constructed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within them
during conditions of flooding;
         (e)   Be reasonably safe from flooding and consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
         (f)   Be assured to provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
         (g)   Not be detrimental to uses in adjoining areas;
         (h)   Not adversely affect the efficiency or restrict the flood
carrying capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system;
         (i)   Ensure that any fill or other materials are protected from
erosion, discharge, and sediment entering surface waters by the use of
vegetative cover or other methods as soon as possible.
      (2)   Materials that, in time of flooding, are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life shall be
stored at or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE),
floodproofed, or protected by other measures as approved by the Zoning
Administrator. Storage of materials likely to cause pollution of the waters,
such as sewage; sand; rock; wrecked and discarded equipment; dredged spoil;
municipal, agricultural or industrial waste; and other wastes as further
defined in M.S. § 115.01, are prohibited unless adequate safeguards approved by
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency are provided. For projects not requiring
approvals by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, adequate safeguards must
be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.05 FLOODWAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses in Floodway. Development allowed in the floodway
district is limited to that which has low flood damage potential and will not
obstruct flood flows, increase velocities, or increase the water surface
elevations of the 1% annual chance flood. The following uses and activities may
be allowed with a permit, subject to the standards in §
155.05(B):
      (1)   Agricultural uses, recreational uses, parking lots, loading areas,
airport landing strips, water control structures, navigational facilities, as
well as public open space uses.
      (2)   Roads, driveways, railroads, trails, bridges, and culverts.
      (3)   Public utility facilities and water-oriented industries which must
be in or adjacent to watercourses.
      (4)   Grading, filling, land alterations, and shoreline stabilization
projects.
   (B)   Standards for permitted uses in Floodway. In addition to the
applicable standards detailed in §
155.04:
      (1)   The applicant must demonstrate that the development will not result
in any of the following during the 1% annual chance flood: cause a stage
increase of 0.00 feet or greater, obstruct flood flows, or increase velocities.
This shall be demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed
by a professional engineer, or using other standard engineering practices (e.g.
projects that restore the site to the previous cross-sectional area). This is
commonly documented through a “no-rise certification.”
      (2)   Any development that would result in a stage increase greater than
0.00 feet may only be allowed with a permit if the applicant has applied for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) in accordance with 44 CFR § 65.12,
and FEMA has issued the CLOMR. Map revisions must follow the procedures in §
155.11(A)(5) and §
155.14.
      (3)   Any development resulting in decreases to the water surface
elevation of the base flood identified in the Flood Insurance Study requires a
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) following the procedures in §
155.11(A)(5) and §
155.14.
      (4)   Any development in the beds of public waters that will change the
course, current or cross section is required to obtain a public waters work
permit in accordance with M.S. § 103G.245 or a utility crossing license in
accordance with M.S. § 84.415, from the Department of Natural Resources, or
demonstrate that no permit is required, before applying for a local permit.
      (5)   Fill and other land alteration activities must offer minimal
obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.06 FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses in Flood Fringe. Any uses or activities allowed in any
applicable underlying zoning districts may be allowed with a permit, subject to
the standards set forth in §
155.06(B).
   (B)   Standards for permitted uses in Flood Fringe. In addition to the
applicable standards detailed in §
155.04:
      (1)   Residential structures.
         (a)   Elevation on fill. Structures erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, or moved on fill within the Flood Fringe District shall
be placed so that the lowest floor, as defined in § 155.02 of this chapter, is
elevated at or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE). The
finished fill elevation shall be at or above the elevation associated with the
base flood plus any stage increases that result from designation of a floodway.
Fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside
limits of the structure. Elevations must be certified by a registered
professional engineer, land surveyor or other qualified person designated by
the Zoning Administrator. Elevation methods alternative to these fill standards
are subject to a Conditional Use Permit, as provided in §
155.06(B)(2)(b) of this chapter (Figure 2).
   Figure 2: Overview of fill standards for residential structures.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a42b482c0c282ddf37f3403a8547843a6f3c29d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1147.gif]
 
      (2)    Nonresidential structures. Nonresidential structures must meet one
of the following construction methods:
         (a)   Elevation on fill. Structures may be elevated on fill, meeting
the standards in §
155.06(B)(1)(a) of this chapter. Fill for nonresidential structures is not
required to be extended 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure.
         (b)   Alternative elevation methods. Structures may be elevated using
methods alternative to the fill standards in §
155.06(B)(1)(a) of this chapter. Such methods include the use of blocks,
pilings (Figure 3), filled stem walls (Figure 4), or internally-flooded
enclosed areas (Figure 5) such as crawl spaces, attached garages, or tuck under
garages.
Figure 3:                  Figure 4:               Figure 5:
Blocks or pilings.                Filled stem walls.            Internally
flooded enclosed area.[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
4a42b482c0c282ddf37f3403a8547843a6f3c29d/IMAGES/0-0-0-1149.gif]
 
         (c)   Designs accommodating for internally-flooded enclosed areas must
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the standards detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin 1, as amended, as well
as the following standards:
            1.   The lowest floor, as defined in §
155.02 of this chapter, shall be elevated at or above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation (RFPE).
            2.   The floor of the enclosed area must be at or above the
exterior grade on at least one side of the structure.
            3.   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
shall be a minimum of two openings below the base flood elevation on at least
two sides of the structure. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. The openings shall have a minimum net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, have a net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, and shall allow automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters without human intervention.
            4.   Internally flooded enclosed areas shall only be used for the
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Bathrooms and toilet rooms
shall not be allowed.
         (d)   Dry floodproofing. Structures having watertight enclosed
basements or spaces below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE) must
meet the following standards:
            1.   Walls must be substantially impermeable to the passage of
water, with structural components having the capacity of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, at least up to the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE);
            2.   Must meet the standards of FEMA Technical Bulletin 3, as
amended; and
            3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall be
required to certify that the design and methods of construction meet the
standards detailed in this section.
      (3)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures must meet the
following standards:
         (a)   Structures shall not be designed or used for human habitation.
         (b)   Structures will have a low flood damage potential.
         (c)   Structures shall constitute a minimal investment not to exceed
576 square feet in size, one-story in height, and shall only be used for
parking and storage, except as provided under §
155.06(B)(3)(e). Structures not meeting the standards of §
155.06(B)(3)(a) through (c) must be designed and constructed in accordance with
floodplain management requirements based on whether the structure is
residential or nonresidential. Residential structures must meet the
requirements of §
155.06(B)(1), and nonresidential structures must meet the requirements of §
155.06(B)(2).
         (d)   Structures with two or more rigid walls, must meet one of the
following construction methods:
            1.   Wet floodproofing. Structures may be floodproofed in a way to
accommodate internal flooding. To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
pressure, there shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the
structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. The openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, and shall
allow automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention.
Portions of structures below the RFPE must be constructed of flood damage-
resistant materials. Utilities must be elevated above the RFPE and any utility
lines below the RFPE shall be constructed so as to prevent floodwaters from
entering or accumulating within them. Wet floodproofed structures must be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
            2.   Elevation on fill. Structures may be elevated on fill, meeting
the standards in §
155.06 (B)(1)(a) of this chapter. Fill is not required to be extended 15 feet
beyond the outside limits of the structure.
            3.   Alternative elevation methods. Structures may have their
lowest floor elevated above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE)
through methods alternative to the fill standards in §
155.06 (B)(3)(d)(2), and must meet the standards in §
155.06 (B)(2)(b) of this chapter.
            4.   Dry floodproofing. Structures may be dry-floodproofed, or
watertight, meeting the standards in §
155.06 (B)(2)(c) of this chapter.
         (e)   Structures with fewer than two rigid walls, such as carports,
gazebos, and picnic pavilions, meeting the standards in §
155.04(B)(1) of this chapter may be located at an elevation below the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, exceed 576 square feet in size, and may
include uses as provided under §
155.06(A).
      (4)   Any facilities used by employees or the general public must be
designed with a flood warning system acceptable to the City of Hoyt Lakes that
provides adequate time for evacuation, or be designed to ensure that within the
area inundated during the base flood event, the depth (in feet) multiplied by
the velocity (in feet per second) is less than four.
      (5)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the
standards of §
155.10 of this chapter.
   (C)   Conditional uses in Flood Fringe. The following uses and activities
may be permitted as conditional uses, subject to the standards in §
155.06(A):
      (1)   Alternative elevation methods - residential structures. Residential
structures with their lowest floor elevated above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation (RFPE) using methods alternative to the fill requirements
in §
155.06(B)(1).
   (D)   Standards for conditional uses in Flood Fringe. In addition to the
applicable standards detailed in §
155.04, §
155.06(B), and §
155.11(B):
      (1)   All residential structures with lowest floors elevated through
alternative elevation methods must meet the standards in §
155.06(B)(2)(b) of this chapter.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.07 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses in General Floodplain District.
      (1)   Until the floodway is delineated, allowable uses will be restricted
to those listed in the Floodway District, §
155.05.
      (2)   All other uses are subject to a floodway/flood fringe determination
as provided in §
155.07(D), in addition to the standards provided in §
155.07(B) and §
155.077(C). Permitted uses shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   If the development is determined to be in the Floodway District,
§
155.05 applies.
         (b)   If the development is determined to be in the Flood Fringe
District, §
155.06 applies.
   (B)   Determining flood elevations. All development requires a determination
of the Base Flood Elevation (BFE). Proposed developments of more than 50 lots
or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, must use detailed methods for determining the
BFE. This may include use of supporting A Zone modeling and the “shoreland
method,” when eligible, on lakes. Exceptions to this requirement include
projects that restore the site to the previous cross-sectional area, such as
shore stabilization or culvert replacement projects. Base Flood Elevations
(BFE) may be found using best available data from any Federal, State, or other
source (including MNDNR's Lake & Flood Elevations Online (LFEO) Viewer).
   (C)   Encroachment analysis.
      (1)   Encroachments due to development may not allow stage increases more
than one-half foot at any point, unless through a map revision following the
procedures in §
155.11(A)(5) and §
155.14. This evaluation must include the cumulative effects of previous
encroachments, and must be documented with hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed by a professional engineer, or using other standard engineering
practices. A lesser water surface elevation increase than one-half foot is
required if, due to the water surface level increase, increased flood damages
would potentially result.
      (2)   Alterations or changes that result in stage decreases are allowed
and encouraged.
   (D)   Standards for the analysis of floodway boundaries.
      (1)   Requirements for detailed studies. Any development, as requested by
the Zoning Administrator, shall be subject to a detailed study to determine the
limits of the Floodway District. This determination must be consistent with the
minimum standards for hydrologic and hydraulic mapping standards and
techniques, as detailed in Minnesota Rules, part 6120.5600, Subp. 4 and FEMA
Guidelines and Standards for Flood Risk Analysis and Mapping, as revised.
Additionally:
         (a)   A regulatory floodway necessary to carry the discharge of the 1%
annual chance flood must be selected without increasing the water surface
elevation more than one-half foot at any point. This determination should
include the cumulative effects of previous encroachments. A lesser water
surface elevation increase than one-half foot is required if, due to the water
surface level increase, increased flood damages would potentially result; and
         (b)   An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream
within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway boundaries, unless
topography, existing development patterns, and comprehensive land use plans
justify a modified approach, as approved by the Department of Natural
Resources.
      (2)   Other acceptable methods. For areas where a detailed study is not
available or required:
         (a)   Development prohibited in floodways (e.g. most buildings)
requires a floodway/flood fringe determination to verify the development is
within the flood fringe. This determination must be done by a professional
engineer or utilize other accepted engineering practices. The Department of
Natural Resources may also provide technical assistance and must approve any
alternative methods used to determine floodway boundaries.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.08 SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.
   All subdivided land must meet the following requirements. Manufactured home
parks and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are considered subdivisions
under this chapter.
   (A)   All lots within floodplain districts must be suitable for a building
site outside of the Floodway District.
   (B)   Subdivision of lands within the floodplain districts may not be
approved if the cost of providing governmental services would impose an
unreasonable economic burden on the City of Hoyt Lakes.
   (C)   All subdivisions must have vehicular access both to the subdivision
and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE), unless a flood warning/emergency
evacuation plan has been approved by the City of Hoyt Lakes.
   (D)   The Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE) and the required elevation of all access
roads must be clearly identified on all required subdivision drawings and
platting documents.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.09 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE UTILITIES, SERVICE FACILITIES, ROADS, BRIDGES, AND
RAILROADS.
   (A)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges
must be elevated to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE) where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area, or where
failure or interruption would result in danger to public health or safety.
Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation
where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety. All public transportation facilities should be
designed to minimize increases in flood elevations.
   (B)   Public utilities. All utilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be elevated and/or
floodproofed to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE), be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and be designed to
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters. All public utilities should be designed to minimize
increases in flood elevations. New solid waste management facilities, as
defined in Minnesota Rules, part 7035.0300, are prohibited in the 1% annual
chance floodplain. Water supply systems are subject to the provisions in
Minnesota Rules, part 4725.4350.
   (C)   Private on-site water supply, individual sewage treatment systems, and
other service facilities. Private facilities shall be subject to applicable
provisions detailed in § 155.09(B). In addition, new or replacement on-site
sewage treatment systems are to be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during times of flooding, shall not be located in a
designated floodway, and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules,
parts 7080.2270.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.10 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks are
subject to applicable standards for each floodplain district. In addition:
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes must be placed and elevated
in compliance with §
155.06 of this chapter and must be securely anchored to a system that resists
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (2)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks must meet the appropriate standards for subdivisions in §
155.08 of this chapter.
   (B)   Recreational vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds
and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are
prohibited in any floodplain district. Recreational vehicles placed in existing
recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds or lots of record in the floodplain
must either:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in §
155.10(A), or
      (2)   Be travel ready, meeting the following criteria:
         (a)   The vehicle must be fully licensed.
         (b)   The vehicle must be ready for highway use, meaning on wheels or
the internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities.
         (c)   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the
vehicle.
         (d)   Accessory structures may be permitted in the Flood Fringe
District, provided they do not hinder the removal of the vehicle should
flooding occur, and meet the standards outlined in §
155.04 and §
155.06(B)(3).
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.11 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Duties. A Zoning Administrator or other official must administer and
enforce this chapter.
      (1)   Permit application requirements. Permit applications must be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The permit application must include the
following, as applicable:
         (a)   A site plan showing all existing or proposed buildings,
structures, service facilities, potential obstructions, and pertinent design
features having an influence on the permit.
         (b)   Location and detail of grading, fill, or storage of materials.
         (c)   Copies of any required local, state or federal permits or
approvals.
         (d)   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator
as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
      (2)   Record keeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain applicable
records in perpetuity documenting:
         (a)   All certifications for dry floodproofing and alternative
elevation methods, where applicable.
         (b)   Analysis of no-rise in the Floodway District, as detailed in §
155.05(B)(1), and encroachment analysis ensuring no more than one-half foot of
rise in the General Floodplain District, as detailed in §
155.07(B)(2) and §
155.07(C)(1).
         (c)   Final elevations, as applicable, detailing the elevation to
which structures and improvements to structures are constructed or
floodproofed. Elevations shall be determined by an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified individual, as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (d)   Substantial damage and substantial improvement determinations,
as detailed in §
155.12(A)(3), including the cost of improvements, repairs, and market value.
         (e)   All variance actions, including justification for their
issuance, and must report such variances as requested by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      (3)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or
nonconforming use. No building, land or structure may be occupied or used in
any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the
Zoning Administrator stating that the finished fill and building floor
elevations or other flood protection measures are in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. Before authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must
notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work
in public waters in accordance with M.S. § 103G.245, this will suffice as
adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to FEMA.
      (5)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease
base flood elevations. Where physical changes affecting flooding conditions may
increase or decrease the water surface elevation of the base flood, the City of
Hoyt Lakes must notify FEMA of the changes in order to obtain a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR), by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific
data as soon as practicable, but no later than six months after the date such
supporting information becomes available. Within the General Floodplain
District, a map revision is only required if development results in stage
increases greater than one-half foot.
   (B)   Conditional uses and variances.
      (1)   Process.
         (a)   An application for a conditional use permit will be processed
and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   An application for a variance to the provisions of this chapter
will be processed and reviewed in accordance with M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6(2)
and this chapter.
      (2)   Additional variance criteria. The following additional variance
criteria must be satisfied:
         (a)   Variances must not be issued within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
         (b)   Variances from the provisions of this chapter may only be issued
by a community upon:
            1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
            2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         (c)   Variances from the provisions in this chapter may only be issued
upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief.
         (d)   Variances must be consistent with the general purpose of these
standards and the intent of applicable provisions in state and federal law.
         (e)   Variances may be used to modify permissible methods of flood
protection, but no variance shall permit a lesser degree of flood protection
than the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE).
         (f)   The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a
variance in writing that:
            1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
            2.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks
to life and property.
Notification must be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
      (3)   Considerations for approval. The City of Hoyt Lakes must consider
all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter in granting
variances and conditional use permits, including the following:
         (a)   The potential danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
         (c)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
      (4)   Conditions of approval. The City of Hoyt Lakes may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances and conditional use permits as it deems
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
         (b)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
         (c)   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction.
         (d)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator and Planning Commission.
   (C)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
      (1)   All notices of public hearings to consider variances or conditional
uses under this section must be sent via electronic mail to the Department of
Natural Resources respective area hydrologist at least 10 days before the
hearings. Notices of hearings to consider subdivisions/plats must include
copies of the subdivision/plat.
      (2)   A copy of all decisions granting variances and conditional uses
under this section must be sent via electronic mail to the Department of
Natural Resources respective area hydrologist within 10 days of final action.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.12 NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   Continuance of nonconformities. A use, structure, or occupancy of land
which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject
to the following conditions:
      (1)   Within the floodway and general floodplain districts (when a site
has been determined to be located in the floodway following the procedures in §
155.07(C), or when the floodway has not been delineated), any expansion or
enlargement of uses or structures is prohibited.
      (2)   Within all districts, any addition, modification, rehabilitation,
repair, or alteration shall be in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter, shall not increase the flood damage potential or increase the degree
of obstruction to flood flows, and where applicable, must be protected to the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE).
      (3)   If any nonconforming structure is determined to be substantially
damaged or substantially improved based on the procedures in §
155.12(B), it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. Any structures located outside the 1% annual chance floodplain
are exempt from this provision.
      (4)   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure,
is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the premises must
conform to this chapter.
   (B)   Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. Prior
to issuing any permits for additions, modifications, rehabilitations, repairs,
alterations, or maintenance to nonconforming structures, the Zoning
Administrator is required to determine if such work constitutes substantial
improvement or repair of a substantially damaged structure. A determination
must be made in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Estimate the market value of the structure. In the case of repairs,
the market value of the structure shall be the market value before the damage
occurred and before any restoration or repairs are made.
      (2)   Estimate the cost of the project. The property owner shall
accommodate for inspection, and furnish other documentation needed by the
Zoning Administrator to evaluate costs.
         (a)   Improvement costs shall be comprised of the market rate of all
materials and labor, as well as the costs of all ordinary maintenance and
upkeep carried out over the past one year.
         (b)   Costs to repair damages shall be comprised of the market rate of
all materials and labor required to restore a building to its pre-damaged
condition regardless of the work proposed, as well as associated improvement
costs if structure is being restored beyond its pre-damaged condition.
      (3)   Compare the cost of the improvement, repairs, or combination
thereof to the estimated market value of the structure, and determine whether
the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of a
substantially damaged structure, as defined in §
155.02 of this chapter.
         (a)   For the purposes of determining whether the proposed work would
constitute substantial improvement, the evaluation shall also include all
rehabilitations, additions, or other improvements completed since the community
has adopted floodplain standards impacting this structure.
         (b)   If any nonconforming structure experiences a repetitive loss, as
defined in §
155.02 of this chapter, it shall be considered substantially damaged and must
not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   Based on this determination, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare
a determination letter and notify the property owner accordingly. Structures
determined to be substantially damaged or substantially improved may not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.13 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Uses in violation of the chapter. Every structure, fill, deposit, or
other use placed or maintained in the floodplain in violation of this chapter
shall be considered a public nuisance.
   (B)   Civil remedies. The creation of a public nuisance may be enjoined and
the maintenance of a public nuisance under this chapter may be abated by an
action brought by the City of Hoyt Lakes or the Department of Natural
Resources.
   (C)   Enforcement. Violations of the provisions of this chapter constitutes
a misdemeanor and are punishable as defined by law. The Zoning Administrator
may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but
not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits,
orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance
Program for denial of flood insurance. The City of Hoyt Lakes must act in good
faith to enforce these official controls and to correct violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 155.14 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Ordinance amendments. Any revisions to the floodplain maps by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or annexations of new map panels require an
ordinance amendment to update the map references in §
155.03(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   Required approval. All amendments to this chapter must be submitted to
the Department of Natural Resources for review and approval prior to adoption,
for compliance with state and federal rules and requirements. The floodplain
ordinance shall not be considered valid until approved.
(Ord. 247, passed 3-24-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   STREET NAME CHANGES
      
III.   ZONING
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting to Minnesota Power & Light Company the right to
10       4-25-1956   construct and maintain an electric distribution system
                     within the city for a period of 20 years.
                     Granting Peoples Natural Gas, division of Northern Natural
33       9-9-1964    Gas Company, a nonexclusive authority for a period of 25
                     years to erect and maintain a gas plant and/or gas system.
                     Granting to Minnesota Power & Light Company the right to
65       3-11-1975   construct and maintain an electric distribution and
                     transmission system within the city for a period of 20
                     years.
                     Creating and awarding a cable television franchise for a
71       5-20-1976   period of 15 years to Cable Communications Systems for the
                     Cities of Hoyt Lakes, Aurora, Biwabik and the Township of
                     White.
                     Granting to Peoples Natural Gas, division of UtiliCorp
104      10-27-1988  United Inc., a nonexclusive authority for a period of 25
                     years to erect, maintain and operate a gas distribution
                     system; repealing Ord. 33.
112      5-28-1991   Amending Ord. 71 to extend the authorized term for renewal
                     from five to ten years.
                     Granting a franchise to Star Northern American Corporation
113      5-30-1991   to construct, operate and maintain a cable television
                     system for a term of 15 years; repealing Ord. 71.
114      5-30-1991   Amending Ord. 71 to extend the authorized term for renewal
                     from five to 15 years.
                     Granting to Minnesota Power & Light Company the right to
132      9-12-1995   construct and maintain an electric distribution and
                     transmission system within the city for a period of 20
                     years; superseding Ord. 65.
                     Granting a renewed cable franchise, for a period of seven
177      10-24-2006  years, to Mediacom Minnesota LLC, setting forth conditions
                     accompanying the grant of the renewed franchise, providing
                     for certain service regulations and prescribing penalties.
                     Granting a cable franchise, for a period of five years, to
                     Lake County d/b/a Lake Connections, setting forth
198      4-10-2012   conditions accompanying the grant of the franchise,
                     providing for certain service regulations and prescribing
                     penalties.
                     Granting Minnesota Energy Resources, a subsidiary of
201      10-8-2013   Integrys Energy Group, a natural gas franchise for a
                     period of 25 years; repealing Ord. 104.
                     Extending the expiration date of the cable television
203      3-11-2014   franchise agreement authorizing the operation of a cable
                     television system.
                     Granting a renewed franchise to Mediacom Minnesota LLC,
204      4-22-2014   for a period of ten years, setting forth conditions
                     accompanying the grant of the renewed franchise, providing
                     for certain service regulations and prescribing penalties.
                     Granting Minnesota Power a nonexclusive franchise to
210      6-15-2015   construct, operate, repair and maintain an electric
                     distribution system and transmission lines for a period of
                     20 years; cancelling Ord. 132.
211      6-15-2015   Authorizing an electric franchise fee as authorized by
                     Ord. 210.
                     Granting a renewed franchise to Lake County DBA Lake
216      10-22-2018  Connections to provide services, facilities and equipment
                     necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the
                     community.
 
TABLE II: STREET NAME CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
31       - -1964     Changing the name of Allen Junction Road to Kennedy
                     Memorial Drive.
 
TABLE III: ZONING
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
128      3-28-1995   Rezoning property from Conservancy District (CD) to Retail
                     Business (B- 1).
138      8-27-1996   Rezoning all of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 of Section 9,
                     T58N, R14W from R-2 to B-2.
142      1-28-1997   Rezoning Block 15, Hoyt Lakes Subdivision No. 3 from R-
                     3 to B-1.
143      1-28-1997   Rezoning Block 14, Hoyt Lakes Subdivision No. 3 from R-
                     3 to B-1/B-3.
147      7-22-1997   Rezoning the following property from CD to I, all within
                     T58N, R14W:
                     1. NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 7;
                     2. SW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 7;
                     3. NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 7 lying west of County
                     Road 633; and
                     4. SE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 7 lying west of County
                     Road 633.
                     Rezoning the following property from Conservancy District
154      10-26-1999  (CD) and B-2 General Business to R-5 Two-Family Dwelling
                     and Townhouse:
                     1. Part of the north half of Section 8, Township 58 North,
                     Range 14 West containing 13.8 acres more or less; and
                     2. Part of the south half of Section 8, Township 58 North,
                     Range 14 West containing 28.8 acres more or less.
                     Rezoning part of the NW 1/4 of the SE 1/4, Section 8,
158      2-22-2000   Township 58 North, Range 14 West from B-2 General Business
                     to R-5 Two-Family Dwelling and Townhouse.
                     Rezoning all that part of Government Lots 3, 4, 12 and the
160      1-23-2001   NE 1/4 of Section 7, Township 58 North, Range 14 West
                     lying north of the current C.S.A.H. 110, a/k/a Allen
                     Junction Road from CD to I.
                     Rezoning that part of the NW 1/4 of the SE 1/4, Section 8,
161      3-12-2002   Township 58 North, Range 14 West from R-5 Two-Family
                     Dwelling and Townhouse to B-2 General Business.
                     Rezoning that part of Government Lots 2, 3 and 4, Section
                     18 and that part of Government Lots 11 and 12, Section 7,
162      1-27-2003   all in Township 58 North, Range 14 West from CD
                     Conservation District to R-3 Single-Family Residential
                     (with Shoreland Management overlay).
164      8-26-2003   Rezoning that part of the NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4 Section 7,
                     Township 58 North, Range 14 West from CD to I.
                     Rezoning property in Sections 3 and 10, all in Township 58
175      3-28-2006   North, Range 14 West from Mining District to Conservation
                     District (CD).
                     Rezoning the following from Multiple-Family Residential
176      7-25-2006   District (R-6) to Single- Family Residential (R-1), all in
                     Section 8, Township 58 North, Range 14 West:
                     1. Northerly 200 feet of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 lying
                     east of road excluding part platted as Lakeview Addition
                     to Hoyt Lakes and excluding westerly 0.46 acre;
                     2. NE 1/4 of SE 1/4 lying north of Hoyt Road; and
                     3. Part of the NW 1/4 of SE 1/4 beginning at the most
                     north point of plat of Hoyt Lakes Subdivision No. 3 and
                     ending southwesterly to point of beginning, excluding
                     northerly 200 feet and excluding 2.04 acres along west
                     line.
                     Rezoning all that part of the NW 1/4, Section 9, Township
181      10-23-2007  58 North, Range 14 West from Conservation District (CD) to
                     Single-Family Residential (R-1).
                     Rezoning that part of the SW 1/4 of Section 9, Township 58
187      4-28-2009   North, Range 14 West from R-2 Single-Family Residential
                     District to R-6 Multiple- Family Residential District.
195      9-13-2011   Rezoning the following from R-1 Single-Family Residential
                     District to R-5 Two-Family and Townhouse District:
                     1. Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, Block 3,
                     Hoyt Lakes Subdivision No. 5;
                     2. That part of the NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4, Section 17,
                     Township 58 North, Range 14 West, beginning at the
                     southwest corner of Lot 1, Block 3, Hoyt Lakes Subdivision
                     No. 5;
                     3. That part of the NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4 and that part of
                     the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4, Section 17, Township 58 North,
                     Range 14 West, beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 5,
                     Block 3, Hoyt Lakes Subdivision No. 5; and
                     4. That part of the NW 1/4 of the SE 1/4, Section 17,
                     Township 58 North, Range 14 West, beginning at the
                     southwest corner of Lot 7, Block 3, Hoyt Lakes Subdivision
                     No. 5.
                     Rezoning that part of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4, Section 9,
205      6-23-2014   Township 58 North, Range 14 West from General Business
                     District (B-2) to Storage District (S- 1).
                     Rezoning the following from Mineral Mining District (MM)
206      6-23-2014   to Closed Landfill Restricted (CLR), all in Section 4,
                     Township 58 North, Range 14 West:
                     1. The N 1/2 of the SE 1/4 and the S 1/2 of the NE 1/
                     4 lying west of the centerline of County Highway 666,
                     consisting of 67.23 acres;
                     2. That part of the S 1/2 of the NE 1/4 of the SE 1/
                     4 lying west of the centerline of County Highway 666,
                     consisting of 8.6 acres;
                     3. The S 1/2 of the NW 1/4 of the SE 1/4, consisting of
                     15.3 acres;
                     4. That part of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 lying North of
                     the northerly line of the Duluth, Messabe and Iron Range
                     Railway and lying west of the centerline of Highway 666,
                     consisting of 1.4 acres; and
                     5. That part of the SW 1/4 of the SE 1/4 lying north of
                     the northerly line of the Duluth, Messabe and Iron Range
                     Railway, consisting of 0.5 acres.
                     Rezoning the following property from R-5, Two- Family and
215      6-25-2018   Townhouse District to R-3, Single-Family Residential
                     District:
                     1. Lots 1 through 11, Block 3, Hoyt Lakes Subdivision No.
                     5;
                     2. That part of the NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4, Section 17,
                     Township 58 North, Range 14 West;
                     3. That part of the NE 1/4 of the SW 1/4 and that part of
                     the NW 1/4 of the SE 1/4, Section 17, Township 58 North,
                     Range 14 West; and
                     4. That part of the NW 1/4 of the SE 1/4, Section 17,
                     Township 58 North, Range 14 West.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Section Code Section
M.S. Section               Code Section
84.81 to 84.915            72.027
84.415                     155.05
84.92 to 84.929            72.003
93.44 to 93.51             152.100 ,
                           155.01
97A.141, subd. 5           131.02
Chapter 103F               152.100
103F.201-.221              152.100
103G.005, subd. 15         152.100
103G.005, subd. 15a        152.100
                           152.100 ,
103G.245                   155.05,
                           155.11
105.485                    152.100
115.01                     155.04
Chapter 134                152.101
134.07 through 134.15      94.01
144.391                    113.01
151.40                     132.15
151.72                     114.01,
                           114.04
                           132.15,
Chapter 152                132.17 ,
                           153.12
152.01                     132.15
Chapter 168                70.01
168.002, subd. 27          71.02
168.10                     91.02
                           70.01,
                           70.15,
                           70.33,
Chapter 169                71.15,
                           72.003,
                           72.009,
                           72.032,
                           72.080
169.01, subd. 1            91.02
169.20                     72.095
169.21                     72.095
169.999                    10.98
169A.03                    72.003,
                           72.027
176.001 et seq.            30.02
176.011, subd. 9, clause 6 30.02
Chapter 201                33.15,
                           33.17
Chapter 216D               95.10
216D.01-.09                95.10,
                           95.19
237.16                     95.01
237.162                    95.01,
                           95.12
237.162, subd. 12          95.03
237.163                    95.01,
                           95.12
237.163, subd. 2(b)        95.02
237.163, subd. 6           95.24
237.79                     95.01
237.81                     95.01
238.086                    95.01
Chapter 245A               152.101
260.315                    153.12
273.17                     151.46
Chapter 278                113.03,
                           114.03
307.08                     152.100
Chapter 327                152.090
327.14, subd. 2            152.016
Chapter 340A               110.25
340A.101 et seq.           110.13
340A.4011                  110.27
340A.412, subd. 1          110.03
340A.503                   130.20,
                           130.23
340A.502                   130.20,
                           130.23
344.02, subd. 1(a-d)       155.02
Chapter 349                130.02
Chapter 394                152.100
Chapter 412                151.02
412.271                    94.03
Chapter 429                95.17,
                           151.02
429.021                    96.05
429.021, subd. 1           96.04
435.194                    96.14
437.02                     111.03
                           95.17,
Chapter 462                152.100 ,
                           155.01
462.357, subd. 6(2)        155.02,
                           155.11
462.358, subd. (2)(b)      151.46
462.3593                   152.085
469.190                    34.14,
                           34.99
Chapter 471                151.02
Chapter 505                151.02
505.01, subd. 8            152.100
Chapter 508                151.02
Chapter 566                153.12
609.2231                   130.20,
                           130.21
609.27                     130.20,
                           130.23
609.52                     130.20,
                           130.23
                           130.20,
609.595                    130.23,
                           130.24
609.605                    130.20,
                           130.23
609.66                     130.20,
                           130.21
609.68                     130.20,
                           130.23
609.685                    130.20,
                           130.22
609.705                    130.20,
                           130.21
609.715                    130.20,
                           130.21
                           130.20,
609.72                     130.21,
                           130.22 ,
                           153.12
609.745                    130.23
609.74                     130.20,
                           130.23
Chapter 617                152.101
617.23 through 617.299     152.101
617.241                    152.101
626.862                    10.20
631.48                     10.99
                           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
7        4-11-1956   130.04,
                     130.99
8        4-11-1956   130.05,
                     130.99
9        4-11-1956   130.06,
                     130.99
10       4-25-1956   TSO I
                     72.060—
16       10-10-1956  72.069,
                     72.999
                     110.01—
21       1-8-1958    110.13,
                     110.99
22       4-21-1958   94.01—
                     94.03
                     150.01—
26       4-11-1961   150.12,
                     150.99
31       - -1964     TSO II
33       9-9-1964    TSO I
34       4-27-1965   110.09
                     93.01—
36       8-3-1965    93.10,
                     93.99
38       9-27-1966   72.045—
                     72.047
40       7-31-1967   150.02
                     70.15,
44       8-26-1969   70.16,
                     70.99
                     130.04,
45       10-14-1969  130.20—
                     130.24,
                     130.99
53       1-26-1971   91.40—
                     91.43
                     51.20—
55       3-9-1971    51.26,
                     51.99
57       7-13-1971   33.15—
                     33.17
60       6-25-1973   130.03,
                     130.99
62       9-11-1973   110.09
63       6-11-1974   70.32,
                     70.99
64       8-27-1974   33.01—
                     33.03
65       3-11-1975   TSO I
67       9-23-1975   70.35,
                     70.99
                     92.30,
70       4-13-1976   92.31,
                     92.99
71       5-20-1976   TSO I
74       3-8-1977    70.34,
                     70.99
76       8-26-1977   70.33,
                     70.99
80       1-10-1978   112.01,
                     112.99
82       7-24-1979   96.01—
                     96.14
                     92.15—
84       4-22-1980   92.18,
                     92.99
                     52.01—
                     52.06,
                     52.20,
88       4-28-1981   52.21,
                     52.35,
                     52.50,
                     52.99
                     71.15—
90       5-26-1981   71.21,
                     71.99
92       11-10-1981  72.080,
                     72.999
                     51.01—
94       3-22-1983   51.07,
                     51.99
96       9-10-1984   110.09
                     92.01,
98       - -1985     92.02,
                     92.99
104      10-27-1988  TSO I
                     91.25—
106      11-9-1988   91.28,
                     91.99
107      1-24-1989   30.02
108      6-27-1989   110.09
109      11-13-1990  110.14
                     152.001,
                     152.002,
                     152.015,
                     152.016,
                     152.030—
                     152.052,
                     152.065—
110      4-23-1991   152.073,
                     152.085—
                     152.092,
                     152.094—
                     152.099,
                     152.115—
                     152.130,
                     152.999
112      5-28-1991   TSO I
113      5-30-1991   TSO I
114      5-30-1991   TSO I
                     91.01—
115      9-23-1991   91.11,
                     91.99
116      11-12-1991  152.094
                     152.016,
118      10-27-1992  152.034,
                     152.035
120      4-13-1993   51.08
121      5-25-1993   152.100
                     34.01—
122      9-28-1993   34.15,
                     34.99
                     131.01—
124      10-25-1994  131.03,
                     131.99
125      3-14-1995   110.08
127      3-28-1995   130.02,
                     130.99
128      3-28-1995   TSO III
129      4-11-1995   130.02
131      7-25-1995   152.034,
                     152.097
132      9-12-1995   TSO I
133      9-26-1995   152.095
                     72.025—
134      5-14-1996   72.034,
                     72.999
                     72.001—
                     72.003,
135      5-14-1996   72.005—
                     72.010,
                     72.999
136      5-14-1996   130.01,
                     130.99
                     152.034,
                     152.035,
137      5-28-1996   152.039,
                     152.090,
                     152.094,
                     152.100
138      8-27-1996   TSO III
                     110.25—
140      12-10-1996  110.33,
                     110.99
141      1-14-1997   130.02
142      1-28-1997   TSO III
143      1-28-1997   TSO III
144      2-11-1997   152.094,
                     152.096
                     70.01,
                     70.30,
                     70.31,
146      5-13-1997   70.99,
                     71.01,
                     71.02,
                     71.99
147      7-22-1997   TSO III
150      5-26-1998   152.092
151      6-23-1998   152.034
154      10-26-1999  TSO III
155      10-26-1999  152.100
                     151.01—
                     151.03,
                     151.15—
                     151.29,
153      11-8-1999   151.40—
                     151.46,
                     151.60—
                     151.64,
                     151.99
157      1-25-2000   110.14
158      2-22-2000   TSO III
                     110.01—
                     110.02,
159      3-28-2000   110.04,
                     110.06—
                     110.08
160      1-23-2001   TSO III
161      3-12-2002   TSO III
162      1-27-2003   TSO III
                     152.097,
163      7-22-2003   152.101,
                     152.999
164      8-26-2003   TSO III
165      8-26-2003   53.01,
                     53.99
167      2-24-2004   152.034
168      5-25-2004   152.016,
                     152.068
170      10-26-2004  31.01—
                     31.03
171      12-14-2004  110.09
                     152.016,
                     152.034,
                     152.053,
172      3-22-2005   152.094,
                     152.095,
                     152.100,
                     152.116,
                     152.131
173      6-28-2005   152.034,
                     152.129
174      8-24-2005   72.004
175      3-28-2006   152.098,
                     TSO III
176      7-25-2006   TSO III
177      10-24-2006  TSO I
178      12-12-2006  110.07
179      1-23-2007   152.096
180      5-8-2007    91.99
181      10-23-2007  TSO III
182      11-27-2007  152.093
184      3-11-2008   152.016,
                     152.098
186      9-23-2008   152.034
187      4-28-2009   TSO III
188      5-26-2009   152.034
191      7-27-2010   152.016,
                     152.089
                     90.01—
192      2-8-2011    90.22,
                     90.99
193      4-26-2011   50.01—
                     50.06
194      9-13-2011   152.067,
                     152.071
195      9-13-2011   TSO III
198      4-10-2012   TSO I
200      5-28-2013   132.15—
                     132.18
201      10-8-2013   TSO I
                     132.01—
202      12-10-2013  132.03,
                     132.99
203      3-11-2014   TSO I
204      4-22-2014   TSO I
                     152.085,
205      6-23-2014   152.103,
                     TSO III
                     152.085,
206      6-23-2014   152.102,
                     TSO III
                     91.02,
                     91.04,
207      7-28-2014   91.10,
                     91.28,
                     91.99
                     97.01—
208      12-22-2014  97.05,
                     97.99,
                     131.02
210      6-15-2015   TSO I
211      6-15-2015   TSO I
212      7-25-2016   152.085
213      7-1-2017    110.09
215      6-25-2018   TSO III
216      10-22-2018  TSO I
217      10-22-2018  30.01
218      3-11-2019   Adopting Ordinance
219      4-22-2019   72.095,
                     72.999
220      12-14-2020  110.04
221      12-28-2020  110.04
222      2-8-2021    91.02
223      6-7-2021    90.99
224      6-7-2021    152.034
225      6-7-2021    152.034
226      9-13-2021   50.05
228      11-8-2021   72.095
229      11-8-2021   90.03
231      3-14-2022   98.01,
                     98.99
232      6-27-2022   110.04,
                     110.29
235      11-14-2022  110.09
236      11-28-2022  153.01—
                     153.18
                     154.01—
237      11-28-2022  154.15,
                     154.99
239      1-23-2023   152.094
                     113.01—
240      1-23-2023   113.08,
                     113.99
                     114.01—
241      1-23-2023   114.08,
                     114.99
242      10-10-2023  132.17,
                     132.99
247      3-24-2025   155.01—
                     155.14
                    
 
