La Crescent, MN
Code of Ordinances
2025 S-25 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 594, passed 9-8-25
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   General interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.98   Administrative citations
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of La Crescent shall be
designated as the Code of La Crescent, Minnesota, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 GENERAL INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of La Crescent,
Minnesota.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNTY. Houston County, Minnesota.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by any individual authorized by state law.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Minnesota.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provision or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance or code provision requires an act to
be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given,
reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary
for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
shall fall on a Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded and the next
business day shall count as the last day.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance or code provision
previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance or
code provision had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly
provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
   Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
   Example: (M.S. §609.034) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
85)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
   Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see M.S.
§§138.163 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city, as published and subsequently amended, the prior code
section number shall be indicated in the history.
   Example:   (Prior Code, §3.20)
§ 10.98 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to
this section are intended to provide the public and the city with an informal,
cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional, primarily petty
misdemeanor criminal charges for violations of certain statutes, ordinances and
of other city regulation. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the
part of those who have been charged with administrative offenses. At any time
prior to the payment of the administrative penalty as provided on the
administrative citation, the person charged may withdraw from participation in
the procedures, in which event the city may bring criminal charges in
accordance with the law consistent with the facts involved underlying the
administrative citation. Likewise, the city may, without issuing an
administrative citation, bring the appropriate criminal charges initially. In
the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures, but
does not pay the monetary penalty specified on the administrative citation, the
city may recover the costs entailed as part of a criminal disposition should
the party charged be eventually adjudicated guilty.
   (B)   Offenses. An administrative offense is a violation of a provision of
the city code, city ordinance or state law and is subject to the administrative
penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties and as noted on
the administrative citation, as periodically set by the City Council by
resolution duly enacted. No penalty, as scheduled for administrative offenses,
shall exceed $100 for any offense. An administrative offense, a petty
misdemeanor, is not a crime. When used for traffic offenses, it is the policy
of the Police Department to issue administrative citations for petty
misdemeanors only. Administrative citations shall not be used in cases
involving personal injury, property damage, or where litigation is pending.
   (C)   Procedure. Officers of the Police Department will be issued separate
citation (ticket books) for issuing administrative citations. The citation form
shall include necessary space for all pertinent vehicle information, driver
information, month, date and time of the violation, ordinance or other
regulation number, and the officer's signature and badge number.
   (D)   Issuing administrative citations. At the time of a traffic stop or
during initial contact by an officer, violators may be given the option of
receiving an administrative citation or the citation the officer would
otherwise issue (non-administrative citation) where issuance of administrative
citation is not an option. Violators continue to enjoy the presumption of
innocence, hence may seek judicial determination by not remitting the amount
specified on the face of an administrative citation and as directed thereon. If
the officer ascertains in the initial contact with a violator of the violator's
intention to plead not guilty, the officer would issue a non-administrative
citation. The administrative citation shall disclose on the face thereof the
local ordinance number, statute or other regulation citation violated and the
issuing officer shall prepare and place on file brief incident report for each
administrative citation issued.
   (E)   Payment of administrative citations. When issuing the administrative
citation, the payment due date shall be written on the citation, affording the
violator seven days to pay the specified penalty at the City Clerk's office or
other designated depository. Although payment constitutes admission of the
violation, the violation shall not appear anywhere on the violator's driving or
criminal history record. Failure to pay the administrative penalty on or before
the date specified on the citation will result in it being processed in the
same manner as a non-administrative citation. Upon issuance of the misdemeanor
or petty misdemeanor charge, (non-administrative citation) the administrative
offense procedure shall not be initiated or if it is initiated shall thereupon
terminate. In instances where the administrative citation amount has been paid
and a non-administrative citation issues, the violator may disclose to the
Houston County Court Administrator the fact of the payment evidenced by receipt
thereof. The Prosecuting City Attorney to make the final dispositional decision
in such cases.
   (F)   Processing administrative citations. The City Clerk's office shall
receive a copy of all administrative citations issued, to enable effective
administrative record thereof and to account for payments received for
administrative citations. Receipts will be issued for all payments received.
All proceeds received and data collected pertaining to payment of an
administrative penalty shall be maintained by the City Clerk's office. All
penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to the City of La
Crescent and deposited to the city's general fund. Each administrative citation
will be classified as paid, unpaid or void. If a citation is dismissed or
voided for any reason, it must be marked and filed as such and forwarded to the
Chief of Police. All data collected and generated from the issuance of
administrative citations shall be filed and maintained by the Police
Department.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-9-08)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of no less than $35, but not to exceed $300/
$1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. In either case,
the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   When the code makes a violation a petty misdemeanor, the violator
shall be subject to a fine of no less than $15, but not to exceed $300/$1,000.
   (C)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is specifically provided
for such failure.
(Am. Ord. 393, passed 4-28-03)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations, penalties, see M.S. §§ 412.231 and 609.034
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
32.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   EMERGENCY SERVICES
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Council meetings; order of business
   
30.02   Elections
   
30.03   Workers compensation for Mayor and City Council members
   
30.04   Salary of the Mayor and of the members of the City Council
§ 30.01 COUNCIL MEETINGS; ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Each meeting of the Council shall be held on the second and fourth
Monday of each calendar month commencing at 5:30 p.m., official time.
   (B)   Council business shall be conducted in the following order:
      (1)   Call to order.
      (2)   Roll call.
      (3)   Consent agenda. All items on the consent agenda are considered to
be routine by the City Council and will be enacted by one motion. There will be
no separate discussion of these items unless a Council member or citizen so
requests, in which event the item will be removed from the consent agenda and
considered as a separate item on the regular agenda.
      (4)   Public hearings.
      (5)   Ordinances and resolutions.
      (6)   Reports of officers, boards and committees.
      (7)   Unfinished business.
      (8)   New business.
      (9)   Miscellaneous.
      (10)   Adjournment.
(Prior Code, § 2.08) (Ord. 252, passed 11-16-87; Am. Ord. 449, passed 1-26-09)
§ 30.02 ELECTIONS.
   The term of office for Mayor shall be two years, and for Council members, it
shall be four years. Elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in even-numbered years.
§ 30.03 WORKERS COMPENSATION FOR MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   State law provides that municipal officers elected or appointed for a
regular term of office are considered to be employees for workers compensation
purposes. Pursuant to M.S. § 176.011(9)(6), elected officials of the city,
namely the Mayor and the members of the City Council, are included in the
coverage of the Workers Compensation Act.
(Ord. 346, passed 1-12-98)
§ 30.04 SALARY OF THE MAYOR AND OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The salary of the Mayor of the city is hereby established to be $7,500 per
annum, payable $625 per month, and the salary of the members of the City
Council shall be $6,300 per annum, payable $525 per month. There shall be no
renumeration for Council who attend duly convened special meetings of the City
Council.
(Ord. 347, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 437, passed 12-17-07; Am. Ord. 561, passed
9-12-22)
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Standing commissions enumerated
   
31.02   Eligibility for membership and appointments
   
31.03   Reimbursement; expenses reimbursed
   
31.04   Ex-officio members
   
31.05   Reporting to Council
   
31.06   Commission agenda
Specific Departments, Boards and Commissions
   
31.20   Duties and objectives generally
   
31.21   Parks and Recreation Commission
   
31.22   Planning Commission
   
31.23   Emergency Services Commission
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 32
   Heritage Preservation Commission, see §
150.16
   Police Department, see
Ch. 33
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 STANDING COMMISSIONS ENUMERATED.
   The following standing commissions for the city are hereby established:
Emergency Services Commission, Golf Commission, Heritage Commission, La Crosse
Community Fire Cooperative, La Crosse Area Planning Commission Library Board,
Park and Recreation Commission, Planning Commission and Cable TV/Government
Access Commission.
(Prior Code, §2.15(1)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
§ 31.02 ELIGIBILITY FOR MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENTS.
   City Council members or other persons are eligible for appointment to the
commissions. Commission appointments, for purposes of transition from previous
commission appointment policy, shall be made anew with respect to all
commission positions in 1990. One-half of the commission members of a given
commission shall be appointed for a period of one year along with the extra
commission member of commissions having an odd number of members; the remaining
commission positions of a given commission shall be appointed for three-year
terms, except in the case of Planning Commission appointments. All subsequent
commission appointments in the years following transition year 1990 shall be as
to expired commission positions and for two-year terms. Interim appointment to
fill vacancies shall be for the balance of the unexpired vacant commission
position. Commission members, except Council member appointees, need not be
city residents. All members of commissions, their specific term durations not
withstanding, serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be discharged
or removed with or without cause.
(Prior Code, § 2.15(3)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
§ 31.03 REIMBURSEMENT; EXPENSES REIMBURSED.
   (A)   Commission members shall receive such reimbursement for expenses
incurred as a result of commission duties with prior approval thereof as the
Council may by resolution determine. Subject to approval and review by the City
Council, commission members shall be reimbursed for:
      (1)   Fees incidental to attendance at out-of-town meetings and seminars.
      (2)   Ordinary and necessary expenses incurred while attending and in
connection with out-of-town seminars and meetings.
      (3)   Necessary special equipment and supplies with prior City Council
approval.
   (B)   A city vehicle may be available for necessary out-of-town travel
subject to and consistent with established ongoing city policy for the use
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2.15(4)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
§ 31.04 EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS.
   The Chief of Police, Building Official, City Attorney, City Administrator
and the Public Works Director are ex-officio members of all commissions, and
the duration of their terms in such ex-officio capacities shall correspond with
their respective tenures in their general capacities.
(Prior Code, § 2.15(5)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
§ 31.05 REPORTING TO COUNCIL.
   All commissions shall report to the City Council at least once a year or as
otherwise requested by the Council. Routinely after each meeting whereat
subject matter referred to a commission for study, consideration and
recommendation, the commission shall make written specific findings of fact
together with its recommendation based thereon and shall transmit such written
fact findings and recommendation in writing to the City Administrator for
consideration by the City Council at a subsequent meeting thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2.15(8)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
§ 31.06 COMMISSION AGENDA.
   The business transacted at all commission meetings shall follow a standard
agenda form as prescribed by the City Council and available at the City
Administrator's office. Minutes of all proceedings which are public information
shall be kept by the designated commission secretary and shall be available at
all reasonable times and frequencies as public information, and especially for
review by the City Administrator, City Council, and where indicated, other city
staff department heads.
(Prior Code, § 2.15(10)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
SPECIFIC DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 31.20 DUTIES AND OBJECTIVES GENERALLY.
   The duties and objectives of the Public Works, Health, Parks and Recreation,
Buildings and Grounds, Economic Development, Planning, Public Safety, Board of
Appeals and Emergency Services are listed in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.16(1)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
§ 31.21 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.
   The duties and objectives of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be to
make studies and submit status reports and budget recommendations concerning
youth and adult recreational programs; to plan for effective utilization of
existing parks and playgrounds, including reviews to determine adequate
equipment and to make projections for new facilities to meet the recreational
needs of city residents.
(Prior Code, § 2.16(4)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
§ 31.22 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Qualifications of members; terms of office.
      (1)   There is hereby established a Planning Commission, hereinafter
referred to as the “Commission” which shall consist of seven members appointed
by the City Council from among the residents of the city.
      (2)   In addition, two ex-officio members shall be appointed, one from
the administrative membership of the city government, and one from the
membership of the City Council. Members appointed from and after the effective
date of these provisions shall be appointed three, each for a period of one
year; two, each for a period of two years; two, each for a period of three
years. Appointments to the Planning Commission shall be made by the City
Council annually as to each then expired Commission membership position, each
appointment to be for a three-year period.
      (3)   Ex-officio members shall be appointed for annual terms; provided,
that membership on the Commission shall terminate with the office from which
ex-officio membership is derived, and ex-officio members shall serve during the
pleasure of the City Council or as may otherwise be appropriate.
      (4)   Members other than ex-officio shall be appointed from among persons
in a position to represent the general public interest, and no person shall be
appointed with private or personal interests likely to conflict with the
general public interest. If any person appointed shall find that his or her
private or personal interests are involved in any matter coming before the
Commission, he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from taking part in
action on the matter, or he or she may be disqualified by the chairperson of
the Commission.
   (B)   Removal from office; vacancies.
      (1)   Appointments to the Planning Commission, the heretofore provisions
not withstanding are subject to cancellation or revocation at any time, with or
without cause in the sole discretion of the City Council. In the event of
vacancies, appointments to fill any vacancy shall be by the City Council for
the unexpired period of the vacant Commission position(s).
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the chairperson of the Commission to notify
the City Council promptly of any vacancies occurring in membership, and the
City Council shall fill such vacancies within 60 days for the unexpired term of
the original appointment.
   (C)   Officers, rules, employees, salaries and expenses.
      (1)   The Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from
among those of its members who are not appointed ex-officio, and may create,
with ratification of the City Council, such other offices as it may determine.
The Building Official shall serve as secretary to the Planning Commission. The
secretary shall not be entitled to vote.
      (2)   The Commission shall adopt rules for its governance and for the
transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of attendance at its
meetings and of resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, showing
the vote of each member on each question requiring a vote, or if absent or
abstaining from voting, indicating such fact. The records of the Commission
shall be a public record.
      (3)   Subject to prior approval of the City Council and within limits set
by appropriations or other funds made available, the Commission may employ such
staff, technicians and experts as may be deemed proper, and may incur such
other expenses as may be necessary and proper for the conduct of its affairs.
Members of the Commission shall receive no salary or fees for their services
thereon, but may receive necessary travel, per diem, and other expenses while
on official business for the Commission if funds are available for this
purpose.
   (D)   Appropriations, fees, and other income. The City Council shall make
available to the Commission such appropriations as it may see fit for fees, and
expenses necessary in the conduct of its work.
   (E)   Functions, powers and duties.
      (1)   The functions, powers and duties of the Commission shall generally
be to act as fact finder concerning matters appropriately before it and in
further regards thereto make recommendation to and advise the City Council
concerning but not necessarily limited to:
         (a)   The gathering and maintenance in current form such basic
information and background data as is necessary to an understanding of past
trends, present conditions, and forces at work to cause changes in their
conditions as relate to the comprehensive plan.
         (b)   To prepare and keep current for City Council approval, adoption
and implementation of a comprehensive general plan for meeting present
requirements and such future needs as may be foreseen.
         (c)   To recommend to the City Council principles and policies for
guiding action affecting development in the city and its environs.
         (d)   To recommend to the City Council ordinances, regulations and
other proposals promoting orderly development along lines indicated as
desirable by the comprehensive plan.
         (e)   To develop data for the City Council along with fact-findings
and recommendation concerning proposed developments to facilitate conformance
to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan and the
ordinances.
         (f)   To keep the City Council and the general public informed and
advised as to all planning and development matters.
         (g)   To conduct such public hearings as applicable law and ordinance
(code) provisions require, to gather information enabling the City Council to
knowledgeably draft, establish and maintain the comprehensive plan and
ordinances and regulations related to it and to collect and compile information
necessary for the plan, or for the purpose of promoting the accomplishment of
the plan in whole or in part.
         (h)   To perform other duties which may be lawfully assigned to it, or
which may have bearing on the preparation or accomplishment of the plan.
      (2)   In connection with its duties, and within the limit of its funds
and with the prior approval of the City Council, the Commission may make, cause
to be made, or obtain maps, aerial photographs and surveys, and special studies
on the location, condition and adequacy, including but not limited to: studies
on housing; commercial and industrial facilities; economic development; parks;
playgrounds and other recreational facilities; schools; public and private
utilities; and traffic, transportation, and parking.
      (3)   Consistent with organizational structure and specific duty
assignments, all city employees shall, upon request and within a reasonable
time, furnish to the Commission or its employees or agents such available
records or information as are required in its work.
   (F)   Plat review by Commission. As soon as a major street plan is adopted
by the Commission and subdivision regulations have been adopted by the City
Council, it shall become the responsibility of the Commission to pass upon all
proposed new or amended plats coming directly or indirectly under the
jurisdiction of the city. No new plat, and no amendment or vacation of an
existing plat or portion thereof, shall thereafter be caused to be recorded by
the city without the prior review of the Commission. Once reviewed by the
Commission and subsequently approved by the City Council, to the extent
required by law, the plat shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2.16(7)) (Ord. 326, passed 3-20-95; Am. Ord. 334, passed 2-12-
96)
§ 31.23 EMERGENCY SERVICES COMMISSION.
   The duties and objectives of the Emergency Services Commission shall be to
develop an emergency plan for the city to deal effectively with disasters and
hazards resulting from natural disasters and those resulting from other
catastrophes, including but not limited to spills and leaks of toxic substances
which expose residents and persons in the city to injury and damages, both
personal and property, and to provide emergency care and assistance together
with a plan to effectively implement such services and to study and review the
capability of the community to deal with all manner of emergencies; formulating
a plan for ongoing citizen information and a warning system to apprise all
residents and persons in the city of impending disasters, affording the means
where possible to avoid or at least to minimize injury to person and damage to
property; and to implement a system of drills to test the effectiveness of the
system.
(Prior Code, § 2.16(11)) (Ord. 270, passed 2-5-90)
Cross-reference:
   Civil defense, see
Chapter 34
CHAPTER 32: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
32.01   Scope; purpose
   
32.02   Definitions
   
32.03   Department organization
   
32.04   Officers
   
32.05   Qualifications and appointment of personnel
   
32.06   Participation requirements
   
32.07   Hiring procedures
   
Appendix:   Physical Performance Test
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention, see
Chapter 92
§ 32.01 SCOPE; PURPOSE.
   (A)   These rules and regulations, upon their effective date after adoption
by the Joint Powers Board and approval by the City of La Crescent and Township
of La Crescent, hereby shall be the controlling rules and regulations of the
Fire Department and supersede any and all inconsistent or conflicting prior
rule, regulation, by-law, policy or any other directive whether written or
verbal. All such existing rules, regulations and by-laws, policies or
directives shall automatically become null and void upon the effective date of
these rules and regulations. All firefighters shall familiarize themselves with
and abide by all Fire Department policies, general rules, regulations and code
provisions concerning the La Crescent Fire Department, hereinafter
"Department."
   (B)   It is the purpose and mission of the La Crescent Fire Department to
minimize loss of life and property for the La Crescent community from fires,
natural disasters, life threatening situations and to assist other emergency
agencies.
(Ord. 333, passed 2-12-96)
§ 32.02 DEFINITIONS. 
   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words, combination of
words, terms, and phrases as used in these rules and regulations shall have the
meanings set forth in the following definitions.
   EMPLOYEE. All firefighters and emergency first responders, and all officers
of the Department, albeit not for any collective bargaining or Public
Employment Labor Relations Act purposes, but among other purposes, recruitment,
workers compensation and withholding from compensation are hereby deemed
EMPLOYEES.
    EMPLOYEE IN GOOD STANDING.  Any employee of the Department, who continues
to meet all training, participation and health requirements of these Department
rules and regulations as amended.
   FIREFIGHTER.  Any permanent, non-probationary employee of the Department,
including all officers.
   GOVERNING AUTHORITY.  The City Council of the City of La Crescent or the
Joint Powers Board to the extent of the powers delegated by the Joint Power
Agreement of August 15, 1988 as amended.
   INACTIVE STATUS.  Not in compliance with training, participation or health
requirements of these Department rules and regulations as amended.   An
inactive employee of the Department is not an employee in good standing.
   OFFICER.  A firefighter who has been duly appointed to and continues in a
supervisory capacity in the Department as provided in these provisions,
including the Chief, and designated officer supervisory positions as may be
recommended by the Chief and approved by the Governing Authority.
   PROBATIONARY FIREFIGHTER. A firefighter who has not yet completed the
prescribed probationary period in accordance with these Department rules and
regulations as amended.
(Ord. 333, passed 2-12-96)
§ 32.03 DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The heretofore established and ongoing Department in the city is
hereby affirmed in its continuation for the benefit of the city specifically,
and the community generally, to the extent that the services thereof are
contracted for, as the case may be, and pursuant to Joint Powers Agreement
entered into by the city for the rendition of fire suppression services and
response to emergencies, to enforce city fire codes, investigate fires, and
provide fire safety education to the public.
   (B)   The Department shall be administered by the Fire Chief and such other
officers as provided in these rules and regulations. The Department shall have
as many firefighters as the Governing Authority deems necessary, provided the
total number of positions in the Department including officers, firefighters
and probationary firefighters shall not be less than 20 nor more than 30. The
Governing Authority shall hire firefighters in accordance with these rules and
regulations and other laws and applicable to hiring. Reduction or increase of
the personnel of the Department shall be determined by the Governing Authority
in its sole discretion upon available data including consideration of any
relevant information such as recommendation of the Chief as the Governing
Authority deems necessary in order to promote the efficiency of the Department.
The Department chain of command shall be defined in the Department rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 333, passed 2-12-96)
§ 32.04 OFFICERS.
   The officers of the Fire Department are the Fire Chief, two Assistant Chiefs
(the First Assistant Chief and the Second Assistant Chief), two Captains (the
First Captain and the Second Captain), a Fire Service Instructor, a Safety
Officer and a Fire Marshal.
   (A)   Fire Chief.
      (1)   Appointment. The Chief shall be appointed by the Governing
Authority and said appointment shall be deemed an indefinite appointment. The
conditions of the Chief's employment shall be in accordance with the personnel
policies and rules and regulations of the Department.
      (2)   Duties.The Chief shall be responsible to the Governing Authority
for the following:
         (a)   Planning, directing and coordinating all activities of the
Department including, but not limited to, fire protection, fire prevention and
education services, training and safety.
         (b)   Preparation and administration of the Department budget.
         (c)   Communication of departmental objectives, policies and
procedures to members of the Department and to the public.
         (d)   Enforcement of ordinances or other laws directed toward fire
prevention.
         (e)   Inspecting, or causing to be inspected any and all premises and
ordering or causing the abatement or removal of all fire hazards. Pursuant to
the power to order inspections of all premises, the Chief shall have the
authority to obtain search warrants in the manner prescribed by law and
consistent with legal procedures appertaining.
         (f)   Investigating, or causing to be investigated, the cause, origin,
and circumstance of each fire occurring within the corporate limits of the city
(and elsewhere pursuant to contract where the rendition of such services is
authorized by the contractual undertakings of the city) resulting in
destruction or damage exceeding $100 except that all fires of unknown origin
shall be investigated in order to determine whether the fire was the result of
carelessness, accident or design. All investigations shall begin no later than
two days after the occurrence of the fire.
         (g)   Making such reports as may, from time to time, be required by
the State Fire Marshal, or the Governing Authority.
         (h)   Recommending to the Governing Authority for its approval rules
and regulations for the Department. The rules and regulations shall define, but
shall not be limited to, the chain of command, job descriptions, training
participation and health requirements and discipline.
         (i)   As the Chief deems necessary, recommend administrative and
operational policies for the Department to the Governing Authority for its
approval.
         (j) Make such reports as may be directed by the Governing Authority.
         (k) Performance of such other functions as are necessary to properly
administer and to insure the efficient and safe operation of the Department.
   (B)   Fire Marshal. The office of Fire Marshal may be held by the Chief or
by his assistant if the Governing Authority approves. The Fire Marshal shall be
charged with the enforcement of all city ordinances and laws of the State of
Minnesota with reference to fire protection. He shall have full authority to
inspect all premises and shall, with prior City Council approval, initiate
action for the removal or abatement of fire hazards and other indicated
enforcement action in the city.
   (C)   Fire Services Instructor. The Fire Service Instructor, under the
supervision of the Chief, shall be responsible for setting up training
programs, drill schedules, training new members, attendance records, and
maintaining other membership records and data. The Fire Service Instructor
shall coordinate activities of such office with the Fire Chief in all matters
of Department interest, and shall, among other duties, submit semiannual
reports to the Fire Chief and annual reports through the Chief to the Governing
Authority on those operations of the Department under his responsibility.
   (D)   Safety Officer. The Safety Officer shall be a member of the Fire
Department assigned and authorized by the Fire Chief as the principal Safety
Officer assigned to perform the duties and responsibilities specified in NFPA
1521, Standard for Fire Department Safety Officer, 1992 Edition as amended.
(Ord. 333, passed 2-12-96)
§ 32.05 QUALIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENT OF PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Governing
Authority shall appoint, promote, suspend or remove members of the Department
in accordance with these rules and regulations. The Governing Authority, in
exercising its discretion thereon, may consider all relevant matters, data and
information including the recommendations of the Fire Chief. All probationary
firefighters and firefighters appointed to the Department shall meet and
maintain current the requirements of Minnesota Statutes for active membership
in the Firefighters Relief Association.
   (B)   Age requirements. Persons to be selected for probationary status in
accordance with the "Hiring Procedures" Appendix shall be not less than 18
years of age.
   (C)   Response requirements. All firefighters and probationary firefighters
shall reside at a location within two miles, enabling arrival at the fire
station to which assigned within eight minutes as timed under optimal
conditions and while abiding by all applicable speed limits and traffic
regulations. These residency parameters shall be addressed in the initial
screening process and travel from residence timed to assure performance
herewith, before probationary status commences. Failure to comply with the
provisions of this division shall be deemed to be a voluntary resignation from
the Fire Department. The Governing Authority, by a four-fifths vote may upon
written fact finding addressing special circumstances determining, among other
things, that undue hardship or hazard will not result to the citizens of the
city, waiver the requirements of this division. The "place of residence" shall
be where the firefighter or probationary firefighter lives with other members
of his or her immediate family, where that person would be entitled to become a
registered voter and where that person would be allowed to declare (other
eligibility requirements assumed) said place of residence homestead property
for real estate tax purposes.
   (D)   Health and physical fitness requirements. Each applicant, preliminary
selected following initial screening, before appointment as a probationary
firefighter, shall undergo a thorough physical examination by a licensed doctor
of medicine approved by the Governing Authority. The doctor shall submit a
written report of the applicant's physical condition to the Chief.
      (1)   The report shall, among other things, contain a statement as to
whether or not,, in the opinion of the examining physician, there is any
evidence of, (but not limited to), myocarditis, coronary sclerosis, or
pneumonia or its sequel in the applicant at the time of applicant's
examination, and whether or not the applicant is able to perform the duties
that firefighters are reasonably expected to perform, consistent with job
description of the position to be filled.
      (2)   All probationary firefighters and firefighters may be periodically
required to undergo physical examination by a doctor selected by and at the
Governing Authority's to assure that minimum health requirements established in
Department rules and regulations are met. Failure to meet the established
health and physical fitness requirements within a prescribed time period shall
be grounds for placement on inactive status until all requirements can be met
within a reasonable time (not to exceed a specified time) or, that failing,
shall be grounds for dismissal from the Department.
      (3)   Every firefighter shall be required each year to complete a
physical examination and fitness testing when and as prescribed by the
Department. Such examination and testing, which shall be at Governing
Authorities' expense, may vary for each firefighter depending on the
firefighter's age, medical history, fitness level and fitness indicators.
      (4)   Summaries or conclusions of any report of any examination referred
to above and physical fitness examinations required in divisions (B) and (D)(2)
and (3) above shall be retained and permanently kept in the files of the
Department. Details of a physical examination including, but not limited to,
physician narrative of the examination, laboratory tests, and x-ray
interpretation shall be retained by the Department physician. All such
information, whether in summary or detail form, shall be classified private
personnel data on individuals.
   (E)   Probationary period. The initial appointment by the Governing
Authority of any applicant to the Department shall be as a probationary
firefighter. Before being considered for appointment as a firefighter, a
probationary firefighter, following initial screening, shall actively serve on
the Department for 12 months. To initiate the 12-month period, the Chief shall
report to the Governing Authority that the, to be, probationary firefighter has
completed adequate fire service training so as to enable said probationary
firefighter to respond to fire calls.
      (1)   During the probationary period, the probationary firefighter shall
receive training and guidance to assist and enable effective adjustment in
order to achieve firefighter status. A probationary firefighter must
satisfactorily complete the Department's required course of instruction for
probationary firefighters during the probationary period.
         (a)   The Chief may waive the required training and/or course of
instruction if the Chief is convinced that the applicant has otherwise or
elsewhere successfully completed the same or equivalent training or
instruction.
         (b)   At any time during the probationary period the Chief may require
applicant to begin and successfully complete any portion or all of any such
training or instruction previously waived.
      (2)   Each probationary firefighter, after beginning responding to fire
calls at three-month intervals during such probationary period, shall undergo
an evaluation. Each evaluation shall be discussed with the probationary
firefighter and shall include, but not be limited to, an understanding of the
work, the quality and quantity thereof, and the probationer's attitude,
dependability, initiative, work objectives and progress.
      (3)   If during the probationary period the probationary firefighter is
not meeting Department standards for the position, the probationer may be
discharged by the Governing Authority at its discretion, with or without prior
comment and recommendation of the Chief.
      (4)   Upon the Chief's written report to the Governing Authority that a
probationer has successfully completed the probationary period, the Governing
Authority may, in its sole discretion, make the appointment to full firefighter
status.
   (F)   Minimum requirements for maintaining active status. All firefighters
will be required to attend 20% of all fire and first responder calls received
during assigned shift per calendar year. This is a modification from the 30%
ruling.
(Ord. 333, passed 2-12-96; Am. Ord. 367, passed 2-14-00)
§ 32.06 PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. All duly appointed firefighters of the Department shall meet
all fire call, training participation and health and fitness requirements as
listed these rules and regulations. Such requirements shall include but need
not be limited to minimum attendance requirements for fire calls, departmental
training activities, completion of other required training, and participation
in annual health and fitness examinations. Failure to meet minimum
participation requirements shall be cause for termination from the Department.
   (B)   Training requirements. Training sessions (drills) will be regularly
scheduled on the second Tuesday and the last Monday of each succeeding month to
commence at 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise announced. Additional and special drills
may be scheduled and held as circumstances may require. Although the particular
subject matter involved may entail drills having a longer duration from time to
time, the duration of each drill will be based upon an hour unit of time with a
minimum of one hour. Training shall consist of attaining and maintaining
requirements set forth in Sections 3 and 4 of NFPA 1001 Firefighter
Professional Qualifications, 1992 Edition as amended.
   (C)   Promotions. Firefighters shall meet the requirements and compete for
promotions within the Department as defined in these Department rules and
regulations, with final approval and ratification thereof by the Governing
Authority.
      (1)   The Chief shall recommend to the Governing Authority candidates for
appointment to officer positions in the Department as allowed and prescribed in
these Department rules and regulations and the guidelines set forth in the
applicable NFPA 1021, Fire Officer Professional Qualifications, 1992 Edition as
amended.
      (2)   Officers other than the Chief shall serve a probationary period of
12 months commencing with appointment by the Governing Authority. During said
probationary period, each such officer shall receive quarterly evaluations by a
superior officer. Each evaluation shall be discussed with the probationary
officer and shall cover, but need not be limited to, an understanding of the
work, the quality and quantity thereof, and the probationer's attitude,
dependability, initiative, work objectives, and progress.
      (3)   If during the probationary period the probationary officer is not
meeting Department standards for the position, the probationer may be returned
to the position of firefighter in the discretion of the Chief, but with prior
approval of the City Council.
      (4)   With the exception of the Chief, all officers of the Department
above the rank of firefighter shall be appointed by the Governing Authority to
two-year terms expiring December 31 of odd- numbered years. Such officers shall
be subject to reappointment or reassignment at the expiration of said two-year
terms at the sole discretion of the Governing Authority after consideration of
current recommendations by the Chief and any other relevant available data and
information. Officers wishing to be considered for reappointment shall
participate in examinations for each respective officer position along with
other qualified employees of the Department as provided by Department rules and
regulations.
   (D) Chain of command.
      (1)   General. In the absence or disability of the Chief, the next
ranking officer as defined in the organizational structure of the Department
and Department rules and regulations shall perform all of the functions and
exercise all of the authority otherwise performed by the Chief. During short
periods of absence from the City, the Chief may designate an Acting Chief who
shall assume responsibility for all operational activities of the Department.
For periods of absence longer than 30 days, the Governing Authority shall
approve the appointment of an Acting Chief.
      (2)   Emergency command and control.
         (a)   The senior officer or firefighter first at the scene of an
emergency shall assume command of operations at the emergency. On the arrival
of a ranking officer, the firefighter or officer in charge shall report the
situation and actions taken to that officer. That officer shall be responsible
for operations at the fire, but may allow the firefighter or junior officer to
maintain command of the operations.
         (b)   Subsequently, arriving officers ordered to certain positions,
shall not wander from that position and shall not interfere with operations
directed by the other officers. Firefighters and officers arriving on or with a
unit shall work together as a company of that unit and shall avoid separation
from each other unless otherwise ordered.
         (c)   Firefighters arriving at the scene of an emergency, shall stay
with their unit until otherwise ordered. Officers shall report to the officer
in charge at the scene on arrival.
         (d)   Fire equipment operators shall standby their unit unless
otherwise ordered by the officer in charge.
         (e)   In the event of a major fire or emergency, the officer in charge
shall designate a command post and advise dispatch of the locations of the
command post.
   (E)   Limited duty assignment. The Chief shall have the authority to assign
firefighters and probationary firefighters to limited duty firefighting duties
only for reasons and such periods of time as the Chief deems appropriate for
the protection of the health, safety or welfare of the Department and the
public. If said assignments continue for more than 60 days, such continuance
must be approved by the Governing Authority, or the Governing Authority shall
make whatever other judgmental and discretionary decision otherwise indicated
in the circumstances.
      (1)   The Chief shall determine the nature and extent of limited duty
firefighting duties appropriate for each individual assigned to such duties.
      (2)   Unless specifically assigned by the Chief to limited firefighting
duties, or unless otherwise restricted elsewhere in these provisions, each
firefighter and probationary firefighter shall be deemed available for all
firefighting duties and responsibilities.
   (F)   Leave of absence. Any firefighter or probationary firefighter may
request a leave of absence from active duty on the Department. Such requests
shall be in writing and presented to the Chief for recommendation as to
approval or disapproval and thereafter referred to the Governing Authority for
final decision.
      (1)   Leave of absence may be granted for personal, family, or medical
reasons and shall not exceed 90 days except in the case of medical leave.
      (2)   All requests for medical leave of absence shall be accompanied by a
written statement from a physician stating that the probationary firefighter or
firefighter is not able to fight fires and/or perform the duties of the
firefighter's job description for some specified period of time. Additional
statements and additional detail and documentation from the physician may be
required by the Chief at reasonable intervals to document the individual's
ability or inability, as the case may be, to return to duty.
         (a)   Medical leaves of absence may, at the discretion of the Chief,
with prior Governing Authority approval, be granted for any period of time.
         (b)   The Chief may, for medical reasons, only when it is determined,
in the best interests of a firefighter and/or performance of Department, impose
an involuntary leave of absence upon any employee of the Department. If a
firefighter seeks a second medical opinion, the Department shall assume the
expense of reexamination and medical report.
         (c)   The firefighter or probationary firefighter, upon whom an
involuntary leave of absence has been imposed, shall have the right to, within
15 days appeal such leave to the Governing Authority by filing a written notice
of appeal.
         (d)   The appeal shall be heard by the Governing Authority at its next
regular meeting held no sooner than seven days or more than 30 days from
receipt of such written appeal.
      (3)   Any firefighter or probationary firefighter who returns to duty
following an in excess of 90 day medical leave may, at the discretion of the
Chief be required as a precondition to returning to duty, to submit a current
report of physical examination at the Department's expense to assure ability to
perform all of the duties entailed in returning to duty.
      (4)   If an approved leave of absence exceeds 90 days, in any one
absence, 120 days in any one year, or 180 days in any five-year period, the
firefighter shall not, for any days in excess thereof, be considered an
employee in good standing of the Department for purpose of relief association
benefits.
      (5)   During an approved leave of absence, no person shall receive
service credit to be applied to probationary service as a firefighter or as a
Department Officer.    
(Ord. 333, passed 2-12-96)
§ 32.07 HIRING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application. Interested individuals may complete a standard employment
application at any time. Applications will remain on file until there is an
opening on the Department. When there is an opening, individuals with
applications on file will be contacted. Additional applicants may be recruited
as well.
   (B)   Screening. Interested applicants will meet, by appointment, with a
screening committee which will review the job requirements (professional,
educational, physical and the like) and present the applicants with a job
description and the Department rules and regulations.
   (C)   Physical agility test. All applicants must take the same physical
agility test which will include but not be limited to confined space
experience, basic air pack drill, lifting and the like, as provided in the
Physical Performance Test attached as set forth in the Appendix following this
chapter, which will be graded pass/fail.
   (D)   Group interview. Applicants who pass the physical will be interviewed
by a group consisting of the Fire Chief, a member of the Governing Authority
and at least one additional person. Each question will be worth a certain
number of points. After this interview, the interview group will total each
applicant's points and the Fire Chief will present the group's hiring
recommendation to the Governing Authority, which will make the final hiring
decision.
   (E)   Medical evaluation. After being selected to hire, each firefighter is
required by the state to undergo a medical evaluation, which will be graded
pass/fail.
   (F)   Hire/probation. After passing the medical evaluation, the applicant is
hired on a one-year probationary basis. Probation expectations will be
explained to each new firefighter upon his/her hire.
(Ord. 333, passed 2-12-96)
APPENDIX: PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE TEST.
   (A)   The five exercises which make up this test are as follows:
      (1)   Carry a 55 pound hose bundle up four flights of stairs, drop the
bundle on the fifth floor and walk back down the stairs;
      (2)   Carry a 45 pound fan 150 feet around the drill tower and replace it
back where it was picked up;
      (3)   Use a 8 pound rubber mallet to strike a steel beam situated on an
aluminum bed a distance of five feet (simulating using an ax to cut through a
roof or other surface);
      (4)   Drag a hose charged with water 75 feet, open and close the nozzle,
and lay the hose down; and
      (5)   Drag a 174 pound dummy a distance of 100 feet.
   (B)   Candidates will perform the test while wearing a weighted vest under a
fire uniform coat, an air tank, helmet and gloves; the weight of this equipment
is approximately 55 pounds. All five exercises must be completed in sequence
with no stops or rests in between. Candidates must go at the reasonable pace
during the exercise (NO RUNNING IS ALLOWED) and will be timed.
   (C)   Those who complete the exam in less than five minutes will get a
higher score than those who take between 5:01 and 6:30 minutes. The passing
time for the physical performance test is six minutes and 30 seconds.
   (D)   All candidates will be allowed to participate in the 1½ mile run a
week after the physical performance test. The passing time for the 1½ mile is
11 minutes, 40 seconds. This exam is scored pass/fail.
(Ord. 333, passed 2-12-96)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
33.01   Police Department established
   
33.02   Chief of Police
   
33.03   Police Reserve
§ 33.01 POLICE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established in this city a Police Department consisting of a
Chief of Police and additional personnel as are necessary to meet the needs of
the city.
(Prior Code, §2.34)
§ 33.02 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   Generally. The general administration and control of the Police
Department is vested in the Chief of Police, who shall be responsible for the
government efficiency, and general good conduct of the Police Department. In
the exercise of his or her duties, he or she shall have the power to prescribe,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members
of the Police Department, which shall, however, not be inconsistent with the
code and ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. During the absence of
the Chief of Police, a person named by the Chief shall perform all the duties
of the Chief of Police except to make appointments, promotions or demotions of
members of the Police Department.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause the public
peace to be preserved, and enforce all laws and ordinances of the city of which
the Police Department must take cognizance; and whenever any violation thereof
shall come to his or her knowledge, the Chief of Police shall cause the
requisite investigation to be made and procure the evidence for the successful
prosecution of the offender or offenders.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall have the custody and control of all
books, records, machines, tools, implements, and apparatus or equipment of
every kind necessary for the use of the Police Department and of all public
property pertaining to, connected with and belonging thereto. With such
implements, the Chief of Police shall be responsible for the keeping of
adequate records and he or she shall report to the City Council on the needs of
the Department and its work. If the Chief of Police needs supplies, he or she
may purchase equipment and supplies up to the amounts in the budget approved by
the Council and shall submit receipts for these purchases for approval by the
Council.
   (C)   Appointments. The Chief of Police shall make all appointments and
promotions within the Police Department subject to the confirmation of the City
Council.
   (D)   Punishments. The Chief of Police may, at his or her discretion, punish
by suspension any member of the Police Department proved guilty of the
violation of any of the rules or regulations or may file written charges with
the City Council. However, the Chief may not suspend any member for more than
the period of time as may be specified by the City Council, and must notify the
City Council of such suspension immediately.
   (E)   Inspections. The Chief of Police shall inspect all members of the
Police Department in the station and on the streets and note any appearance of
neglect, carelessness or misconduct. The Chief of Police shall inspect their
uniforms carefully, noting the conditions and general appearance of the
officers. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to condemn old uniforms
and order the purchase of new ones.
   (F)   Auxiliary forces. The Chief of Police shall be in charge of the
general administration and control of the auxiliary forces.
(Prior Code, §2.35)
§ 33.03 POLICE RESERVE.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby created within the Police Department a
Police Reserve that shall consist of a number of volunteer members as the
Council deems necessary. The Police Reserve shall be under the control and
supervision of the Chief of Police. Members of the Police Reserve shall be
appointed by the Council and may be removed by it at any time. Removal shall
always state that it is with or without cause even though in a given situation
it may be safer to proceed with cause. Police Reserve shall serve under the
direction of the Police Chief and others as the Chief may appoint from their
own number.
   (B)   Duties. When assigned to duty by the Chief of Police, each police
reserve member shall have the same authority, duties, and obligations as
regular members of the Police Department including the authority to issue
citations except as restricted in division (E) of this section. Individual
members may be used as deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, but the entire
Police Reserve shall not be called to duty, except upon order of the Mayor.
   (C)   Oath, Insignia. Each Police Reserve member shall take the oath
prescribed by M. S. § 358.05. Each member shall be issued a badge, suitable
items of clothing and such other insignia or evidence of identification as the
Chief of Police may prescribe. Upon termination of membership, a member shall
surrender to the city all city property issued to the member.
   (D)   Personnel rules. Personnel policies and rules applicable to regular
employees of the city do not apply to members of the Police Reserve, but each
member shall be covered as a city employee under the workers' compensation
insurance policy of the city and the Municipal Tort Liability Act.
   (E)   Other restrictions. No member of the Police Reserve shall exercise any
authority over the persons or property of others without displaying
identification as a member. No Police Reserve member shall make arrests upon a
warrant unless accompanied by a regular police officer. Only Police Reserve
members shall represent themselves to be members of the Police Reserve. No
Police Reserve member shall carry a firearm while on duty except as
specifically authorized by the Police Chief and permitted by law.
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY SERVICES
Section
   
34.01   Emergency Services Act adopted
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Emergency Services and Disaster Agency established
   
34.04   Local emergencies
   
34.05   Powers and duties of Director
   
34.06   City disaster warning devices
§ 34.01 EMERGENCY SERVICES ACT ADOPTED.
   The Minnesota Emergency Services Act, M.S. Chapter 12, as applicable to the
city, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if set
out in full.
(Ord. 292, passed 4-6-92)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in, or
is likely to result in, catastrophic loss to property and for which traditional
sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair
or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters.
(Ord. 292, passed 4-6-92)
§ 34.03 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created within the city an Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency which shall be under the supervision of the City Council. The Director
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of the Emergency Services Agency, subject to the overall direction
and control of the City Council. The Director shall be appointed annually by
the Mayor, which appointment shall be ratified by the City Council.
(Ord. 292, passed 4-6-92)
§ 34.04 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her legal
successor. Such an emergency shall not be continued for a period in excess of
three days except by or with the consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 292, passed 4-6-92)
§ 34.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   (A)   General operations. The Director shall direct and coordinate the
general operation of all local civil defense efforts and the provision of all
local emergency services in conformity with controlling regulations and
instructions of the State Emergency Services Authority.
   (B)   Intergovernmental arrangements. The Director shall represent the city
on any regional or state organization for emergency services. The Director also
may develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions
for assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, which
arrangements shall be approved by the City Council prior to their
implementation.
   (C)   Plans and reports. The Director shall prepare such plans for the civil
defense of the city and such reports of emergency service activities as deemed
appropriate and as may be requested or directed by the City Council.
   (D)   Use of city personnel. In an emergency, the Director shall utilize the
personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments
and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. 292, passed 4-6-92)
§ 34.06 CITY DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.
   The sirens which shall be maintained by the city shall be activated for
appropriate purposes only as follows:
   (A)   To notify residents of the community of serious life-threatening
danger such as a weather warning.
   (B)   To implement an annual test system.
      (1)   An annual check of the system shall be held in April at an
appropriate time and at other dates and times as is deemed necessary.
      (2)   The purpose of the annual check shall be to verify that the warning
system is operational.
      (3)   The siren will be blown in a steady tone for a period of one
minute.
      (4)   The sirens shall be used for no other purpose than those stated
above.
(Ord. 292, passed 4-6-92)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
52.   WATER REGULATIONS
      
53.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Refuse collection licenses
   
50.02   Collection by city of fees for refuse pickup
   
50.03   Household solid waste bag distribution site licensing
   
50.04   City compost site regulation
Collection and Disposal
   
50.20   Purpose and goals
   
50.21   Definitions
   
50.22   Littering
   
50.23   Recyclable materials
   
50.24   Open burning, burying solid waste; composting
   
50.25   Proper storage, collection and disposal required
   
50.26   Containers
Haulers
   
50.40   Residential collection services
   
50.41   Nonresidential collection services
   
50.42   Collection licenses
   
50.43   Vehicles
   
50.44   Collection times
Residential Mixed Municipal Solid Waste Bag System
   
50.55   Residential mixed municipal solid waste bag system
   
50.56   Residential mixed municipal solid waste bag distribution; site
licensing
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 REFUSE COLLECTION LICENSES.
   (A)   Applications. Applications for refuse collection licenses shall be
made on forms prescribed by the City Council, which forms shall set forth
information concerning and evidencing applicant's having required bond and
insurance coverage and suitable and adequate equipment to perform the service
contemplated by licensing, as required by this and other applicable sections of
this code. Such application forms may, in the discretion of the Council
expressed by resolution duly passed, require statement of proposed rate
structure, which, if the applicant is issued a license, shall be the rates
chargeable for garbage collection by such licensee during the duration of such
license.
   (B)   Council review of applications. To enable the City Council opportunity
for review rates and other aspects of license applications, the Council may by
resolution prescribe a period of time from the date application is filed with
the City Administrator to study proposed rate structure and the application
generally with particular regard to the ability to perform services
contemplated by licensing. The Council may, by resolution, order public hearing
to consider rates and other aspects of applications. The Council may, by
resolution, require an applicant to submit customer lists to indicate
justification for issuing additional license or licenses. The Council, in
reviewing licensing applications, shall, among other things, consider the
ability of the applicant to perform the services contemplated by licensing,
taking into account the number of licensees which can effectively, yet
renumeratively, collect refuse in the city and whether or not the rate
structure is adequately compensatory.
   (C)   Fees. All license applicants shall submit with application requisite
fee as established from time to time by the City Council. In the event the
Council orders a public hearing, as authorized in division (B) of this section,
a part of the fee as may be specified from time to time by the City Council
shall be designated to defray the expense thereof including the charges of
publication of notice of public hearing, the remaining basic fee to be regarded
as the annual license fee. In the event no public hearing is ordered, that part
of the basic fee otherwise designated to defray the expense of public hearing
shall be refunded to the applicant licensed. All fees tendered by applicants
not granted licenses shall be refunded to applicants except where rejection of
the application resulted after a public hearing, in which case the part of the
tendered fee allocable to the public hearing expense shall not be refunded. In
all cases where a public hearing is scheduled, there will be one publication as
to the notice thereof in the official newspaper of the city, which publication
shall be made at least ten days before the appointed time for such hearing. The
foregoing provisions notwithstanding, existing licenses may be renewed
automatically by payment of the annual license fee until the Council, by
resolution at least 60 days prior to renewal date, orders a public hearing be
held on such renewal or unless the Council intends not to renew a given license
pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   Prorating and refunding fees. The Council is hereby authorized to
prorate license fees enabling the licensing of refuse collectors at any time
during the normal license year period, but no part of a license fee once paid
shall be refunded except as may be authorized by Council resolution.
   (E)   Revocation. Any and all licenses are subject to suspension or
revocation at any time for violation of any provisions of this section or
violations of laws of the state, the rules, regulations, provisions, conditions
and restrictions of all public state agencies or any other applicable law.
   (F)   Insurance and bonding. Each applicant shall provide public liability
insurance, holding the city absolutely harmless on account of any claims
whatsoever arising out of refuse collection services in the maximum sum of
$1,000,000 and shall file with the City Administrator a bond in the penal sum
of $5,000 running to the city to assure performance of the services
contemplated by issuance of the license.
   (G)   Liability. All licensees shall be independent contractors and any and
all agents and employees thereof shall be their agents and employees and not
agents or employees of the city.
   (H)   Billing.
      (1)   Licensees shall collect all service charges. In the event refuse is
not collected from any residents or other property in the city for reason of
non-payment of service charges made pursuant to the licensee's Council approved
rates, the licensee shall forthwith notify the City Administrator and, upon
authorization by Council resolution, the refuse shall be picked up by licensee
and the cost thereof paid by the city, which cost shall be certified to the
County Auditor before October 10 of any given year and assessed to the real
estate parcel to which pickup expenses relate, to be collected with the real
estate taxes payable in the next succeeding year pursuant to M.S. §443.29.
      (2)   The rate payable for refuse collection services for purposes of
this section shall be in accordance with the schedule as established from time
to time by the City Council, together with the actual administrative and legal
expenses incurred in certifying the charges for collection pursuant to the
statute.
      (3)   Whether or not the City Council invokes the provisions of this
section in a given case is completely discretionary with the City Council, and
the invoking for the provisions of this section shall not prevent criminal
prosecution for violations of any provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.04)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.02 COLLECTION BY CITY OF FEES FOR REFUSE PICKUP.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City Council from instituting a
program whereby it contracts itself for the pickup of the refuse of its
residents and business firms. This section shall authorize the City Council, by
resolution duly enacted, to engage in the billing and collection for the
rendition of such services, regardless of who renders the service.
(Prior Code, § 9.05)
§ 50.03 HOUSEHOLD SOLID WASTE BAG DISTRIBUTION SITE LICENSING.
   (A)   Required. All locations in the city where garbage bags are distributed
and made available to residents in connection with and a part of the
implementation of the solid waste pickup and disposal program in the city
shall, from and after the effective date of this section and code provisions
embodying the provisions of this section, be required to be licensed by the
city.
   (B)   Licenses issued by City Clerk. Licenses for the distribution of
garbage bags for use in the city shall be obtained at the office of the City
Clerk, City Hall, La Crescent, MN 55947, at which office applicants for
licenses may obtain the necessary application from which shall be completed and
signed by or on behalf of the potential licensee prerequisite to the issuance
of a license.
   (C)   City Council to establish fee schedule. At the outset, no fee shall be
charged for the issuance of licenses for garbage bag distribution sites, but
the City Council may, from time to time, by resolution duly enacted, establish
a fee schedule therefor.
   (D)   Licensees to be bonded. In connection with the issuance of each
license and preliminary to the licensee commencing the condition of services
entailed in the distribution of garbage bags to residents and other sources of
solid waste appropriate for garbage bags under the city solid waste pickup and
disposal program, the licensee shall be bonded in the minimum penal sum of
$5,000 and each license applicant shall provide the necessary information and
execute whatever application forms are necessary in connection with the bonding
process.
(Prior Code, § 9.06) (Ord. 329, passed 9-11-95)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.04 CITY COMPOST SITE REGULATION.
   (A)   Any violation of the policy and procedure with reference to the
regulations of the city landfill set forth in division (B) of this section is
deemed a trespass and subject to prosecution and penalties consistent with the
laws of the state for misdemeanors.
   (B)   With regard to the control of the “city compost site,” the following
policy and procedure shall apply:
      (1)   The old city compost site is being operated as a site for disposal
of certain biodegradable items which will not, in the judgment of the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, pollute
the surrounding wetlands.
      (2)   Only the following items, along with other items deemed acceptable
by the City Administrator, may be placed at the site: leaves, brush, grass and
solid fill materials such as rock, sand, cement and dirt.
      (3)   Access to the site shall be as established by the City Council.
      (4)   Access to the site may be restricted from time to time for
maintenance procedures such as burning and clearing by the city maintenance
department.
      (5)   Control over the site is the responsibility of the City
Administrator's office and the Police Department.
   (C)   A violation of this policy is, upon conviction, punishable in the
manner determined by the laws of the state for misdemeanor offenses, and the
enforcement of this policy is the responsibility of the City Administrator and
the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 10.30(4)) (Ord. 237, passed 7-1-85)
Penalty, see § 50.99
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 50.20 PURPOSE AND GOALS.
   The purpose of this chapter is to benefit the public health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the city. This chapter provides for the orderly and
efficient collection and management of solid waste within the city, and allows
the city to provide quality solid waste management in a manner consistent with
the Houston County Solid Waste Management Plan, and pursuant to the
requirements of M.S. § 115A.46, Subd. 5.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.21 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
   ACCEPTABLE WASTE. All solid waste generated and collected in the county
except that acceptable waste shall not include non-processible waste and
unacceptable waste.
   CITY. The City of La Crescent, Minnesota.
   COLLECTION. The aggregation of solid waste from the place at which it is
generated and includes all activities up to the time when the solid waste is
delivered to a solid waste management facility.
   COUNCIL. The La Crescent City Council.
   COUNTY. Houston County, Minnesota.
   GENERATOR. Any person who generates or aggregates solid waste.
   HAULER. Any person who collects or transports solid waste, recyclable
materials or yard waste, but does not include a self-hauler.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any refuse, sludge, or other waste material or combination
of refuse, sludge or other waste materials in solid, semisolid, liquid, or
contained gaseous form which because of its quantity, concentration, or
chemical, physical, or infectious characteristics may:
      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential harm to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or
otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but are not
limited to: explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants, and
corrosives. Hazardous waste does not include source, special nuclear, or by-
product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
   LA CROSSE FACILITY. The refuse-derived fuel facility owned and operated by
Xcel Energy in La Crosse, Wisconsin, and the landfill owned and operated by La
Crosse County when the Xcel refuse-derived fuel facility is unavailable.
   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. 
      (1)   Garbage, refuse, construction and demolition debris and other solid
waste that the generator of the waste aggregates for collection, except as
provided in division (2).
      (2)   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE does not include: auto hulks, street
sweeping, ash, mining waste, sludges, tree and agricultural wastes, waste
tires, lead acid batteries, motor and vehicle fluids and filters, and other
materials collected, processed, and disposed of as separate waste streams.
   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE SERVICES. The collection, transportation,
processing, or disposal of mixed municipal solid waste generated in the city,
including but not limited to regularly scheduled service, on-call service, one-
time service, rental and other use of equipment such as solid waste containers,
compactors, compactor boxes, and the like, and any other service that involves
or facilitates collection, transportation, processing, or disposal of solid
waste materials as mixed municipal solid waste. It does not include the sale of
equipment used for the collection, transportation, processing, or disposal of
mixed municipal solid waste. It does not include collection, transportation, or
management of recyclable materials, yard waste, source separated compostable
materials, problem materials, or other waste materials when these materials are
segregated by the generator for the purpose of recycling or composting and are
delivered to a recycling facility or compost facility, or the sale, rental, or
other use of equipment necessary to facilitate collection, transportation, or
management of these materials.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any building used for residential purposes consisting of
more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.
   NON-PROCESSIBLE WASTE. Solid waste generated and collected in Houston County
that cannot be processed by the La Crosse Facility due to its physical
characteristics or harmful impact on the La Crosse Facility, including: steel
banding; baling wire; tree trunks or logs or other bulky waste greater than six
inches in diameter, or four feet in length, or weighing over 100 pounds;
propane tanks of any size; aerosol cans in quantity; pressurized tanks; fencing
materials; plastics in significant quantity; major parts of motor vehicles,
trailers, agricultural equipment, marine vessels or similar items; farm or
other large machinery; asbestos or asbestos containing materials; contaminated
soil; construction and demolition debris; and waste, except paper products,
from the following establishments: service stations, auto paint shops, chemical
plants, plastic processing plants and textile plants.
   NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. All property not defined as residential property.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Paper, plastic, tin cans, aluminum, motor oil, glass,
and other materials as determined by Houston County, each separated or
otherwise prepared, which are intended for manufacturing reuse and recycling.
   RESIDENTIAL MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE BAGS. Residential mixed municipal
solid waste collection bags sold by retailers licensed under §§
50.55 et seq.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Property on which there is a single family home, a
duplex, a triplex, a four-plex, an apartment building, a mobile home, a
condominium, a townhouse, a cooperative housing unit, or any other residential
building as determined by the city.
   SELF-HAULER. A person who transports their own solid waste for solid waste
management purposes.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or
air contaminant treatment facility, and other discarded waste materials and
sludges, in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting from
industrial, mining, and agricultural operations and from residential and
nonresidential property, and from community activities, but does not include
hazardous waste; animal waste used as fertilizer; earthen fill, boulders, rock;
sewage sludge; solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other common
pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in
industrial waste water effluents or discharges which are point sources subject
to permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended; dissolved materials in irrigation return flows; or source, special
nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT. Activities that are intended to affect or control
the generation of solid waste and activities which provide for or control the
collection, transportation, processing, treatment, and disposal of solid waste.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN. The Houston County Solid Waste Management Plan
developed, adopted, and approved under M.S. § 115A.46.
   TRANSPORTATION/TRANSPORTS. The conveying of solid waste from one place to
another.
   UNACCEPTABLE WASTE. Solid waste that is generated and collected in Houston
County that may cause damage to or materially adversely affect the operation of
the La Crosse Facility and/or landfill as determined by the La Crosse Facility,
La Crosse County and Houston County, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Cleaning fluids, crank case oils, cutting oils, paints, acids,
caustics, poisons or drugs.
      (2)   Any hazardous waste or waste defined as hazardous in 40 CFR § 261.3
(as amended) or by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or classified as
toxic substance or toxic waste, or prohibited for incineration by any local,
state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the facility.
      (3)   Radioactive waste or materials or hazardous waste regulated under
52 USC 6921-6925 and regulations adopted thereunder, or any other Federal,
state or local law.
      (4)   "Hazardous substances" defined in 42 USC 6901 et seq. and any
regulations promulgated thereunder.
      (5)   Wastes requiring special handling to comply with applicable local,
state or Federal law, including:
         (a)   Pathological, biological, infectious, or explosive materials;
         (b)   Oil sludges;
         (c)   Cesspool or human waste; and
         (d)   Human or animal remains or waste.
      (6)   Waste with excess moisture and any type of waste either smoldering
or on fire or at its kindling point or in the process of initiating combustion.
      (7)   Other materials that may be established as unacceptable from time-
to-time by La Crosse County, Houston County or the La Crosse Facility.
   YARD WASTE. Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, and prunings
generated at residential or nonresidential properties.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.22 LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall place any solid waste in any street, alley, or public
place or upon private property except in proper containers for collection or
other lawful disposal. No person shall throw or deposit solid waste in any
stream or other body of water.
   (B)   No person shall deposit anywhere within the city any solid waste in
such manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any public
place or any other premises within the city.
   (C)   It shall be illegal to use another generator's solid waste storage
container, inspect its contents, or remove its contents unless provided prior
authorization by the owner or lawful custodian of the container.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.23 RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Separation from other waste. For all persons who are owners, lessees,
or occupants of any residential building wherein there are four or fewer
dwelling units, recyclable materials shall be separated from mixed municipal
solid waste in accordance with rules, regulations and procedures as adopted by
the city for separation of recyclable materials from mixed municipal solid
waste.
   (B)   Multiple dwellings. Occupants of multiple dwelling properties shall
have the same opportunity to recycle afforded to occupants of other residential
dwelling units. It is unlawful after January 1, 2014, for any multiple dwelling
owner, association or joint management entity to negotiate, execute, or
maintain a contract for multiple dwelling solid waste collection unless it
includes, as part of that contract or as part of a separate contract, a minimum
of biweekly collection of recyclable materials or is deemed adequate by the
city.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.24 OPEN BURNING, BURYING SOLID WASTE; COMPOSTING.
   No person shall burn or bury any solid waste in the city. This section does
not prevent anyone from composting yard waste on their premises.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.25 PROPER STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   Every person shall, in a sanitary manner, dispose of solid waste that may
accumulate upon property they own or occupy in accordance with the terms of
this chapter. Mixed municipal solid waste shall be collected or otherwise
lawfully disposed of on an as needed basis. Every occupant and owner of any
residential property shall use the residential collection service(s) contract
or licensed by the city.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.26 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Required. Every occupant or owner of any residential property shall:
      (1)   Purchase residential mixed municipal solid waste bags from a
retailer in §§
50.55 et seq.; or
      (2)   Purchase from a licensed hauler one or more containers to receive
and contain all solid waste that may accumulate between collections.
   (B)   Use of containers and residential mixed municipal solid waste bags.
      (1)   All normal accumulations of mixed municipal solid waste shall be
deposited in such containers or residential mixed municipal solid waste bags,
except that yard waste may be stored in closed containers not meeting the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   Solid waste shall be drained of liquid and mixed municipal solid
waste shall be wrapped before being deposited in a container. Highly flammable
or explosive material shall not be placed in containers or residential mixed
municipal solid waste bags.
   (C)   Standards. Each residential container shall be watertight, shall be
impervious to insects and rodents, and shall not exceed 96 gallons in capacity.
Residential mixed municipal solid waste bags shall not exceed 33 gallons in
capacity. Special use containers for short term cleanup events, such as
relocations (moving), and disaster cleanups are allowed for a maximum of two
weeks. Any commercial or business establishment having a solid waste volume
exceeding two cubic yards per week shall provide bulk or box-type solid waste
storage containers. Containers shall be maintained in good and sanitary
condition. Any container not conforming to the requirements of this section or
having ragged or sharp edges or any other defect likely to hamper or injure the
person collecting the contents shall be promptly replaced after notice by the
city.
   (D)   Prohibited containers. Dumpsters, front-load and rear-load containers
are prohibited at properties in which there is a single-family home, duplex or
triplex.
   (E)   Four-plex properties. Properties containing four-plex are permitted to
have the above-referenced prohibited containers provided the property owners
comply with all state fire code regulations. Further, the containers shall not
exceed two cubic yards and shall be properly shielded from view.
   (F)   Recycling containers. The licensed hauler to provide recycling
services shall provide to the owner or occupant of each residential property a
container for the separation and collection of recyclable materials. The owner
or occupant of each residential property shall leave the recycling containers
at the premises upon relocation and shall maintain the recycling containers in
good condition.
   (G)   Placement for collection. Each container or residential mixed
municipal solid waste bag for premises abutting the alley shall be placed at
the rear of the property next to the alley. Alleys are to be passable at all
times. Where no alley exists, the container or residential mixed municipal
solid waste bag shall be placed near the rear door of the building to which it
relates and shall be placed at the front property lines for collection, but it
shall not be so placed before 4:30 p.m. the night before collection and shall
be removed by 6:30 p.m. the day of collection. The day of collection shall be
Wednesday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14; Am. Ord. 527, passed 10-22-18)
HAULERS
§ 50.40 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICES.
   (A)   Authorization. The city shall provide mixed municipal solid waste bag
collection and recycling services for residential property by contracting with
one hauler to provide such services in the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from directly
providing residential mixed municipal solid waste services and to engage in the
billing and collection of fees for the rendition of such services.
   (C)   Procedures and criteria. The city shall enter into one or more
residential mixed municipal solid waste collection contracts after issuing a
request for proposals (RFP) from haulers interested in contracting with the
city to perform such services. The city shall not contract with any hauler to
provide services that do not comply with this chapter, including the licensing
criteria. The city shall contract only with haulers that are in compliance with
the Houston County Solid Waste Ordinance and County Solid Waste Plan, and that
have a Waste Delivery Agreement with Houston County.
   (D)   Service charges.
      (1)   Generally. The owner or occupant of all residential property
receiving mixed municipal solid waste services or recycling services within the
city shall pay to the city a service charge assessed in accordance with rates
set forth by resolution of the Council and any service charges collected by the
city on behalf of the county.
      (2)   Billing and payment. The service charges for each residential
property shall be paid on a periodic basis. If the occupant does not pay the
service charges, the fee owner of each residential property will be responsible
for payment. The Council by resolution may make service charges:
         (a)   Payable at the same time as bills for other city services and
subject to the same conditions of payment; or
         (b)   Payable as part of retail price of residential mixed municipal
solid waste bags.
      (3)   Collection of unpaid charges. If any charge is unpaid and overdue
by more than 30 days on September 1 of any year, the Council shall levy an
assessment against the property equal to the unpaid charges as of that date
plus interest at a rate set by the Council from that date. The Clerk shall
certify the assessment to the County Auditor for collection in the same manner
as local assessments.
      (4)   Disposition of funds. All service charges shall be deposited in a
separate account in the general fund and be used for solid waste management
purposes.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.41 NONRESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICES.
   The city may contract with one or more licensed haulers to provide
nonresidential mixed municipal solid waste collection services in the city in
the same manner prescribed in this chapter for residential mixed municipal
solid waste collection services. In such event, no license shall be issued for
nonresidential collection except to haulers contracted with the city, and no
person shall collect nonresidential solid waste, mixed municipal solid waste or
recyclable materials within the city except persons holding a city license and
contract to do so. No person shall permit solid waste, mixed municipal solid
waste or recyclables to be picked up from his or her nonresidential premises
except by a licensed hauler.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.42 COLLECTION LICENSES.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   Applications. An applicant for such license shall make application
to the City Administrator on a form prepared by the city. Such forms shall
require accurate information including, but not limited to:
         (a)   The name of the owner or licensee;
         (b)   A description of the kind of services to be rendered;
         (c)   A description of each motor vehicle to be used for hauling,
including the license number thereof;
         (d)   The manner and kind of service proposed to be given to the
customers and scheduled pickups;
         (e)   The city shall license one hauler for residential mixed
municipal bags and recycling service for residential property.
      (2)   Council review of applications. The Council may by resolution order
a public hearing to consider an application. The Council may by resolution
request additional information from the applicant.
      (3)   Suspension or revocation of license. The City Council may suspend
or revoke the license of any licensee whose conduct is found to be in violation
of this chapter upon ten days written notice and a City Council hearing.
Suspension or revocation may be based on health, safety, and welfare concerns
arising out of the performance of the licensee, its employees or agents, and/or
its vehicles and equipment.
   (B)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   Insurance and bonding. No collection license shall be issued until
the applicant files with the city a certificate of insurance issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state currently covering all
vehicles to be used by the applicant in the business. The minimum limits of
coverage shall be set annually by resolution of Council.
      (2)   Collection of recyclable materials.
         (a)   The city will contract and license a hauler to provide recycling
services to residential property for: newsprint, corrugated cardboard, mixed
paper, magazines, tin cans, aluminum cans, glass containers, plastic
containers, boxboard, telephone books, and additional materials as from time to
time mandated according to the terms of its contract with city, and the
requirements of the county.
         (b)   As part of the licensing requirement, all haulers serving
nonresidential generators must offer recycling service for: newsprint,
corrugated cardboard, mixed paper, magazines, tin cans, aluminum cans, glass
containers, plastic containers, boxboard, telephone books, and additional
materials as from time to time mandated by the city or county. The hauler will
be responsible for providing adequate containers as judgment by the city to
store recyclable materials.
   (C)   Fees; term. The annual license fee shall be as duly set by the Council
by resolution. Such license shall expire December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.43 VEHICLES.
   All vehicles of licensees under this chapter shall be operated in accordance
with the following regulations:
   (A)   Each collection vehicle shall be marked on the outside so as to
identify the contractor. Every vehicle used for hauling solid waste shall be
covered, leakproof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. Every
vehicle used for hauling solid waste shall be sufficiently airtight so as to
prevent unreasonable quantities of dust, paper, or other collected materials to
escape. Every vehicle shall be kept clean to prevent nuisances, pollution or
insect breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair.
   (B)   Vehicles operated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
excepted from the seasonal weight restrictions placed upon city roads except
that:
      (1)   No vehicle shall be operated on any road at any time where special
postings specifically prohibit collection vehicles; and
      (2)   During any period of time when weight restrictions are imposed,
each collector shall make provisions for operation or conformance with such
restrictions so that service is not interrupted.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.44 COLLECTION TIMES.
   The collection day shall be Wednesday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:
00 p.m.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
RESIDENTIAL MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLD WASTE BAG SYSTEM
§ 50.55 RESIDENTIAL MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE BAG SYSTEM.
   The city may implement a residential mixed municipal solid waste bag system
in which licensed and approved retailers make residential mixed municipal solid
waste bags available to residents to be used as waste containers for certain
mixed municipal solid waste collection services provided by licensed haulers.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.56 RESIDENTIAL MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE BAG DISTRIBUTION; SITE
LICENSING.
   (A)   Required. All locations in the city where residential mixed municipal
solid waste bags are distributed and made available to residents in the city
shall be required to be approved by the city.
   (B)   City Council to establish fee schedule. The City Council may by
resolution establish a fee schedule for the issuance of licenses for the
distribution of residential mixed municipal solid waste bags.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   All violations of the provisions of this chapter are deemed public
nuisances. The city may seek the assistance of the county in enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. A second or more frequent
violation within a period of two years of an initial violation shall be deemed
a misdemeanor. Criminal prosecution for violations shall not preclude, where
indicated, forfeiture of performance bond and revocation of a collection
license. Since all violations are hereby deemed a public nuisance, the city may
enforce compliance by seeking injunctive relief without the election of such
remedy affecting the city's right to enforce these provisions by any one or
more other of the foregoing remedies.
(Ord. 484, passed 1-27-14)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Sanitary service line
   
51.02   Sanitary sewer and water service connection; mandatory connection
Sewer Use Regulations
   
51.20   Definitions
   
51.21   Control by Utilities Superintendent
   
51.22   General regulation
   
51.23   Private wastewater disposal
   
51.24   Building sewers and connections
   
51.25   Use of public services
   
51.26   Damage to facilities
   
51.27   User rate schedule for charges
   
51.28   Powers and authority of Inspector
Sewer Service Charge System
   
51.40   Purpose
   
51.41   Definitions
   
51.42   Establishment of Sewer Service Charge System
   
51.43   Determination of service charges
   
51.44   Sewer Service Fund
Administration and Enforcement
   
51.55   Administration
   
51.56   Collection of charges
   
51.57   Application of sewer service charge system
   
51.58   Tables
   
51.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Connection to municipal sewer and water mains, see §
52.07
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 SANITARY SERVICE LINE.
   Sanitary services shall be constructed of watermain pipe with hubs and
neoprene gaskets between the main and property lines. Watermain pipe utilized
shall meet AWWA C900 specification and within public right-of-ways of the city
shall be a minimum of SDR 21 standards per ASTM 2241.
(Prior Code, §11.041)
§ 51.02 SANITARY SEWER AND WATER SERVICE CONNECTION; MANDATORY CONNECTION.
   (A)   Findings. The City Council finds:
      (1)   It is in the best interests of public health, safety, and welfare,
including but not limited to the protection of water quality for the health and
safety of residents within the city, that properties within the city are served
by and connect to city sanitary sewer and water service facilities;
      (2)   It is in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants that
the cost of development and construction of sanitary sewer and water service
facilities should be borne by the owner of the property which is served, and
not the general taxpayers of the city; and
      (3)   It is in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants that
sanitary sewer and water service connection and availability charges vary in
amount depending on the factors set forth in this section.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of the connection and availability charges
established herein is as follows:
      (1)   To ensure that the city obtains sufficient funds to pay the cost of
development and construction of sanitary sewer and water service facilities
from the owners of the properties served;
      (2)   To equitably apportion the cost of development and construction of
sanitary sewer and water service facilities among the owners of the properties
served; and
      (3)   To reimburse the city for the cost of making and supervising
connection of properties to sanitary sewer and water service facilities.
   (C)   Connection charges. Pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, connection charges, in
amounts to be established by resolution of the City Council from time to time,
are hereby established to apply to any parcel of land within the city which
hereafter is either connected to city sanitary sewer and/or water service
facilities or required to connect to such facilities pursuant to city
regulation. The City Council may establish by resolution one or more connection
charges to apply equitably to developments, circumstances, and areas of the
city. Connection charge amounts may be based upon any or all of the following
factors and any such other as may be promulgated by city:
      (1)   The cost of making and supervising the connection to the
facilities;
      (2)   The cost of development and construction of new or enlarged
facilities to extend service coverage within the city;
      (3)   The cost of enlarging the capacity of the facilities in
anticipation of future residential or commercial development, which cost may be
included, without limitation, in connection charges applied to new developments
regardless of whether the specific development was planned or under
construction at the time the cost of enlarging the facilities’ capacity was
incurred; and
      (4)   Any other costs associated with providing sanitary sewer and/or
water service facilities to properties within the city and either allowed or
not prohibited by applicable law, including but not limited to costs of
construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, and improvement of such
facilities.
   (D)   Mandatory connection: when connection is required. The owners of all
structures discharging wastewater and located within 200 feet of the city
sanitary sewer service facilities shall be required, at each owner’s expense,
to install a suitable connection line to the city sanitary sewer. The deadline
for connection may be determined by resolution of the City Council for a
particular project or area of the city, and may include such conditions as the
City Council deems appropriate. If no deadline has been determined by
resolution, the connection shall be completed either within 90 days after the
city sanitary sewer has become operational in cases where the sanitary sewer
service has been extended to within 200 feet of existing structures, or
immediately in cases where new structures are constructed within 200 feet of
existing sanitary sewer service facilities. In the event that any owner fails
to complete the connection to the city sanitary sewer by the applicable
deadline, the city shall have the right to enter onto the subject property,
complete the connection, and all costs entailed with the connection shall be
added to the connection charge amount for the property.
   (E)   Unpaid charges.
      (1)   Due date; delinquent charges. Connection charges and availability
charges shall be due and payable within 60 days after the date the charge is
billed to the property owner. A charge that is not paid within such period
shall be considered delinquent. On or before October 15 of each year, the City
Clerk shall certify all delinquent charges to the Houston County Auditor.
      (2)   Payment of delinquent connection charges in installments.
         (a)   A property owner whose property is subject to a delinquent
connection charge may petition the City Council to allow certification of the
charge to the County Auditor in annual installments, together with interest at
the annual rate established by the City Council. The City Council shall grant
all such petitions which are filed in writing with the City Clerk within 30
days after the connection charge has become delinquent. The City Council may
grant, but shall not be required to grant, any petition which is filed after
the expiration of such 30-day period. A property owner may also file such
petition with the City Clerk before the connection charge becomes delinquent,
although the petition will not be deemed accepted and the City Council will not
have authority to act on any such petition until the connection charge has
become delinquent. If a petition is filed too late (in the sole judgment of the
City Council) to allow the city to certify the first installment on the
following year’s property taxes, the property owner shall make payment of the
first installment plus interest directly to the city within 30 days after the
City Council has approved the petition, and all subsequent installments and
interest will be certified for payment with property taxes.
         (b)   The City Council shall have the discretion to determine the
number of annual installments allowed for each petition granted based upon all
relevant factors, including but not limited to the amount of the connection
charge and the need for the city to recover construction costs within a
reasonable period of time. The City Council, in its sole discretion, may also
increase the number of annual installments to accommodate the proven financial
hardship of an owner based on income, medical status, disability, and other
relevant factors, provided, however, that any increase in the number of
installments on such basis may be reviewed and the number of installments
modified, in the City Council’s sole discretion, in the event that the hardship
is eliminated or alleviated due to a transfer of full or partial ownership or
possession of the property, a change in financial circumstances of the owner,
or any other circumstances which significantly reduce the hardship.
         (c)   A property owner’s obligation to make approved installment
payments under this section shall be binding on the property owner’s successors
and assigns, and shall also be a lien on the parcel of land to which the
connection charge relates. Evidence of such lien may be filed against such
parcel, of land in the office of the Houston County Recorder; provided,
however, that any failure to file such lien with the Houston County Recorder
shall not eliminate or diminish, in any way, the obligation of the property
owner or the property owner’s successors and assigns to make the approved
installment payments.
         (d)   If the property taxes become delinquent for any parcel of land
which the City Council has approved for certification of the delinquent
connection charges in installments, the City Council may declare the total
connection charge and accrued interest to become immediately due and payable.
Thereafter, the City Council shall certify the total outstanding balance of the
delinquent charges together with interest to the Houston County Auditor for
collection thereafter as other taxes against the subject parcel of land.
         (e)   A listing of the various items and the connection charges with
reference thereto shall be established by resolution of the City Council at any
duly convened meeting thereof.
         (f)   The City Council may, from time to time, modify, amend or
supplement the listing of charges without need to amend the initial enabling
ordinance.
(Ord. 469, passed 3-14-11)
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
§ 51.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   AUTHORITY. The city or its representative thereof.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20° C. in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also referred to as a house connection or service
connection.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SDS
permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat such pollutants to a
degree which complies with effluent concentration limits imposed by the permit.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specifically constructed for the purpose of
measuring flow and sampling of wastes.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a “compatible
pollutant,” including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Gaseous, liquid, and solid wastes resulting from
industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the
development, recovery and processing of natural resources, as distinct from
residential or domestic strength wastes.
   INDUSTRY. Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of a publicly owned
treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A, B, D, E and I.
   INFILTRATION. Water entering the sewage system (including building drains
and pipes) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections and manhole walls.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including
building drains) from sources such as but not limited to roof leaders, cellar
drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins,
surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the city's wastewater disposal
system processes or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a
violation of any requirements of the city's NPDES/SDS permit. The term
includes: of sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with
published regulations providing guidelines under § 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345)
or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC
6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act (42 USC 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances
Control Act (15 USC 2601 et seq.), or more stringent state criteria applicable
to the method of disposal or use employed by the city.
   MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for the introduction of pollutants in
publicly-owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not
susceptible to treatment by such treatment facilities or would interfere with
the operation of such treatment facilities, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act (33
USC 1317(b)).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally
discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to § 402 and §
405 of the Act (33 USC 1342 and 1345).
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface
water or ground water.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant
added is heat.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater that is primarily introduced by
residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than 255 mg/l and a
total suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 300 mg/l.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
terms of grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to
the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than 1½-inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is wastewater.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. Sewers
shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source discharges and connections.
      (2)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.
      (3)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a
public authority.
      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public
authority.
      (7)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters
which are not admitted intentionally.
      (8)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry
storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street wash
water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment
facility which has a discharge flow in excess of 25,000 gallons per average
work day; has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the treatment facility;
whose waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to § 307(a) of
the Act (33 USC 1317(a)); or whose discharge has a significant effect, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater
disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or
emissions generated by the treatment system.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flows during normal operation, and shall adversely affect the collection or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07 for a disposal system as defined by M.S. § 115.01(8).
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Public Works Director or a deputy, agent or
representative thereof.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause
adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act
(33 USC 1317(a)).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharges to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   USER. Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city's wastewater disposal system.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with any ground water, surface water and stormwater that
may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission and treatment of municipal sewage,
domestic sewage or industrial wastewater including interceptor sewers, outfall
sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; and any works including land which is an integral part of the
treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
   WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Prior Code, § 11.16) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
§ 51.21 CONTROL BY UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Utilities Superintendent shall have control and general supervision of
all public sewers and service connections in the city, and he or she shall be
responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter to the end that a
proper and efficient public sewer is maintained.
(Prior Code, § 11.17)
§ 51.22 GENERAL REGULATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage
or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the city's NPDES/SDS
permit.
   (C)   Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to construct
or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   (D)   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes from which wastewater is
discharged, and which is situated within the city and adjacent to any street,
alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be
located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, shall be required at the owner's
expense to install a suitable service connection to the public sewer by a
licensed plumber in accordance with provisions of this code within 365 days of
the date the public sewer is operational; provided, the public sewer is within
100 feet of the property line of property whereat the wastewater is generated.
All future buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public sewer shall
be required to immediately connect to the public sewer. If sewer connections
are not made pursuant to this section, an official ten-day notice shall be
served instructing the affected property owner to make the connection.
   (E)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in
compliance with a notice given under this chapter, the city may undertake to
have the connection made and shall assess the cost thereof against the
benefitted property. Such assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the
rate determined by the City Council and shall be certified to the County
Auditor and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements. The rights of the city shall be in addition
to any remedial or enforcement provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.18) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.23 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of §
51.22, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal
system complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Prior to the commencement of construction of a private wastewater
disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
city. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and
other information as are deemed necessary to the city.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city
or its authorized representative. The city or its representative shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Minnesota Rules Chapter
7080, entitled Individual Sewage Treatment System Standards. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer within 365 days in compliance with this chapter, and
within 45 days any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater
disposal systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be broken to
permit drainage, and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
   (F)   The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or
the Minnesota Department of Health.
(Prior Code, § 11.19) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.24 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any new connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited
unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities, including
but not limited to capacity for flow, BOD5 and suspended solids as determined
by the Superintendent.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city. All connections shall
be made by a licensed plumber.
   (C)   Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or authorized
agent and the party employed to do the work, and shall state the location, name
of owner, street number of the building to be connected, and how occupied. No
person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits of the
building or property for which the service connection permit has been given.
   (D)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service; and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or any other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of
activity.
   (E)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owners. The owners shall defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the city from any loss or damage that may be
directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered one building sewer. The city does not and will not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such
connection aforementioned.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent or his or
her representative, to meet all requirements of this subchapter.
   (H)   The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling of the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the State Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in the amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (J)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or indirectly to the wastewater disposal system.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the State Building Code and Plumbing Code and
other applicable rules and regulations the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by
proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior
to installation.
   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection and inspection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or authorized representative thereof.
   (M)   All excavations for building sever installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights by the applicant or his or her agent so as
to protect the public from hazard, streets, sidewalks, parkways and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work, shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the city.
   (N)   No person shall make a service connection with any public sewer unless
regularly licensed under this chapter to perform such work, and no permit shall
be granted to any person except such regularly licensed person.
   (O)   Any person desiring a license to make a service connection with public
sewers shall apply in writing to the City Council with satisfactory evidence
that the applicant or employer is trained or skilled in the business and
qualified to receive a license. All applications shall be referred to the
Superintendent for recommendations to the Council. If approved by the Council,
such license shall be issued by the City Administrator upon the filing of a
bond as provided in this subchapter.
   (P)   No license shall be issued to any person until a $5,000 bond to the
city, approved by the Council, is filed with the City Administrator conditioned
that the licensee will indemnify and save harmless the city from all suits,
accidents and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in any street,
alley or public ground made by the licensee or by those in the licensee's
employment for any purpose whatever, and that the licensee will replace and
restore the street and alley over such opening to the condition existing prior
to installation, adequately guard with barricades and lights and will keep and
maintain the same to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, and shall conform
in all respects to the rules and regulations of the Council relative thereto,
and pay all fines that may be imposed on the licensee by law.
   (Q)   The license fee for making service connections is $25. All licenses
shall expire on December 31 of the license year unless the license is suspended
or revoked by the Council for cause. Upon failure to apply for a license
renewal prior to the expiration date thereof, the license fee for the ensuing
year shall be $50. The City Council may, from time to time, amend license fee
schedule by resolution duly enacted.
   (R)   The Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this
subchapter for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Giving false information in connection with the application for a
license.
      (2)   Incompetence of the licensee.
      (3)   Willful violation of any provisions of this subchapter or any rule
or regulation pertaining to the making of service connections.
(Prior Code, § 11.20) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.25 USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
water such as stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage or non-
contact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet
on approval of the city and upon approval and the issuance of a discharge
permit by the MPCA.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities such as but not limited to grease, garbage with particles
greater than ½-inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating
oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater disposal system.
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal
system. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act (33 USC 1317(a)).
   (D)   The following described substances, materials, water or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise endanger lives,
limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent may set
limitations lower than limitations established in the regulations below if, in
his or her opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the
above objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the
quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, the city's NPDES/SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage-treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which
shall not be violated without approval of the Superintendent are as follows:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F. (65.6° C.)
or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent
at the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104° F. (40°
C.), or having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the
wastewater treatment works resulting in interference therein.
      (2)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F. (0° and
65.6° C.), and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of
mineral origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not.
      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
“slug”, as defined in §
51.20.
      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined in §
51.20. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places
where garbage originates from the preparation of food on the premises or when
served by caterers.
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair.
      (6)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
      (7)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage or ground
water.
      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids such as but not
limited to Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved
solids such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate in such
quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal system.
      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing the following substances shall not
exceed the limits for the substance as set forth in § 307(a) of the Act (33 USC
1317(a)), notwithstanding the right of the city to establish lower limits for
such wastes as set forth elsewhere in this chapter: Arsenic, Cadmium, Copper,
Cyanide, Lead, Mercury, Nickel, Silver, total Chromium, Zinc and Phenolic
compounds which cannot be removed by the city's wastewater treatment system.
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater
disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance of
any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body.
      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific written agreement subject to the provisions of division (Q) of this
section.
   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in division (D) of this section or which in the
judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater treatment facilities, processes, or equipment; receiving waters or
soil, vegetation and ground water; or which otherwise create a hazard to life
or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b)) and all
amendments thereof;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating
and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
      (2)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design, installation, and maintenance of the facilities and
equipment shall be made at the owners' expense, and shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
   (F)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in divisions (C)
and (D) of this section, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any state requirements.
   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner.
   (H)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in
division (D)(2) of this section, any flammable wastes as specified in division
(C)(1) of this section, or sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of the type to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a
record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials not
performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by a currently licensed
waste disposal firm.
   (I)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
or control manhole, with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes.
Such structure shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed
by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by the owner to be
safe and accessible at all times.
   (J)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this subchapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge. The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses
to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry
must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge
to assure that compliance with federal, state and local standards are being
met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses
to the city at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The
owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting
required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the
right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an independent
laboratory.
   (K)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Superintendent.
   (L)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this subchapter. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Superintendent for review and approval prior to construction
of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures
shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the user's
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter. Users shall
notify the Superintendent immediately upon having a slug or accidental
discharge of substances of wastewater in violation of this subchapter to enable
countermeasures to be taken by the Superintendent to minimize damage to the
wastewater treatment works. Such notification will not relieve any user of any
liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment system or
treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof
under any state and federal law. Employees shall insure that all employees who
may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
   (M)   No person having charge of any building or other premises which drains
into the public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which may form a
deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within ten days
after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall install a
suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap or suitable and sufficient
device, or if one already exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the same,
and perform such other work as the Superintendent may deem necessary. Upon the
owner's refusal or neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean
out, repair or alter the same after the period of ten days, the Superintendent
may cause such work to be completed at the expense of the owner or
representative thereof.
   (N)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the
purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause such work to be done as
the Superintendent may direct. Each day after ten days that a person neglects
or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and
the Superintendent may then cause the work to be done, and recover from such
owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in the name of the city.
   (O)   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing
facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times a
catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil,
dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sever system.
   (P)   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this subchapter, the city may assess against any person the cost
of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result
of the discharge of prohibited wastes by such person, and may collect such
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in
any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.
   (Q)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industry whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern, providing that National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
and the city's NPDES/SDS system permit limitations are not violated.
(Prior Code, § 11.21) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.26 DAMAGE TO FACILITIES.
   No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediately arrest under the charge of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 11.22) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.27 USER RATE SCHEDULE FOR CHARGES.
   Each user of sewer service shall pay the charges applicable to the type of
service and in accordance with the provisions set forth in §
51.40 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 11.23) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
§ 51.28 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observations, measurement, sampling
and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city's sewer system in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized
to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. An industry may withhold information considered confidential; however,
the industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the
information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   While performing necessary work on private properties, the
Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and
the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by
city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain safe conditions as required in §
51.25(I).
   (D)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent works, if any, on the
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 11.24) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM
§ 51.40 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is for sewer service charges to recover costs
associated with:
   (A)   Operation, maintenance and replacement to ensure effective functioning
of the city's wastewater treatment system.
   (B)   Local capital costs incurred in the construction of the city's
wastewater treatment system.
(Ord. 283, passed 5-6-91)
§ 51.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATION. Those fixed costs attributable to administration of the
wastewater treatment works such as billing and associated bookkeeping and
accounting costs.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any place of business which discharges sanitary waste as
distinct from industrial wastewater.
   COMMERCIAL WASTEWATERS. Domestic wastewater emanating from a place of
business as distinct from industrial wastewater.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of wastewater treatment
facilities for the cost of repaying money bonded to construct the facilities.
   EXTRA STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater having a BOD5 or TSS greater than domestic
waste as defined in this section and not otherwise classified as an
incompatible waste.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Users which are units, agencies or instrumentalities of
federal, state or local government discharging normal domestic strength
wastewater.
   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE. Waste that either singly or by interaction with other
wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to
humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS or INDUSTRIES.
      (1)   (a)   Entities that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater
treatment works, liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in
industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development of any natural
resources. These are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented
under one of the following divisions:
            Division A.   Agricultural, Forestry and Fishing
            Division B.   Mining
            Division D.   Manufacturing
            Division E.   Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and
Sanitary Sewers
            Division I.   Services
         (b)   For the purposes of this definition, domestic waste shall be
considered to have the following characteristics: BOD5 - less than 285 mg/l;
and suspended solids - less than 300 mg/l.
      (2)   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other wastes to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or hazard in or has an adverse effect on
the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. The liquid processing wastes from an industrial
manufacturing process, trade or business including but not limited to all
Standard Industrial Classification Manual Divisions A, B, D, E and I
manufacturers as distinct from domestic wastewater.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Users other than commercial, governmental, industrial or
residential users, discharging primarily normal domestic strength wastewater
(such as nonprofit organizations).
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER. Wastewater that is primarily produced
by residential users, with BOD5 concentrations not greater than 285 mg/l and
suspended solids concentrations not greater than 300 mg/l.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required to provide for the dependable
and economical functioning of the treatment works throughout the design or
useful life of the treatment works, whichever is longer, and at the level of
performance for which the treatment works were constructed. The phrase includes
replacement.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Expenditures for operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
   PUBLIC WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. A system of sanitary sewers owned,
maintained, operated and controlled by the city.
   REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories or
appurtenances which are necessary during the design life or useful life of the
treatment works, whichever is longer, to maintain the capacity and performance
for which such works were designed and constructed.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment facilities whose premises or
building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including
dwelling units such as detached and semi-detached housing, apartments, and
mobile homes; and which discharges primarily normal domestic strength sanitary
wastes.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface
waters which are not admitted intentionally.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The aggregate of all charges, including charges for
operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service and other sewer related
charges that are billed periodically to users of the city's wastewater
treatment facilities.
   SEWER SERVICE FUND. A fund into which income from sewer service charges is
deposited along with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt
incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment. Expenditure of
the sewer service fund will be for operation, maintenance and replacement costs
and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater
treatment.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection
system or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) MANUAL. Published by the Office of
Management and Budget, 1972, as amended and supplemented.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface or is in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act (33
USC 1317(a)), which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will
cause adverse effects.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user's
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including
replacement.
   USERS. Those residential, commercial, governmental, institutional and
industrial establishments which are connected to the public sewer collection
system.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community, also referred to as sewage. From
the standpoint of source it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that
may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment of municipal
sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power, and other equipment and
their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and
alteration thereof; and any works including land which is an integral part of
the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting
from such treatment.
(Ord. 283, passed 5-6-91)
§ 51.42 ESTABLISHMENT OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a Sewer Service Charge System whereby all
revenue collected from users of the wastewater treatment facilities will be
used to affect all expenditures incurred for annual operation, maintenance and
replacement and for debt service on capital expenditure incurred in
constructing the wastewater treatment works.
   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation, maintenance
and replacement costs of the treatment works, based on the users proportionate
contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users.
   (C)   Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital costs
as determined by the City Council.
   (D)   Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment
facility shall be determined and fixed in a “Sewer Service Charge System”
developed according to the provisions of this subchapter. The Sewer Service
Charge System developed by the city shall be adopted by resolution upon
enactment of this subchapter, shall be published in the local newspaper, and
shall be effective upon publication. Subsequent changes in sewer service rates
and charges shall be adopted by Council resolution and shall be published in
the local newspaper.
   (E)   Revenues collected for the sewer service shall be deposited in a
separate fund known as “The Sewer Service Fund”. Income from revenues collected
will be expended to offset the cost of operation, maintenance and equipment
replacement for the facility and to retire the debt for capital expenditure.
   (F)   Sewer Service charges and the Sewer Service Fund will be administrated
in accordance with the provisions of §
51.55.
(Ord. 283, passed 5-6-91)
§ 51.43 DETERMINATION OF SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   User classes.
      (1)   Users of the city wastewater treatment works shall be identified as
belonging to one of the following user classes: Residential; Commercial;
Industrial; Institutional; or Governmental.
      (2)   The allocation of users to these categories for the purpose of
assessing user charges and debt service charges shall be the responsibility of
the City Administrator. Allocation of users to user classes shall be based on
the substantive intent of the definitions of these classes contained in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Rates. The user shall pay operation, maintenance and replacement costs
in proportion to the user's proportionate contribution of wastewater flows and
loadings to the treatment plant, with the minimum rate for loadings of BOD and
of TSS being the rate established for concentrations of 285 mg/l BOD and 300
TSS (normal domestic strength wastewater).
   (C)   Unit costs for treatment of flow, BOD and TSS.
      (1)   Unit costs for treatment of flow, BOD and TSS shall be determined
and fixed annually in the Sewer Service Charge System according to the
following procedure:
         (a)   Determine the annual OM&R budget.
         (b)   Allocate total annual OM&R costs to flow, BOD and TSS
proportionally; according to the costs of collections and of the specific
treatment process required to affect or reduce flow, BOD and TSS.
         (c)   Divide the OM&R costs attributable to flow, BOD and TSS
respectively, by the total annual billable volume and loadings of flow, BOD and
TSS, to arrive at unit costs .
      (2)   For purposes of determining user charges, the following definitions
of unit costs shall apply:
         UF   =   Unit cost for treatment of Flow in $/K gal.
         UBOD   =   Unit cost for treatment of BOD in $/lb.
         UTSS   =   Unit cost for treatment of TSS in $/lb.
   (D)   User charges for normal domestic strength users.
      (1)   The billable amount of flow will be calculated from the volume of
metered water usage. For residential users, the per quarter, billable flow
shall be 80% of the metered spring quarter (February, March, April) water
usage. For non-residential users discharging normal domestic strength
wastewater, the per quarter billable flow shall be 100% of the metered spring
quarter (February, March, April) water usage.
      (2)   The billable amounts of BOD and TSS will be calculated from the
volume of metered usage as determined in division (D)(1) of this section, where
the billable quantities will be those attributable to a wastewater
concentration of 285 mg/l/BOD and 300 mg/l/TSS (normal domestic strength
wastewater).
      UC(NDS)   =   (UF x F) + (UBOD x KBOD x F) + (UTSS x KTSS x F)
      Where:      U(NDS)   =   User charge for treatment of normal domestic
strength wastewater
            UC(NDS)   =   User charge, for treatment of normal domestic
strength wastewater
            UF      =   Unit cost for treatment of flow in $/Kgal
            F      =   Billable flow in Kgal
            UBOD    =    Unit cost for treatment of BOD in $/lb
            KBOD    =   Constant used to calculate the quantity of BOD in lbs/
Kgal of normal domestic strength waste (285 mg/l BOD) as follows:
            KBOD      =   0.00834 x 285 mg/l (BOD concentration of normal
domestic strength waste) = 2.38 lb/Kgal
            UTSS       =   Unit cost of treatment of TSS in $/lb
            KTSS       =   Constant used to calculate the quantity of TSS in
lbs/Kgal of NDS waste (300 mg/l TSS) as follows:
            KTSS      =   0.00834 x 300 mg/l (TSS concentration of NDS waste) =
2.50lb/Kgal
   (E)   User charges for users contributing wasted greater than normal
domestic strength.
      (1)   Calculating billable flows and loadings.
         (a)   The billable amount of flow will be calculated from the volume
of metered water usage, or at the discretion of the city, from the measurement
of effluent flow at user's point of discharge. Measurements shall be according
to a regular program prescribed by the city.
         (b)   The billable amounts of BOD and TSS will be calculated by the
measurement of these wastes according to a program prescribed by the city in
keeping with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Calculating user charges.
         UC(GNDS) = (UF x F) + (UBOD x QBOD) + (UTSS x QTSS)
         Where:      UC(GNDS)   =   User charge for treatment of wastewater
that is greater than normal domestic strength
               UF       =   Unit cost for treatment of flow in $ /Kgal
               F       =   Billable flow in Kgal
               UBOD      =   Unit cost for treatment of BOD in $/lb.
               QBOD    =   Quantity of BOD in lbs.
               UTSS       =   Unit cost for treatment of TSS in $/lb.
               QTSS       =   Quantity of TSS in lbs.
   (F)   The city may, at its discretion, require non-residential users to
install wastewater flow meters or such additional water meters as may be
necessary to determine wastewater volume. The city may require residential
connections to install water meters for the purpose of determining wastewater
volume. When so required, such meters shall be of a type approved by the city
equipped with remote registering records, and located at an accessible site on
the owner's property.
   (G)   Debit service charge.
      (1)   Provision for the recovery of local construction costs shall be
included in the sewer rate ordinance and accompanying Sewer Service Charge
System, in accordance with 40 CFR 35.2104. Federal and state regulations do not
require that local construction costs be recovered proportionately, (as is the
case with operation, maintenance and replacement costs) but only that the
method of recovery be provided for in the sewer rate ordinance. Consequently,
the city may employ a variety or methods to recover such costs.
      (2)   The following alternatives demonstrate provision for such costs in
a sewer rate ordinance, and can be employed to assist in the development of a
suitable ordinance. These alternatives are offered as suggestions; neither the
EPA nor the MPCA endorse a particular approach.
      (3)   The debt service charge for local capital/construction costs will
be recovered through the sewer service charge. The costs are based on the costs
found in Appendix, Table 7 at the end of this chapter, estimated federal/state
grants and local share costs.
(Ord. 283, passed 5-6-91)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.44 SEWER SERVICE FUND.
   (A)   (1)   The city hereby establishes a “Sewer Service Fund” as an income
fund to receive all revenues generated by the Sewer Service Charge System, and
all other income dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement and
construction of the wastewater treatment works, including taxes, special
charges, fees and assessments intended to retire construction debt.
      (2)   The city also establishes the following accounts as income and
expenditure accounts within the Sewer Service Fund: Operation and Maintenance
Account; Equipment Replacement Account; and Debt Retirement Account
   (B)   All revenue generated by the Sewer Service Charge System, and all
other income pertinent to the treatment system, including taxes and special
assessments dedicated to construction debt, shall be held by the City
Administrator separate and apart from all other funds of the city. Funds
received by the sewer service fund shall be transferred to the Operation and
Maintenance Account, the Equipment Replacement Account and the Debt Retirement
Account in accordance with state and federal regulations and the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (C)   Revenue generated by the Sewer Service Charge System sufficient to
insure adequate replacement throughout the design or useful life, whichever is
longer, of the wastewater facility shall be held separate and apart in the
Equipment Replacement Account and dedicated to affecting replacement costs.
Interest income generated by the Equipment Replacement Account shall remain in
the Equipment Replacement Account.
   (D)   Revenue generated by the Sewer Service Charge System sufficient or
operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in the Operation and
Maintenance Account.
(Ord. 283, passed 5-6-91)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.55 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Sewer Service Charge System and Sewer Service Fund shall be
administrated according to the following provisions:
   (A)   (1)   The City Administrator shall maintain a proper system of
accounts suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment
replacement and debt retirement costs of the treatment works, and shall furnish
the City Council with a report of such costs annually in January.
      (2)   The City Council shall annually determine whether or not sufficient
revenue is being generated for the effective operation, maintenance,
replacement and management of the treatment works and whether sufficient
revenue is being generated for debt retirement. The Council will also determine
whether the user charges are distributed proportionately to each user in
accordance with §
51.42(B) and § 204(b)(2)(A) of the Act, being 33 USC 1284(b)(2)(A) as amended.
      (3)   The city shall thereafter, but not later than the end of the year,
reassess and as necessary revise the Sewer Service Charge System then in use to
insure the proportionality of the user charges and to insure the sufficiency of
funds to maintain the capacity and performance to which the facilities were
constructed, and to retire the construction debt.
   (B)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, each user will be
notified annually in conjunction with a regular billing of that portion of the
sewer service charge attributable to operation, maintenance and replacement.
   (C)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, the City
Administrator shall be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to
document compliance with the Sewer Service Charge System adopted.
   (D)   Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a quarterly basis
succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and shall be due ten
days from the date of rendering. Any bill not paid in full ten days after the
due date will be considered delinquent. At that time the city shall notify the
delinquent owner or occupant in writing regarding the delinquent bill and
subsequent penalty. The penalty shall be computed as 5% of the original bill
and shall be increased the same 5% for every quarter the bill is outstanding.
   (E)   The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to
such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable therefore to the
city.
   (F)   Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment works of
toxics or other incompatible wastes, including the cost of restoring wastewater
treatment services, cleanup and restoration of the receiving waters and
environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the discharger of the wastes
at no expense to the city.
(Ord. 283, passed 5-6-91)
§ 51.56 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   (A)   Each and every sewer service charge levied by and pursuant to this
subchapter is hereby made a lien upon the lot or premises served, and all such
charges which are on October 1 of each year past due and delinquent shall be
certified to the County Auditor as taxes or assessments on the real estate.
Nothing in this chapter shall be held or construed as in any way stopping or
interfering with the right of the city to levy as taxes or assessments against
any premises affected by delinquent or past due sewer service charges.
   (B)   As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at its discretion,
file a suit in a civil action to collect such amounts as are delinquent and due
against the occupant, owner or user of the real estate, and shall collect as
well all attorney's fees incurred by the city in filing the civil action. Such
attorney's fees shall be fixed by order of the court.
   (C)   In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and chargeable to
recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the owner or user of
the real estate being serviced by the treatment works shall be liable for
interest upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 10% per annum.
(Ord. 283, passed 5-6-91)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.57 APPLICATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   The Sewer Service Charge System shall take precedence over any terms or
conditions or agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with the
requirements of § 204(b)(1)(A) of the Act (33 USC 1284(b)(1)(A)) and federal
regulation at 40 CFR 35.2140 of the Environmental Protection Agency's grant
regulations.
(Ord. 283, passed 5-6-91)
§ 51.58 TABLES.
   The City Council shall establish by resolution the following Tables:
   Table 1. The number of existing connections within the five user classes
defined in this chapter are exhibited in Table 1. This table also exhibits the
total flow and loadings of BOD, and TSS attributable to each user class.
   Table 2. Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Costs.
   Table 3. Equipment Replacement Costs; Annualized.
   Table 4. Projected Labor Costs.
   Table 5. Projected Total Annual Operation, Maintenance and Replacement
Costs.
   Table 6. Allocation of Total Annual OM&R Costs.
   Table 7. Construction Costs.
   Table 8. Allocation of Debt Service Charges.
   Table 9. Replacement of Plant Structures.
   Table 10. Total Unit Costs.
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall
be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof, punishable in accordance with the laws of the state
appertaining for misdemeanor convictions. Each day in which any such violation
occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
city by reason of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 11.26) (Ord. 277, passed 8-27-90)
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Water operations supervised by Utilities Superintendent
   
52.02   Application for water service
   
52.03   Water meters
   
52.04   Service connections
   
52.05   Availability of municipal water service at elevations above 860 feet
   
52.06   Connection to municipal water service mandated
   
52.07   Connection to municipal sewer and water mains
   
52.08   Collection of charges
Water Conservation
   
52.20   Purpose
   
52.21   Emergency restrictions authorized
   
52.22   Imposition of restrictions and bans
   
52.23   Implementation of restrictions and bans
   
52.24   Exceptions
   
52.25   Enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Sanitary sewer and water service connection; mandatory connection, see §
51.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 WATER OPERATIONS SUPERVISED BY UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Utilities Superintendent shall be responsible for the management,
maintenance, care and operation of the water works of the city.
(Prior Code, §11.01)
§ 52.02 APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Required. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter make or cause
to be made any connection to the municipal water system of the city without
first having applied to the city for a water meter. All such connections shall
be made by a licensed plumber.
   (B)   Contents. The application shall describe the property and give the
name of the owner. All meter applications shall be in writing and signed by the
owner of the property or an authorized agent upon forms provided for that
purpose by the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.03 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   From and after July 1, 1991, the city at its expense shall replace
all water meters in need of repair or replacement or as needed to update the
city system unless the need for repairs or replacement is occasioned by the
negligence, acts or omissions of the owner such as freezing or other physical
damage, in which case the costs of repairs or replacement shall be assumed and
paid by the owner.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (D), meters larger than one-inch
size, those of commercial, industrial and institutional facilities, shall be
repaired or replaced by the City, but, if replaced, the owner shall pay the
difference in price.
   (B)   Placement. Every user shall provide a suitable place where a meter
shall be installed.
   (C)   Maintenance. The municipality shall furnish and maintain meters. The
property owners shall protect the meter from freezing and other injury, and all
loss of or damage to meters except for ordinary wear and tear shall be paid by
the customer.
   (D)   Testing. If at any time a customer desires to have his meter tested
for accuracy, such testing shall be done by or under the supervision of the
city and the fees charged payable by the consumer and as established by
resolution duly enacted by the City Council. If the meter registers less than
90% accurate through no fault of the customer, meters shall be replaced by the
city and no fee for such service shall be charged.
   (E)   Meter reading and inspection. Authorized meter readers shall have free
access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and
premises connected with the city water supply system as necessitated in order
to read meters and make inspections.
(Prior Code, § 11.03) (Ord. 284, passed 7-1-91)
§ 52.04 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   Unless special permission is granted in writing by the Council, every
premise shall have a separate and distinct water service connection and a
separate meter. All service connections shall be made and installed in
accordance with regulations, requirements and specifications established by the
Council or by persons approved by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 11.04)
§ 52.05 AVAILABILITY OF MUNICIPAL WATER SERVICE AT ELEVATIONS ABOVE 860 FEET
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to apprise would-be developers
of lands intending to acquire municipal water service at elevations above 860
feet concerning availability of municipal water service.
(Prior Code, § 11.16)
   (B)   Routine service. The city will provide reasonable water pressure to
services connected to its municipal water system to first floor elevations not
exceeding 860 feet.
(Prior Code, § 11.17)
   (C)   Permits required beyond 860 elevation. Any improvements constructed at
elevations above 860 feet or requiring municipal water service above the
elevation shall not be issued a building permit without first having addressed
water supply, fire protection and other hillside development considerations
under this and other applicable municipal regulation and the prior issuance of
indicated variance type authority.
(Prior Code, § 11.18)
   (D)   Procedure. Authorization for the issuance of building permits for
structures above the 860 elevation shall be forthcoming only after receipt of
variance type authorization following public hearing preceded by the same
formality as that which is required with respect to the issuance of variances
under the zoning code provisions of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.19)
   (E)   Landowner obligation. The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to extend any benefit for the initial availability of municipal water
service beyond that afforded other residents at lower elevations. The
provisions of M.S. Chapter 429, as amended, and any other applicable law, rule
or code provision and the ongoing policy of the city with respect to special
assessments and the availability of public improvements shall not be, in any
way, contravened, superseded or extended hereby.
(Prior Code, § 11.20) (Ord. 305, passed 8-16-93)
§ 52.06 CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL WATER SERVICE MANDATED.
   (A)   Connection mandated where water service available. In all instances
where municipal water system is accessible, landowners are required at this
expense to install a suitable service connection to the municipal water main in
accordance with all applicable code provisions. All connections shall be made
by a licensed plumber. All properties located within the city, which by reason
of the use thereof require water, except as hereinafter provided, shall be
forthwith connected to the municipal water system, and such connections shall
conform with all applicable code regulations and be made under the direct
supervision and responsibility of a master plumber.
   (B)   (1)   Service charges for non-connected property(s). If a period of
one year elapses following the availability of municipal water and sewer as,
but not limited to, in the case of recently annexed lands and the necessary
indicated connections are not made, there shall, nevertheless, be billings
rendered for the ongoing minimum periodic charges collected in the same manner
as in the case of duly connected and serviced properties. If the non-connected
status exists for a period longer than one year from and after the availability
of such service(s), the minimum charge for the first six months after the
aforestated one year grace period, shall be 150% of said minimum charges and
for the next succeeding six month period thereafter the minimum charge shall be
at 200% of the minimum and at said rate thereafter until connection and
metering have occurred subject to adjustment as the City Council may determine
by resolution duly enacted. Affected property owners shall be billed and the
service charges collectible in the same manner as with ordinary routine
services billings and with all the attending collection procedures thereunto
appertaining.
      (2)   Implied temporary access easement to enable municipal installation
of connections. In exchange for the consideration which the availability of
municipal water and/or sewer to all residents in the city, all resident
property owners are deemed to have given and granted to the city an implied
temporary access easement to enable the city to itself make connections.
Accordingly, in cases where a period of one year has elapsed from and after the
availability of municipal water and sewer is presented as in the case of
recently annexed lands, and the property owner fails to make the necessary
connections, the city may enter, over in and upon an implied temporary access
easement on the property to be connected, this by the most direct route for
purposes of making the connections to available public sewer and water and any
excavations entailed therewith shall be carefully refilled, compacted and
surface restored, said temporary implied easement to thereupon terminate.
      (3)   Municipal connections basis for special assessment. Upon completion
of a connection by the city under division (B)(1), the property owner shall be
billed for the total costs entailed therewith and unless paid within 30 days of
such billing shall be certified to the County Auditor in the manner of special
assessments payable with real property taxes billed to such property the next
succeeding property tax billing year.
   (C)   Recently annexed properties. Properties recently annexed to the city
which by virtue of their use require water, shall have a period of 365 days
from and after the effective date of annexation in which to make connections to
the municipal water system at their expense.
   (D)   Exceptions. Where extraordinary circumstances exist which the City
Council shall, based upon written fact findings, determine to be "non-
accessible," shall be excepted from the mandatory water system hookup
regulations. City Council may, based upon written fact findings, determine that
there exists other cogent reasons for non-connections which as the need for
water for a commercial purpose where chemically treated water is not
satisfactory.
   (E)   Connections made by the city - special assessment. In instances where
365 days have elapsed since the availability of municipal water but the
connection mandated by these regulations have not been made and there has been
no exception determined to be warranted as hereinbefore provided, the city upon
first securing necessary easement from any such property owner using water
service located within the corporate limits of the city shall cause such
connection to be made and the costs thereof together with the hookup fee,
certified to the County Auditor as a special assessment upon each such property
so improved, to be collected with the real property taxes payable on such
property(ies) over a period of not to exceed ten years, in ten equal annual
installments together with interest at the legal rate accruing from the date
the installation was complete.
   (F)   Special assessment deferment policy. In instances where, under the
general policy of the city, a property owner would be eligible for assessment
deferment, the installation and connection shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of the next proceeding subdivision of these regulations and the
total assessment certified to the County Auditor but payment thereof deferred
in accordance with such policy except that interest shall be payable at the
legal rate during the deferment period of referral.
   (G)   Hookup fees. Consistent with ongoing city policy and separate and
distinct from the cost of the construction and installation of connections to
the municipal water system is the obligation to pay a hookup fee. The amount
thereof, subject to amendment, chargeable to any location in the city payable
as the given connection is completed or as may otherwise be directed by the
City Council. The hookup fee may not be deferred.
   (H)   Sealing of private wells mandated. All instances where water was
obtained from a private well prior to the availability of water from the
municipal water system, upon connection thereto as hereinbefore mandated the
theretofore utilized, at the expense of the property owner shall be sealed in
the manner prescribed by the State Health Department and consistent with all
other regulations there unto you and to you appertaining.
   (I)   Violations.  The violation of any provision hereof and of this
subchapter, is a misdemeanor and upon conviction punishable in accordance with
the laws of the state appertaining. Violations may, in the discretion of the
city, be charged as petty misdemeanors in which case, upon conviction, are
punishable in accordance with the laws of the state.
(Ord. 343, passed 6-23-97; Am. Ord. 365, passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 402, passed
1-12-04; Am. Ord. 411, passed 6-28-04)
§ 52.07 CONNECTIONS TO MUNICIPAL SEWER AND WATER MAINS.
   (A)   Generally. No connection or subsequent repair, replacement or
modification to municipal sewer and water systems, except under the direct
supervision, control and responsibility of a master plumber.
   (B)   Permits required. All existing requirements prescribed by the city
code and codes, state, federal and others heretofore adopted by the city remain
in full force and effect.
   (C)   Permit applications. Where permit applications are required such
shall, insofar as sewer and water connections and related work and activities
are concerned be subscribed to by a master plumber with licensure and/or
registration identification noted on the application.
   (D)   Connections, attachments and installations; testing. It shall be the
responsibility of a master plumber, fully licensed and certified, to implement
all applicable codes' requirements and regulations in the pressure and other
prescribed testing of all installations and of all component installations
including, but not limited to, grinder-pumps and lift stations and to implement
and follow all manufacturers' specifications.
   (E)   Violations. Violation of any provision of this section is a
misdemeanor and is punishable upon conviction as provided by law.
(Ord. 364, passed 7-26-99)
§ 52.08 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   (A)   Each and every water service charge levied is hereby made a lien upon
the lot or premises served, and all such charges which are on October 1 of each
year past due and delinquent shall be certified to the County Auditor as taxes
or assessments on the real estate. Nothing in this chapter shall be held or
construed as in any way stopping or interfering with the right of the city to
levy as taxes or assessments against any premises affected by delinquent or
past due water service charges.
   (B)   As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at its discretion,
file a suit in a civil action to collect such amounts as are delinquent and due
against the occupant, owner or user of the real estate, and shall collect as
well all attorney's fees incurred by the city in filing the civil action. The
attorney's fees shall be fixed by order of the court.
   (C)   In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and chargeable to
recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the owner or user of
the real estate being serviced by the water works shall be liable for interest
upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 10% per annum.
(Prior Code, § 11.05)
WATER CONSERVATION
§ 52.20 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to conserve the municipal water supply by
regulating the distribution thereof to the end that there is a continuous
supply of good quality, potable water for human consumption and all other
domestic purposes, for firefighting and fire prevention, watering of lawns and
gardens and miscellaneous purposes, domestic and commercial.
(Ord. 255, passed 7-18-88)
§ 52.21 EMERGENCY RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The City Council is hereby authorized to invoke emergency restrictions
under circumstances where, in the discretion of the City Council, the water
supply is deemed insufficient to meet, among other needs, the purposes
enumerated in this subchapter.
   (B)   Such emergencies may, in the discretion of the City Council, be
addressed in two phases:
      (1)   Phase I. Imposition of water usage restrictions; and
      (2)   Phase II. Bans on certain kinds of water usages.
(Ord. 255, passed 7-18-88)
§ 52.22 IMPOSITION OF RESTRICTIONS AND BANS.
   (A)   Phase I. Imposition of water usage restrictions.
      (1)   In instances where restrictions are deemed to be adequate measures
to accomplish the objectives of this regulation, the watering of lawns and
gardens shall be either between the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m., or from
6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
      (2)   In instances where watering restrictions are imposed, residences
having even-numbered addresses shall be permitted to water only during the
prescribed hours on even numbered days, and residences having odd-numbered
addresses shall be permitted to water only during the prescribed hours on odd
numbered days, with no lawn watering permitted on the 31st day of a month
having 31 days.
   (B)   Phase II - water usage bans.
      (1)   Total ban on lawn watering;
      (2)   Total ban on garden, shrub and tree watering;
      (3)   Total ban on car washing and other outside washing and spraying
activities;
      (4)   Total ban on filling of pools of any size;
      (5)   The discontinuance of watermain flushing by the city, and
discontinuance of other municipal large volume water usage such as Fire
Department training activities.
(Ord. 255, passed 7-18-88)
§ 52.23 IMPLEMENTATION OF RESTRICTIONS AND BANS.
   (A)   The emergency measures enumerated in §
52.22, or anyone or combination thereof or all of the measures, may be
initiated by and at the direction of the City Council or by the Public Works
Director under specific direction and guidelines established by City Council
resolution duly enacted.
   (B)   The City Council resolution referred to in division (A) of this
section, notices of imposition of restrictions and notices of violations of the
provisions of this subchapter shall recite with specificity the particular
restrictions imposed or violated.
(Ord. 255, passed 7-18-88)
§ 52.24 EXCEPTIONS.
   Special watering permits may be granted by the City Council for newly seeded
or sodded areas and newly planted trees, but such exceptions shall not be
issued for periods greater than two weeks. In the case of special watering
permits, watering shall be allowed daily from 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m., or as
otherwise specified and subject to such other conditions as may be set forth in
such special permit.
(Ord. 255, passed 7-18-88)
§ 52.25 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Persons violating any provision of this subchapter shall be given
written notice with specifications of the violations and an order warning to
cease and desist. This provision for issuing a warning shall not preclude the
City Council from ordering the immediate prosecution of violators without prior
warning where the circumstances warrant and the City Council resolution,
referred to in this subchapter, recites a finding to such effect.
   (B)   Persons convicted of any violations of any provision of this
subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be punished
in accordance with the laws of the state appertaining together with the costs
of prosecution.
(Ord. 255, passed 7-18-88)
CHAPTER 53: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Purpose and intent
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Applicability
   
53.04   Responsibility for administration
   
53.05   Ultimate responsibility
Regulation of Discharges
   
53.15   Discharge prohibitions
   
53.16   Suspension of MS4 access
   
53.17   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
53.18   Monitoring of discharges
   
53.19   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants by
the use of best management practices
   
53.20   Watercourse protection
   
53.21   Notification of spills
Enforcement and Violations
   
53.30   Enforcement
   
53.31   Appeal of notice of violation
   
53.32   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
53.33   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
53.34   Injunctive relief
   
53.35   Compensatory action
   
53.36   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
53.37   Criminal prosecution
   
53.38   Remedies not exclusive
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-storm
water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives
of this chapter are:
   (A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the director of the
municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
five acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES Storm Water Phase II permits
will be required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one
acre or more. These activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in §
53.15 of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following: any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not
limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or any drain or
conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm
drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR, 122.26(b)(14).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement
agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of the authorized
enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of
or in the employ of the agency.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
2013 S-12
§ 53.05 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards, therefore this chapter does not intend that compliance by
any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor
unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
REGULATION OF DISCHARGES
§ 53.15 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than storm water.
   (B)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire
fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the
test.
      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   (C)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.16 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city
may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when the
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the U.S. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the U.S., or to minimize
danger to persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if the termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized
enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.17 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of the permit. Proof of
compliance with the permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.18 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
the devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement
agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water
discharge.
      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing the access shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this chapter.
A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this chapter.
      (7)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he or she is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.19 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The City will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for
any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S.
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system
or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.20 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or the
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that the structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.21 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. the
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of hazardous materials the
person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous
materials, the person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person
or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to
the city within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of the establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. These
records shall be retained for at least three years.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS
§ 53.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. This notice may require without
limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which the remediation or
restoration must be completed. The notice shall further advise that, should the
violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work
will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.31 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within
five days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the appropriate authority or his or her designee shall take place within
15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.32 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or
person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency
or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.33 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will
be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within five days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a
special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of the
violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments.
Interest at the judgment rate per annum shall be assessed on the balance
beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.34 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.35 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, and the like.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.36 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of the nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.37 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   (A)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter
shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and
shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,000 per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. Violations of this
chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor level offense.
   (B)   The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
§ 53.38 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 479, passed 11-26-12)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   State highway traffic regulations adopted by reference
   
70.02   Responsibility for violating chapter
   
70.03   Impounding vehicles
   
70.04   Non-motorized vehicles to be attached to motorized vehicles
   
70.05   Truck, tractors and heavy equipment routes
   
70.06   Junk automobiles
   
70.07   Bicycles
   
70.08   Motor vehicles in public parks and other public places
   
70.09   Alleys; no through traffic; parking restricted
   
70.10   Obstruction of public streets at railway crossings
   
70.11   Golf carts and four-wheeled all-terrain vehicles
   
70.12   Train whistle regulation
Operation of Vehicles
   
70.20   Excessive acceleration prohibited
   
70.21   Rubber surfaced wheels required
   
70.22   Weight limitations
   
70.23   Through streets and stop signs
Snowmobiles
   
70.40   Definitions
   
70.41   State regulations incorporated
   
70.42   City traffic regulations
   
70.43   Chasing of animals
   
70.44   Crossing streets
   
70.45   Intersections
   
70.46   Leaving snowmobiles unattended
   
70.47   When operation is always unlawful
   
70.48   When operation is unlawful except when specifically authorized
   
70.49   Persons under 18
   
70.50   When public thoroughfare travel is allowed
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Highway Traffic Regulations Act is hereby adopted by reference.
The regulatory provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as amended, are hereby adopted
as a traffic ordinance regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys
within the city and are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section
as completely as if set out in full herein.
   (B)   Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in division (A) of
this section is a violation of this section, and such violator shall be guilty
of such an offense and shall be punished by such penalty as is prescribed by
such statutes.
(Prior Code, § 7.01)
§ 70.02 RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATING CHAPTER.
   The presence of a vehicle in or upon any public street, alley, or highway in
the city, stopped, standing or parked in violation of this chapter shall be
prima facie evidence that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered
as owner committed or authorized the commission of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 7.02)
§ 70.03 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle which is left parked or standing in violation of this chapter is
declared to be a nuisance, and the same may be summarily abated by or under the
direction of or at the request of a police officer by removing and impounding
or storing such vehicle in an appropriate place by means of towing or
otherwise, and shall only be surrendered to duly identified owner thereof or
his agent upon the payment of all necessary costs and expenses of towing,
removing and storage thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7.03)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.04 NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES TO BE ATTACHED TO MOTORIZED VEHICLES.
   It shall be a violations of this section to park non-motorized vehicles,
including but not limited to campers, trailers, and so-called fifth wheelers,
unless such non-motorized vehicles are attached to a vehicle duly licensed to
transport such vehicles on the public streets and highways of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7.04)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.05 TRUCK, TRACTORS AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT ROUTES.
   (A)   Designation of routes. The streets in the city set forth in Chapter
72, Schedule II are hereby designated heavy traffic routes in the city.
   (B)   Certain vehicles required to use heavy traffic routes. The following
vehicles, either drawn by horses or propelled by motor power, are required to
use heavy traffic routes:
      (1)   Those having solid tires.
      (2)   Those carrying a weight of 6,000 pounds or more per axle.
      (3)   All tractors and heavy equipment.
      (4)   Those vehicles or vehicles/trailer/equipment with the collective
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 16,000 pounds or more.
(Prior Code, § 7.22) (Am. Ord. 384, passed 11-13-01)
   (C)   When deviations from heavy traffic routes are allowed. The requirement
that certain vehicles use heavy traffic routes shall not prevent the use of
such vehicles on other streets in the city for the purpose only of making
delivery of goods to private customers or business places, or of carrying on
such necessary local business that requires the use of such other streets,
provided that in all such cases the shortest possible route shall be taken.
(Prior Code, § 7.23)
   (D)   Signs indicate heavy traffic routes. Appropriate signs at appropriate
places in the city indicating heavy traffic routes as may be directed by the
City Council from time to time by resolution enacted.
(Prior Code, § 7.24)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.06 JUNK AUTOMOBILES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   JUNK CAR OR MOTOR VEHICLE. Any such motor vehicle partially dismantled,
inoperative, wrecked or junked or which has been unlicensed in the current year
which is maintained at a location within the city for more than 30 days except
if kept in an enclosed accessory building.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined by M.S. Chapter 169.
(Prior Code, § 7.36)
   (B)   Prohibited actions. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person, firm or corporation who owns, leases or is otherwise in control of any
real property in the city to permit, or allow on such property any partially
dismantled, inoperative, wrecked or junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle which
has been unlicensed in the then current year year for more than a period of 30
days unless it has been enclosed in an accessory building on such property.
(Prior Code, § 7.37)
   (C)   Penalty. Each day a violation of this section continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Violations of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed petty misdemeanors.
(Prior Code, § 7.38)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.07 BICYCLES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   BICYCLE. Any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels, or any device generally recognized as a bicycle
though equipped with two front or two rear wheels.
(Prior Code, § 7.39)
   (B)   Rules for operation.
      (1)   Rights and responsibility of bicyclist. Every person riding a
bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the
state and the traffic regulations of this city except as those regulations
which by their nature can have no application to bicycles.
      (2)   Manner of riding. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride
other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
      (3)   Number riding. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at
one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
      (4)   Attachment to other vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle
shall attach it or himself to any vehicle upon a street, alley, or other
roadway.
      (5)   Riding abreast. Every person operating a bicycle upon a street,
alley, or other roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as
practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction.
      (6)   Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handle bars.
      (7)   Where to ride. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk
within a business district, nor shall a rider use the roadway when a useable
path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to such roadway.
      (8)   Pedestrians have right-of-way. Whenever any person is riding a
bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 7.40)
   (C)   Equipment.
      (1)   Night driving requirements. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime
shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Commissioner of Highways for
the state which is visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
      (2)   Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
enable the operator thereof to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Prior Code, § 7.41)
   (D)   Parent's responsibility. It is unlawful for the parent of any minor
child and the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit his child
or ward to violate any provisions of this section, and violation of this
section shall be deemed a petty misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 7.42)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.08 MOTOR VEHICLES IN PUBLIC PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Rules for operation and exceptions. No motor vehicles, and for these
purposes, motor vehicles include snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor bikes, mopeds
and all other vehicles, whether powered electrically or by internal combustion
engine, shall be operated on or permitted to be placed or parked within the
city parks and other public lands of the city, except on designated surfaced
thoroughfares and designated parking areas located therein, subject to time
restrictions hereinafter contained.
(Prior Code, § 7.43)
   (B)   Restrictions. The City Council, by resolution duly enacted, ordains
that except with a special permit previously issued by the City Council, it
shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, as defined herein, to be within the
perimeter of the public parks and other public places of the city between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day official time, provided,
however, this section shall not apply to the official vehicles of the city
police, Maintenance Department, and other departments which are being used in
the execution of the duties and obligations of such officers, agents, and
employees of the city or in going to and returning from the performance thereof
by such persons.
(Prior Code, § 7.44)
   (C)   Fees. The fees, in the event any are prescribed, shall be established
by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 7.45)
   (D)   Parking restrictions not applicable to city streets. The provisions of
this section are intended to regulate the presence of motor vehicles in public
parks and other public places of the city but is not intended to apply to the
public streets and thoroughfares of the city and parking places located outside
of the perimeters of the public parks and other public properties of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7.46)
   (E)   Violations. Violations of the provisions of this section are deemed
petty misdemeanors and persons duly convicted thereof shall be prosecuted in
accordance with the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7.47)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.09 ALLEYS; NO THROUGH TRAFFIC; PARKING RESTRICTED.
   No public alley shall be used for through traffic. Each public alley shall
be used only for ingress and egress for property abutting the alley and for
making pick-ups and deliveries at properties abutting the alley; and no vehicle
shall be stopped or parked on a public alley for a longer continuous period of
time than one hour. For the purpose of this section, any vehicle moved a
distance of not more than one block during the limited parking period shall be
deemed to have remained stationary. It shall be unlawful for any person to
obliterate, erase or remove any mark or sign placed on a vehicle by a police
officer for the purpose of measuring the length of time such vehicle has
parked.
(Prior Code, § 7.48)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.10 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC STREETS AT RAILWAY CROSSINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for locomotives and railway rolling stock, whether or
not connected to locomotives, to obstruct railway crossings of public streets
in the city for in excess of 15 minutes.
(Prior Code, §7.50)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.11 GOLF CARTS AND FOUR-WHEELED ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Issuance of permits to handicapped to operate golf carts or four-
wheeled, all-terrain vehicles authorized. The physically handicapped, as
hereinafter defined, consistent with this section and all other laws and
regulations appertaining, are authorized issuance of permits to operate a golf
cart or four-wheeled, all-terrain vehicle on any public thoroughfare within the
corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   Permits and applications therefor. No operation of golf cart or four-
wheeled, all-terrain vehicles is authorized hereunder except by permit by
persons having been issued permit pursuant hereto. Applications for permit
shall elicit such information as applications for motor vehicle driver's
license applications do, the applicant shall be accompanied by a current
licensed physician's report indicating applicant to be physically able to
.operate such vehicle(s) safely, and evidence of insurance complying with the
provisions of M.S. § 65B.48(5), and shall relate to a single specific vehicle.
   (C)   Miscellaneous regulations. All permits issued pursuant to this section
shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year and shall be annually
renewable. Permits issued are subject to revocation at any time upon a showing
that permittee can no longer safely operate the vehicle, the operation of which
was authorized by permit issued pursuant to this section. Vehicles operated by
permits issued pursuant hereto shall be operated only at times from sunrise to
sunset and shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is
impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other visibility limiting circumstances
where lighting is insufficient to clearly see persons and vehicles at 500 feet.
All vehicles permitted to be operated pursuant to this section shall display
slow-moving vehicle emblem pursuant to M.S. § 169.522.
   (D)   Administration; definition of handicapped persons.
      (1)   All applications for permits hereunder shall be made to and
processed by the City Clerk and shall be reviewed and approved by the Chief of
Police.
      (b)   For purposes of this section, PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED shall mean any
person who has sustained an amputation or material disability of either or both
arms or legs, or who has been otherwise disabled in any manner, rendering it
difficult or burdensome to walk. In the discretion of the Chief of Police, a
person who is an applicant for a permit hereunder may be deemed HANDICAPPED if
currently certified to be such by a licensed physician.
   (E)   General traffic regulations incorporated by reference. There are
hereby incorporated by this reference, as if set out here at in full, all
regulations specifically relating to vehicles described in this section and all
other rules, regulations and laws of the State of Minnesota thereunto
appertaining, Where the provisions of this section and any other regulations
conflict, the more restrictive shall control. Should any provision of this
section be rendered invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all remaining
provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
   (F)   Penalties. Violations of this section are deemed misdemeanors and
punishable upon conviction according to the laws of the State of Minnesota
appertaining.
(Ord. 521, passed 5-29-18)
§ 70.12 TRAIN WHISTLE REGULATION.
   (A)   The sounding of train whistles, horns and other similar warning
devices at or in anticipation of the private emergency crossings, including
that on Shore Acres, except as hereinafter provided is prohibited.
   (B)   Control and the provisions of this section shall not prohibit the
sounding of train whistles, horns and other such warning devices where work
crews are present or in the event of emergencies.
   (C)   Violations of this section are misdemeanors and are punishable upon
conviction as provided by the laws of the state, but violations may, in the
discretion of City Enforcement, be charged petty misdemeanors.
(Ord. 414, passed 11-22-04)
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 70.20 EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful and prohibited by this section to speed start or
accelerate any motor vehicle in a manner exhibiting unnecessary speed on any
public or private roadway, including driveways and parking lots, within the
city. Acceleration of any kind which causes squealing tires and the like shall
be deemed to be inherently hazardous and contrary to public safety. The
squealing or screeching sound emitted by tires or the throwing of sand and/or
gravel by tires so accelerated shall be prima facie evidence of the violation
of this section.
(Prior Code, § 7.06)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.21 RUBBER SURFACED WHEELS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to operate, move or cause to be moved upon or along the
streets of the city at any time any tractor, truck, wagon, trailer, automobile
or any other vehicle of any kind or any combination thereof unless the same is
equipped with rubber surfaced wheels. The using of rubber surfaced wheels with
projecting metal lugs, or so-called studs, is likewise prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 7.07)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.22 WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Vehicular weight on roads limited. It shall be unlawful to operate,
move, or cause to be moved along or upon any of the streets of alleys in the
city any truck, tractor, trailer, automobile, car or any other vehicle of any
kind or any combination thereof when the gross weight of any single axle
exceeds the weight limited by the Council of the city during the period of time
fixed by the Council.
   (B)   Informative signs to be erected. Weight limitations shall be
established by the Council so as to coordinate with those imposed by other
municipalities, including but not necessarily limited to the county, except
that weight restrictions effective for periods different from such other
municipality or municipalities may be imposed by City Council resolution duly
enacted, and as such restrictions are designated and imposed, notice thereof
shall be given with appropriate signs caused to be erected, placed and
maintained on the streets of the city so as to reasonably inform the motoring
public.
   (C)   Defacing of signs prohibited. It shall be unlawful to remove, deface,
destroy or render illegible any sign erected to inform drivers of the weight
limits set for vehicles moving or moved along or upon city streets or alloys.
   (D)   Seasonal weight restrictions.
      (1)   Existing regulations reaffirmed. Existing city regulations with
reference to seasonal weight restrictions on roads, streets and other public
thoroughfares except as hereinafter modified shall remain in full force and
effect.
      (2)   Ongoing construction activity exception.  In instances where there
are city construction projects in progress which are not suspended for
seasonally related conditions and access to which can be gained over non-city
public thoroughfares, the weight restrictions thereon shall not apply in the
construction project area for and during the period such ongoing construction
activity remains uncompleted.
      (3)   Collective gross weight. Restricted are those vehicles or vehicles/
trailers/equipment with the collective gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of
16,000 pounds or more.
(Prior Code, § 7.08) (Ord. 360, passed 3-8-99; Am. Ord. 384, passed 11-13-01)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.23 THROUGH STREETS AND STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   When vehicles shall stop. Every driver of a vehicle shall bring his
vehicle to a full stop before entering or crossing any through street or
highway or stop intersection properly designated and posted as such.
   (B)   Designation of through streets and stop intersections. The City
Council may, by resolution designate any street or highway as a through-street
and any intersection as a stop intersection where necessary to preserve the
free flow of traffic and to prevent accidents and shall cause appropriate signs
to be erected at the entrance of such streets and highways and at such
intersections.
(Prior Code, § 7.10)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SNOWMOBILES
§ 70.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR.  Every parson who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to
a snowmobile entitled to the use or possession thereof.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its agencies
and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runner.
(Prior Code, § 7.25)
§ 70.41 STATE REGULATIONS INCORPORATED.
   The requirements of all other laws of the state and rules and regulations of
the Commissioner of Conservation concerning, among other things, the
registration of snowmobiles, consistent with the laws of the state and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter, are hereby incorporated
herein and made a part hereof as if set out in full. Those regulations, the
violation of which under the laws of the state would amount to petty
misdemeanors shall be regarded petty misdemeanors under this code, and
likewise, those provisions, the violation of which are deemed misdemeanors
under the laws of the state, shall be regarded misdemeanors under this code.
(Prior Code, § 7.26)
§ 70.42 CITY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   City traffic regulations shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon
streets and highways, except for those relating to required equipment, and
except those which by their nature have no application.
(Prior Code, § 7.27)
§ 70.43 CHASING OF ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal
with a snowmobile.
(Prior Code, § 7.28)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.44 CROSSING STREETS.
   A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway except an
interstate highway or freeway, provided:
   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing.
   (B)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way.
   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
   (D)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or
highway.
   (E)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, or in conditions of reduced visibility
only if both front and rear lights are on.
(Prior Code, § 7.29)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.45 INTERSECTIONS.
   No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way
to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the
intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(Prior Code, § 7.30)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.46 LEAVING SNOWMOBILES UNATTENDED.
   Every person leaving a snowmobile on a public place shall lock the ignition,
remove the key and take the same with him.
(Prior Code, § 7.31)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.47 WHEN OPERATION IS ALWAYS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   Generally. It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile
within the limits of the city under the conditions given in the following
subdivisions.
   (B)   Under the influence of alcohol or drugs. It shall be unlawful to
operate a snowmobile at any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs
as defined in M.S. § 169.121, which is hereby incorporated by reference.
   (C)   Unreasonable speeds. It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile at a rate
of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances.
   (D)   Careless driving, and the like. It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile
at any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly in
disregard of the rights of safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger
or cause injury or damage to any person or property.
   (E)   Certain hours. It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile during the hours
from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any day.
   (F)   Towing. It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile so as to tow any person
or thing across a public street or highway as permitted in § 70.30(A), except
through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile.
   (G)   Endangering persons or property. It is unlawful to operate a
snowmobile within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink or
sliding area where the operation would conflict with use or endanger other
persons or property.
(Prior Code, § 7.32)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.48 WHEN OPERATION IS UNLAWFUL EXCEPT WHEN SPECIFICALLY AUTHORIZED
   (A)   Generally. Except as specifically permitted and authorized in this
subchapter, it is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the
limits of the city.
   (B)   Public right-of-way. Except when authorized, it shall be unlawful to
operate a snowmobile on the portion of any right-of-way of any public highway,
street, road, trail or alley.
   (C)   Sidewalks. Except when authorized, it shall be unlawful to operate a
snowmobile on a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel.
   (D)   Boulevards. Except when authorized, it shall be unlawful to operate a
snowmobile on boulevards within any public right-of-way.
   (E)   Private property. Except when authorized, it shall be unlawful to
operate a snowmobile on private property of another without written permission
of the owner or person in control of the property.
   (F)   Public places. Except when authorized, it shall be unlawful to operate
a snowmobile on any other public place except as may be specifically permitted
in writing or by other provisions of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7.33)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.49 PERSONS UNDER 18. 
   (A)   Generally. No person under 18 years of age shall operate on streets or
the roadway surface of highways or making a direct crossing of a trunk, county-
aid, county highway, or city street as the operator of a snowmobile. A person
14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a
snowmobile on streets and highways only if he has in his immediate possession a
valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the Commissioner, as provided by
M.S. § 84.872.
   (B)   Liability. It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the
snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions described in §
70.48(A).
(Prior Code, § 7.34)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.50 WHEN PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE TRAVEL IS ALLOWED. 
   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this subchapter, a snowmobile may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time
when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical. When practical, the existence of an emergency shall be determined
by declaration of the Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor, the Chief of
Police or acting Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 7.35)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of any of the provisions of §
70.01 is a violation of this chapter when the violation occurs within the city.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and fined no less than $15. If a minimum fine or imprisonment is
prescribed by the provisions of state law for an offense, such penalty for such
an offense shall apply to a person convicted of the same offense in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.05) (Am. Ord. 393, passed 4-28-03)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Parking prohibited generally
   
71.02   Emergency situations
   
71.03   Lights on parked vehicles
   
71.04   Parallel parking and angle parking
   
71.05   No parking zones
   
71.06   Forty-eight hour parking zones
   
71.07   Two hour parking
   
71.08   School no parking zones
   
71.09   Parking of certain vehicles restricted
   
71.10   Parking for display or maintenance prohibited
   
71.11   Boulevard parking prohibited
   
71.12   Municipal parking lot parking restriction
   
71.13   Physically handicapped parking
   
71.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parking and traffic schedules, see Chs.
72 and
73
§ 71.01 PARKING PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
   In addition to the parking regulation contained elsewhere in this chapter,
it shall be a violation of the city code to double park, to park nearer than
prescribed by the laws of the state to intersections, so as to obstruct
driveways, and at any location in the city where parking is prohibited and so
indicated by yellow curb marking.
(Prior Code, §7.201)
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.02 EMERGENCY SITUATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to park in all instances where parking is prohibited by
virtue of snow removal activities, in fire lanes and at any other locations
designated to be “no parking” on an emergency basis at the direction of the
Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, §7.202)
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.03 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle when stopped or parked in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter upon any street, highway, or
public alley in the city where there is sufficient light to clearly reveal any
person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street, highway or
alley.
(Prior Code, § 7.11)
§ 71.04 PARALLEL PARKING AND ANGLE PARKING.
   On all streets and alleys in the city, the stopping or parking of vehicles
shall be parallel as provided by M.S. § 169.35, as amended and incorporated
into this section by reference in §§
70.01 through
70.04, except that angle parking shall be required on such streets and at such
locations as the Council may by resolution duly enacted establish and prescribe
from time to time. The exceptions to the general rule that parking shall be
parallel are listed in the parking schedules of
Chapter 73.
(Prior Code, § 7.12)
§ 71.05 NO PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   Generally. No vehicle shall be stopped or parked at any time on
certain public thoroughfares in the city where the permitting of parking shall
be hazardous. The City Council, by resolution duly enacted, shall designate
such public thoroughfares or portions thereof. The streets and other public
thoroughfares upon which stopping or parking is thus prohibited is set forth in
the parking schedules of
Chapter 73.
   (B)   Designation. No vehicle shall be stopped or parked at any time on any
street where a no-parking zone is duly designated by duly posted no-parking
zone signs.
(Prior Code, § 7.13)
§ 71.06 FORTY-EIGHT HOUR PARKING ZONES.
   No vehicle shall be stopped or parked for more than 48 consecutive hours on
any street or highway in the city. For the purposes of this section, any
vehicle moved a distance of not more than one block during the limited parking
period shall be deemed to have remained stationary. It shall be unlawful for
any person to obliterate, erase or remove any mark or sign placed on a vehicle
by a police officer for the purpose of measuring the length of time such
vehicle has parked.
(Prior Code, § 7.14)
§ 71.07 TWO HOUR PARKING.
   Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., every day except Sundays and
legal holidays, the stopping or parking of motor vehicles for more than two
consecutive hours on such streets and at such locations as may be designated by
resolution of the Council, duly enacted. The streets and locations thereon
where parking is limited to two consecutive hours are set forth in the parking
schedules of
Chapter 73.
(Prior Code, § 7.15)
§ 71.08 SCHOOL NO PARKING ZONES.
   No vehicle, except a school bus loading or unloading school children, shall
be stopped or parked during school hours on school days on such streets and at
such locations as may be specified by City Council resolution duly enacted. All
such school no parking zones so established are set forth in the parking
schedules of
Chapter 73.
(Prior Code, § 7.16)
§ 71.09 PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES RESTRICTED.
   The City Council, by resolution duly enacted, may from time to time prohibit
the parking of certain vehicles on any street or highway in the city at any
time between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following morning and may prohibit
parking at any time between 6:00 p.m. Saturday and 8:00 a.m. the following
Monday. Such parking prohibitions so established are set forth in the parking
schedules of
Chapter 73.
(Prior Code, § 7.17)
§ 71.10 PARKING FOR DISPLAY OR MAINTENANCE PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be stopped or parked on any street, highway or public alley
in the city for the purpose of displaying it for sale or doing maintenance work
on it or making repairs to it, except immediate emergency repairs.
(Prior Code, § 7.18)
§ 71.11 BOULEVARD PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a boulevard unless the boulevard is
part of the parking area in a duly posted angle parking zone and there is no
curb and gutter between the boulevard and the traveled portion of the roadway.
Stopping for loading and unloading purposes shall not be within the provisions
of this section, provided prior approval therefor is granted by City Council
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 7.19)
§ 71.12 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT PARKING RESTRICTION.
   No vehicle shall be stopped or parked for more than 12 consecutive hours in
any municipal parking lot in the city. No vehicle shall be stopped or parked in
municipal parking lots for the purpose of displaying it for sale or to do
maintenance work on it, or making repairs to it except immediate emergency
repairs.
(Prior Code, §7 .20) (Ord. 281, passed 2-4-91)
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.13 PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enact special procedures
for establishing physically handicapped parking in the city pursuant to which
owners of property, private as well as public, may, at locations on public
thoroughfares adjacent to their property, designate parking for the physically
handicapped which, if consistent with guidelines hereinafter provided, shall,
upon resolution duly passed and enacted by the City Council, become official
physically handicapped parking.
   (B)   Physically handicapped parking guidelines.
      (1)   Owners of properties situated in the city who are desirous of
establishing physically handicapped parking, shall submit application therefor
to the Chief of Police of the city, such application to contain the precise
diagrammatic presentation of the requested physically handicapped parking, show
its location with reference to the public thoroughfare upon which it abuts, the
dimensions thereof and a disclosure as to the insignia or signs to be erected
at the location, identifying such parking.
      (2)   If, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, all applications to
establish physically handicapped parking involves areas where access to
firefighting vehicles and equipment and other emergency vehicles may be
involved, the Chief of Police may refer the application to the Fire Chief of
the Fire Department for comment and recommendation.
   (C)   Official establishment. Upon receipt by the City Council of the
comment and recommendation of the Chief of Police, and in cases where permit
applications are referred to the Fire Chief, the comment and recommendation of
the Fire Chief, the City Council may, by resolution, establish physically
handicapped parking at any appropriate location within public rights-of-way
within the city which shall, if the enabling resolution of the City Council
specifies, require indicated approved insignia and signs erected at the expense
of the applicant.
   (D)   Code provision. All physically handicapped parking established
pursuant to this section shall, upon adoption of the enabling resolution, the
erection of appropriate signs, be entered into the parking schedules of
Chapter 73 indicating the date and number of the City Council resolution
adopting such parking regulations together with a concise description and
precise location thereof. The City Council resolution shall make specific
reference to the parking schedules of
Chapter 73 and shall provide the number citation thereto.
   (E)   Penalties. The penalties for violation of all physically handicapped
parking established pursuant to this section shall be punishable, some as petty
misdemeanors and some as misdemeanors, depending upon the circumstances set
forth in M.S. § 169.346, as amended, which statutory regulation is incorporated
herein by this reference as if set out in full herein.
(Ord. 258, passed 11-7-88)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Violations of all parking regulations, except in instances
where parking is prohibited for emergency purposes, are petty misdemeanors and
the fine shall be that established by the court after a recommendation from the
City Council, but no less than $15.
(Prior Code, § 7.203) (Am. Ord. 393, passed 4-28-03)
   (B)   Remittance of net fines within ten days of issuance of citation. All
violators of parking regulations who remit in envelopes issued as and for
traffic summons utilizing forms approved by the City Council for parking
violations, and who remit the amount indicated thereon to be the parking fine
within a period of ten days from and after the issuance of the citation, shall
satisfy the penalty in full by remitting such designated fine amount. With
regard to occurrences where the specified fine is not remitted within the ten-
day period, the amount of the fine is twice the specified amount.
(Prior Code, § 7.204)
   (C)   Parking violation prosecutions. In the event it becomes necessary to
prosecute an alleged parking violation by reason of the non-payment of the
fine, in addition to the doubling of the specified basic fine, shall be added a
surcharge together with a law library fee as set by the court and, in the
discretion of the court, costs of prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 7.205)
   (D)   Towing and storage charges. In the event vehicles are required to be
towed and stored in addition to any parking fines and penalties payable on
account thereof, there shall be payable a towing charge of $65 per tow and a
storage charge of $5 per day.
(Prior Code, § 7.206) (Am. Ord. 393, passed 4-28-03)
  CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Trucks routes and heavy equipment
SCHEDULE I. TRUCKS ROUTES AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
   The following streets in the city are hereby designated as heavy traffic
routes in the city:
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                      Location                      Ord. No. Date Passed
                            From its intersection with
                            Trunk Highway #14/61 on the
Chestnut Street             south, north to the           223      2-21-84
                            intersection of Main Street,
                            Trunk Highway #14/61 and
                            Chestnut Street
East Service Drive          To Trunk Highway #14/61 for   223      2-21-84
                            its entire length
                            From the south line of
Elm Street (South 7th       Michigan Avenue, north to the 223      2-21-84
Street)                     north boundary line of the
                            city limits
                            From the southern boundary of
Hill Street (South 2nd      Utah Avenue north to its
Street)                     termination at the parking    223      2-21-84
                            lot of the La Crescent Health
                            Care Center
                            From the west line of Elm
Iowa Avenue (South 7th      Street to the western
Street)                     boundary line of the right-   223      2-21-84
                            of-way of Trunk Highway #14/
                            61
                            From the western boundary
Main Street (Mississippi    line of the right-of-way of
Avenue)                     Trunk Highway #14/61 west to  223      2-21-84
                            the westerly boundary of Elm
                            Street
Michigan Avenue (South 7th  From the west boundary line
Street)                     of the city limits east to    223      2-21-84
                            the east line of Elm Street
                            From the westerly boundary of
North 1st Street (Minnesota Sycamore Street west to the
Avenue)                     easterly boundary of the East 223      2-21-84
                            Service Drive to Trunk
                            Highway #14/61
                            Both sides of that part of N.
                            Chestnut St. from its
                            southerly end intersection
North Chestnut Street       with U.S. Highway 16          348      3-23-98
                            northward 1056 feet, but
                            subject to other resolution
                            including the maximum 48-hour
                            rule
                            On the south at a line
                            extended from the southerly
Skunk Hollow Road           boundary of South 14th        223      2-21-84
                            Street, north to its
                            termination
                            From the westerly boundary
South 14th Street           right-of-way of Trunk Highway 223      2-21-84
                            #14/61 west to the easterly
                            boundary of Skunk Hollow Road
                            From its intersection with
Sycamore Street             Trunk Highway #14/61 on the   223      2-21-84
                            north, south to the southern
                            boundary of North 1st Street
                            From the westerly boundary of
Utah Avenue (South 2nd      Elm Street west to the        223      2-21-84
Street)                     westerly boundary of Hill
                            Street
Walnut Street (Mississippi  From the southerly boundary
Avenue)                     of Main Street south to its   223      2-21-84
                            termination
 
(Prior Code, § 7.21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   No parking
   
II.   Restricted parking
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING.
   Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets at locations and time
designated.
Street Location Times Ord. No. Date Passed
Street    Location                                                                  Times    Ord. Date
                                                                                             No.  Passed
South 2nd South side of the street in the 700 block beginning at approximately Lat. All      555  1-10-
Street    43.827144 and Long. 91.313064 extending 210 feet to the west                            22
North 4th East side from its intersection with Crescent Hills Drive northerly to    All      281  2-4-91
Street    intersection with Houston County State Aid Highway #29
North 4th North side of the street adjacent to Lots 1 and 10 of Block P, Moore &    All      426  10-24-
Street    Peterson’s Addition                                                                   05
North 4th South side of the street adjacent to Lots 1 and 2 of Block 2 Gillette’s All      424  10-11-
Street    Addition                                                                                05
South 7th North side commencing 584 feet west of the west line of South Elm Street  All      317  7-18-
Street    (and its intersection with the north line of South 7th Street)                          94
South 7th North side beginning at intersection of the west line of South Elm Street               3-12-
Street    and extend west along the north side of 7th Street South to its           All      518  18
          intersection with the west line of Larch Avenue extended north
North 9th Both sides                                                                All      398  9-8-03
Street
South 9th West side of the driveway entrance at 530 South 9th Street to the                       1-10-
Street    driveway entrance at 819 Spruce Drive, which is approximately 40 feet in  All      556  22
          length
North
10th      One side                                                                  All      398  9-8-03
Street
South     North side from Lancer Drive along and adjacent to the Independent School               8-15-
14th      District No. 300 property easterly to the east property limit of the      All      219  83
Street    school property
South     South side from Lancer Drive easterly to the east property line of                      8-15-
14th      Independent School District No. 300 property                              All      219  83
Street
Alley in  West side for 100 feet                                                    All      256  7-18-
Block 23                                                                                          88
Cedar     West side from its intersection with South 7th Street southward 229.5     All      229  9-17-
Drive     feet                                                                                    84
Cedar     Both sides from its intersection with South 7th Street southerly 178.65   All      236  6-3-85
Drive     feet
Chestnut  East side from the north line of North 1st Street north to 360 feet north All      382  9-10-
Street    of the north line of North 4th Street.                                                  01
Chestnut  West side commencing 144 feet south of the south line of F Street         All      308  9-20-
Street                                                                                            93
South     East side from its intersection with the south wall of the viaduct bridge               9-14-
Chestnut  and continuing southerly to its intersection with US Highway 16 and there All      498  15
Street    terminating
South     West side from its intersection with the south wall of the viaduct bridge               9-14-
Chestnut  as located on the date hereof south 500 feet and there terminating        All      498  15
Street
                                                                                    For a
South     West side according to the official recorded plats thereof on file and of period        9-14-
Chestnut  record in the Houston County Recorder’s Office                          not to   498  15
Street                                                                              exceed
                                                                                    24 hours
South     West side from its southerly intersection with US Highway 16, northward                 9-14-
Chestnut  335 feet and there terminating the no parking designation                 All      498  15
Street
Cortland  One side                                                                  All      398  9-8-03
Boulevard
Elm       West side from the north line of North 2nd Street to a point 69.20 feet   All      248  11-3-
Street    north thereof                                                                           86
Elm       East side from the intersection thereof with South 11th Street, north to  All      407  4-26-
Street    the north city limits                                                                   04
Hillview  South side from its intersection with Minnesota State Trunk Highway #61   All      235  5-20-
Boulevard westerly 235 feet                                                                       85
Midnight  All sides except east from the north half of the Southwest Quarter of
Street    Section 11, Township 104 North, Range 4 West of the Fifth Principal       All      249  4-6-87
          Meridian
South Oak All sides between South 4th Street and South 7th Street                   All      330  9-25-
Street                                                                                            95
South Oak West side 50 feet south of the bus departure lane                         All      575  9-25-
Street                                                                                            23
Spruce    West side from its intersection with South 7th Street to a point on       All      241  10-21-
Drive     Spruce Drive 151.5 feet south thereof                                                   85
Strupp    All sides except west from the north half of the Southwest Quarter of
Avenue    Section 11, Township 104 North, Range 4 West of the Fifth Principal       All      249  4-6-87
          Meridian
Sycamore  East side beginning at a point with coordinates N43.833357, W-300457;
Street    thence north 22 feet in a straight line to a point with coordinates       All      499  2-8-16
          N43.8333681, W- 91.300446; as shown on an Exhibit A attached to Ord. 499
Twilite   All sides except west from the north half of the Southwest Quarter of
Street    Section 11, Township 104 North, Range 4 West of the Fifth Principal       All      249  4-6-87
          Meridian
Twilite   West side at the single northerly most parking space                      All      294  10-19-
Street                                                                                            92
Walnut    West side from its intersection with South 2nd Street, northerly
Street    approximately 150 feet to its intersection with the southerly line of the All      443  6-9-08
          public alley
North     West side at the single parking space adjacent of the north line of the
Walnut    alley in Block 50                                                         All      303  4-5-93
Street
South     East side from intersection with 3rd Street south to a point 200 feet                   10-8-
Walnut    north of said intersection, and west side from said intersection to a     All      436  07
Street    point 360 feet north of said intersection
                                                                                    From
North 3rd South side from intersection with Elm Street easterly to its intersection November 576  10-23-
Street    with North 4th Street.                                                    1 to          23
                                                                                    April 1
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 7, App. C) (Ord. 407, passed 4-26-04 ; Am. Ord. 576, passed
10-23-23) Penalty, see §
71.99
SCHEDULE II. RESTRICTED PARKING.
   Parking shall be restricted on the following streets at the locations and
times designated:
Street Location Restriction Ord. No. Date Passed
Street    Location       Restriction                                          Ord. Date
                                                                              No.  Passed
          South side
          from
South 1st intersection   No parking, except emergency responder personnel’s      4-28-
Street    with Oak       vehicles                                             592  25
          Street
          easterly 100
          feet
          North side
          from its
          intersection
South 2nd with Walnut    Two hours time limit (all times)                     229  9-17-
Street    Street to a                                                              84
          point 150 feet
          west of the
          intersection
          Front of
          building
South 2nd adjacent on    Limited parking from 11 a.m. to 12 a.m. and 5 p.m.        7-20-
Street    the front of   to 6 p.m. for staff only                             293  92
          Kentucky Place
          (333 South 2nd
          Street)
          Both sides
          adjacent and
          northerly of
          Lots 1 and 2,
          Block 2,
          Manton Plat,
          La Crescent,
          according to
          the official
          recorded plat
          thereof on
          file and of
          record in the
North 3rd Houston County Two hour time limit 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. each day  446  9-22-
Street    Recorder's                                                               08
          office, EXCEPT
          that portion
          on the south
          side of said
          segment
          intersected by
          the entrance
          sidewalk which
          is adjacent to
          said sidewalk
          which shall be
          designated as
          "No Parking".
          North side,
          from its
          intersection
North 4th with Elm       From November 1 to April 1                           467  1-24-
Street    Street to its                                                            11
          intersection
          with the state
          highway
          Corner of
          South 4th and
          Oak Streets
          (north of the
South 4th elementary     7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on 268; 9-18-
and Oak   school         days when school classes are in session, for bus          89; 4-
Streets   gymnasium)     dropping off and picking up of students              486  28-14
          from the
          corner
          westward 397
          feet
          In front of
South 7th real property                                                            3-12-
Street    described in   One-hour                                             518  18
          Exhibit A to
          Ordinance 518
          East side from
          South 11th
Lancer    Street south   From 7:45 a.m. to 3:15 p.m., Monday through Friday        12-28-
Boulevard to South 14th  of each week of the school year                      429  05
          Street, in
          Valley South
          Addition
          North side
          from a point
Lancer    330 feet of                                                              2-21-
Boulevard the north line Handicapped parking only (all times)                 225  84
          of South 14th
          Street for 48
          feet
          West side from
          the
          intersection
          of 14th Street
          and Lancer
Lancer    Drive north    Two hours time limit from 8:00 a.m. through 4:00     374  8-14-
Drive     approximately  p.m., Monday through Friday                               00
          184 feet tothe
          entryway of
          the apartment
          complex
          parking lot
          From 329 Main
          Street west to
Main      Oak Street as  Two hours time limit (all times)                     363  7-12-
Street    marked with                                                              99
          appropriate
          signs
          Portions of
          Main and South
          Oak Street in
          particular
Main and  segments                                                                 8-24-
South Oak designated by  7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday        357  98
Streets   appropriate
          signs and/or
          painting
          adjacent curb
          yellow
          South side
          from the
          intersection
Main      with Walnut    Two hours time limit (all times)                     256  7-18-
Street    Street east to                                                           88
          State Trunk
          Highway #61
          frontage road
          The corner of
          South 4th and
          Oak Streets
          (northeast of
          the elementary
Oak       school         7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on      4-28-
Street    gymnasium)     school days, for bus dropping off and picking up of  485  14
          from the       students
          corner
          southward on
          the west side
          of Oak Street
          73 feet
          West side from
          west side of
          the street
          adjacent to
          theElementary
Oak       School         7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days                247  10-6-
Street    Building and                                                             86
          Independent
          School
          District #00
          Administrative
          Offices
          Adjacent to
          Oak Street:
Oak       Lot 20, Block                                                            10-8-
Street    87 of city     Two hours time limit (all times)                     435  07
          plat, commonly
          known as 215
          Oak Street.
          West side from
          the alley
          lying between
          South 3rd
          Street to the
          intersection
          of South 3rd
          Street and
South Oak from the       Four hours time limit from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday -      6-11-
Street    intersection   Friday                                               383  01
          of South 3rd
          Street west
          approx. 119
          feet to entry
          way of the
          parking lot
          located at 412
          South 3rd
          Street
          West side from
          the north line
South Oak of South 4th   Two hours time limit from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday -
Street    Street, north  Friday                                               318  8-1-94
          to the south
          line of the
          public alley
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 7, App. C)
Penalty, see § 71.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   RIGHT-OF-WAY
      
95.   SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
      
96.   TREES
      
97.   PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND PUBLIC GROUNDS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Public nuisances prohibited
   
90.03   Dogs running at large prohibited
   
90.04   Other animals running at large prohibited
   
90.05   Licenses for dogs, cats and other animals
   
90.06   Multiple pet permits
   
90.07   Rabid animals
   
90.08   Vicious dogs
   
90.09   Impoundment
   
90.10   Surrender of animals
   
90.11   Census taking
   
90.12   Application of chapter
   
90.13   Animals in public parks prohibited
   
90.14   Disposal of animal waste
   
90.15   City wide leash regulation
   
90.16   Regulations applicable to dogs and cats
   
90.17   Service dogs
   
90.18   Limited keeping of chickens
   
90.19   Beekeeping regulations
Administration and Enforcement
   
90.30   Fees
   
90.31   Violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. The releasing of a dog, cat or other animal within the city
under circumstances where the dog, cat or other animal is thereafter found
unleashed or otherwise unattended or unrestrained in the city. The failure of a
person required by this chapter to pay any fee in connection with the restraint
or impoundment of any dog, cat or other animal thus resulting in the dog, cat
or other animal remaining at the place of restraint or impoundment shall be
deemed abandonment. Circumstances amounting to a charge of running at large if
occurring at a frequency more than two times in any 90-day period shall be
deemed abandonment.
   ALTERED MALE. Any male animal that has been operated on to prevent it from
procreating.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The police or the person appointed by the City
Council to perform all general duties and functions of animal control and
poundmaster, together with those specifically designated in this chapter or
otherwise in the city code.
   AT LARGE. When running at will beyond the control or call, acting on its own
initiative without connection, physical or sympathetic, with its master.
   CATTERY. Any person, group of persons or a corporation engaged in the
keeping of cats or the business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding cats.
   CONFINED. Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his or her
agent, to an escape- proof building or other enclosure, away from other animals
and the public.
   HAS BITTEN. Has seized with the teeth or jaws so that the skin of the person
or animal seized has been nipped or gripped, or has been wounded or pierced,
including but not limited to scratches, and including but not limited to
probable contact of saliva with a break or abrasion of the skin as determined
by a licensed physician. The term shall also include but not me limited to
contact of saliva with any mucous membrane.
   KENNEL. An establishment wherein any person is engaged in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling
dogs. The exercise by the Animal Control Officer of the duties of the office
shall not be construed a kennel.
   OWN. To keep, harbor or have control, charge or custody of a dog, cat or
other animal. This term shall not apply to dogs, cats or other animals owned by
others which are temporarily maintained on the premises of a veterinarian or
kennel operator for a period of less than 30 days.
   OWNER. Any person keeping, harboring or having charge or control of, or
permitting any dog, cat or other animal to habitually be or remain on, or be
lodged or fed within such person's house, yard or premises. This term shall not
apply to veterinarians or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their
premises dogs, cats or other animals owned by others for a period of less than
30 days.
   PUBLIC NUISANCES. The following are hereby declared public nuisances: the
keeping of a dog:
      (1)   Disposed to unreasonable barking;
      (2)   Which trespasses upon the private property of others;
      (3)   Which has bitten or attacked a person or other animal;
      (4)   Which soils, defiles or defecates on private or public property;
      (5)   Which molests passersby or passing vehicles; or
      (6)   Which is abandoned in the city.
   SPAYED FEMALE. Any female animal which has been operated on to prevent
conception.
   UNREASONABLE BARKING. The written complaint of five or more persons,
residents of the city, alleging that the barking of a dog or dogs is
unreasonable shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the public nuisance of
unreasonable barking, but a lesser number or a single complaint shall be
adequate basis for prosecution.
   VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division (2) of this
definition, meets any of the following criteria:
         (a)   Has killed or caused serious injury to any person;
         (b)   Has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person, or has killed another dog;
         (c)   Belongs to a breed that is commonly known as a pit bull dog. The
ownership, keeping, or harboring of such a breed of dog shall be prima facie
evidence of the owner keeping or harboring of a vicious dog.
      (2)   VICIOUS DOG does not include either of the following:
         (a)   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person or that has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist law enforcement officers in
the performance of their official duties.
         (b)   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog,
or a dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person while a person
was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense directly against the
owner, keeper or harborer. A dog acts without provocation when it was not
teased, tormented or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid or the
defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and who
was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity.
(Prior Code, § 5.01)
§ 90.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person, partnership or corporation shall allow a dog to be a public
nuisance, including public nuisance as defined in §
90.01.
(Prior Code, § 5.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.03 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No dog shall be permitted to run at large within the city limits.
   (B)   In preventing a dog from running at large, if the owner uses a leash,
it should be properly anchored and of sufficient strength to prevent the dog
from freeing itself.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.04 OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall permit any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cattle, sheep,
goat, swine, rabbit, chicken, goose, duck or turkey of which he or she is the
owner to be at large within the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.12)
   (B)   (1)   Who can impound. The Animal Control Officer or any police
officer may take up and impound in the city pound any animal or fowl found
running at large in violation of this section and shall provide proper
sustenance for every animal impounded.
      (2)   Notice. Within 24 hours after any animal has been impounded, the
Animal Control Officer shall post notice at the city hall, describing the
animal and stating that it has been impounded. The Animal Control Officer shall
also make a reasonable attempt to give oral or written notice to the owner
where known.
      (3)   Release. No animal impounded shall be released except to a person
having a receipt from the Animal Control Officer showing payment of the
impoundment fee or the sale price.
(Prior Code, § 5.13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.05 LICENSES FOR DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   Required. No person shall keep any dog, cat or other animal over four
months of age within the city unless:
      (1)   The animal has received rabies shots and any other mandated by laws
of the state.
      (2)   It wears a metal tag attached to the collar of the animal and is
worn by the animal at all times, indicating the animal has received the
necessary rabies and any other inoculations.
      (3)   A license for the animal has been secured from the city in
accordance with the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Applications. Applications for dog, cat and other animal licenses
shall be made on forms provided by the city obtainable at the office of the
City Clerk, and among other undertakings subscribed to by license applicants
shall be the acknowledgment that dog, cat and other animal owners are liable
for all actions of their animals and that owners and licensees shall defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the city from any claims, liabilities or
responsibility arising out of the keeping of a dog, cat or other animal. The
City Clerk shall maintain a record of all licenses issued.
   (C)   License to be denied without prior vaccinations. No license shall be
granted for a dog, cat or other animal which has not been vaccinated against
rabies during the 90-day period preceding the making of an application for such
license, except that when a dog, cat or other animal is first licensed for an
entire year, thereafter the license may be issued if the dog, cat or other
animal has been vaccinated within a period of six months preceding the
application for a license. Vaccination shall be permitted and performed only by
a doctor qualified to practice veterinary medicine in the state in which the
dog, cat or other animal is vaccinated.
   (D)   Fees.
      (1)   The annual license fee for male dogs or cats, female dogs or cats,
neutered male dogs or cats and spayed female dogs or cats shall be in
accordance with the schedule set forth in §
90.30.
      (2)   In applying for the latter type license, written proof is required
from a licensed veterinarian that the animal being licensed has been neutered
or spayed.
   (E)   Duplicates. Duplicate licenses may be obtained for a charge set forth
in §
90.30. No person shall use any license receipt or license tag issued for one
animal on another animal.
   (F)   Expiration. The license fee shall be payable on or before January 15,
excepting that after January 15 in a given year as to dogs, cats or other
animals newly acquired and the animals of persons who become residents of the
city, the licenses shall be obtained within 14 days of residence or
acquisition. All dog, cat and other animal licenses whenever issued shall
expire on December 31 following their issuance. Surcharges for late application
shall be in accordance with the schedule set forth in §90.30, and such charges
shall be leviable on licenses issued subsequent to January 15 of each year. The
City Council may, by resolution, specify the manner of determining or proving
the fact of age and date of acquisition of any such dogs, cats or other
animals.
(Prior Code, § 5.04) (Am. Ord. 337, passed 6-10-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.06 MULTIPLE PET PERMITS.
   (A)   Required. In order to own three or more of any one species, a multiple
pet permit is required, except that an owner may have four licensable pets only
if a combination of two dogs and two cats is owned. In addition to the multiple
pet permit, the owner must obtain a regular license for each dog or cat owned.
   (B)   Applications. Applications for multiple pet permits shall be processed
through the Animal Control Officer under the supervision of the City
Administrator. In instances where an application is so submitted and where
favorable action is not granted on the permit within a period of 14 days
thereafter, the permit application shall be thereby deemed rejected.
   (C)   Fees. A multiple pet permit shall be issuable at a fee set forth in
§90.30, and such permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Surcharges
of a late application shall be in accordance with the schedule set forth in
§90.30, and such charges shall be leviable on licenses issued subsequent to
January 15 each year. Permits shall be prorated monthly.
   (D)   Stipulations for keeping permits. All premises with multiple pet
permits shall maintain areas where animals are kept to be free of all
contamination and diseases. Also odors and noises shall be minimized.
   (E)   Revocation. Upon written complaints served to the police of excessive
noise or odor or upon other complaints of violations of the city code, the
Animal Control Officer may revoke the multiple pet permit of the owner of the
animals causing the problems. If the owner feels the Animal Control Officer was
unreasonable in revoking the permit, then the owner shall serve the City
Administrator a request for a hearing before the City Council. If the situation
requires, the Animal Control Officer may impound the animals pending the
results of the hearing. In this case, the owner shall tender with his or her
request for the hearing funds in an amount sufficient to defray expenses of the
keeping of the animals while the hearing is awaited and until the matter is
eventually resolved.
(Prior Code, § 5.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.07 RABID ANIMALS.
   (A)   When bitten by any animal. Any animal suspected of being afflicted
with rabies, or any dog, cat or other animal not vaccinated according to the
provisions of the chapter, or any other animal which has bitten any person and
caused an abrasion of the skin of such person, shall be seized and impounded
under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of not less than
ten days. If, upon examination by a veterinarian, the animal has no signs of
rabies at the end of the impoundment, it may be released to the owner, or, in
the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable
laws. Any animal vaccinated according to the provisions of this chapter which
has bitten any person shall be confined by the owner or other responsible
person as required by the Animal Control Officer for a period of ten days, at
which time the dog, cat or other animal shall be examined by a licensed
veterinarian. If no signs of rabies are observed by the veterinarian, the
animal may be released from confinement.
   (B)   Destruction thereof. Any person may destroy any animal that he or she
knows is affected with the disease rabies, also know as hydrophobia.
(Prior Code, § 5.05)(Ord.344, passed 7-28-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.08 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog shall fail to do either
of the following, except when the dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or
training for the purpose of hunting, accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer
or a handler.
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
securely confine it at all times in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced
yard, or other locked enclosure which has a top, except that a dangerous dog
may, in the alternative, be tied with a leash or tether so that the dog is
adequately restrained.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
keep it on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than six feet in
length and additionally do at least one of the following:
         (a)   Keep the dog in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced
yard, or other locked enclosure which has a top.
         (b)   Have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of
suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or
tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station a person in close enough proximity to that
dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to another person.
         (c)   Muzzle the dog.
   (B)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog shall fail to obtain
liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in
this state providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive
of interest and costs, of not less than $50,000 because of damage or bodily
injury to or death of a person caused by the vicious dog.
(Prior Code, § 5.07)
§ 90.09 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Who can impound. The Animal Control Officer shall, or any peace
officer may, capture and impound any dog constituting a nuisance as defined in
§
90.01. The police, or any other duly appointed person, may also take and
impound any animal which is not being kept, confined or restrained in a manner
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. Such police officer or person
may enter upon private premises where it appears that there is reasonable cause
to believe that an animal is not being kept, confined, or restrained as herein
required.
   (B)   Notice to owner. Immediately upon the impounding of an animal wearing
a current license tag, the police shall make every reasonable effort to notify
the owner or harborer of such impoundment, and of the conditions whereby the
owner or harborer may regain custody of the animal. Verbal notice shall be
immediately confirmed in writing by the police.
   (C)   Reclaiming impounded animal. Any animal impounded hereunder may be
reclaimed by the owner or harborer of such animal within five regular business
days after receiving notice of such impoundment, excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and legal holidays, upon payment to the City Clerk of an impounding fee as
established by the City Council and set forth in the city's schedule of fees,
together with the actual costs incurred for boarding. If the animal being
reclaimed has no license, and a license is required, a license shall be
required prior to release, and the fee for the same paid prior to the release
from impoundment.
   (D)   Animals which cannot be impounded. If an animal is rabid, or otherwise
diseased, vicious or dangerous, and cannot be impounded after a reasonable
effort or without serious risk to the impounder or others, such animal may be
immediately killed.
   (E)   Sale of impounded animals. If an animal taken up and impounded has not
been reclaimed within the time limit provided herein, or if the owner cannot be
located, then within five regular business days, the person in charge of the
pound shall give three regular business days notice of the time and place where
such animal will be sold by posting notices in the office of the person in
charge of the pound, the office of the City Clerk, and in a conspicuous place
at the pound. Should the person in charge of the pound be unable to sell such
animal, that person cannot sell such animal thereafter without notice as
provided herein or similar notice to otherwise dispose of such animal.
(Prior Code, § 5.08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.10 SURRENDER OF ANIMALS.
   If an owner wants to abandon all responsibility for animals owned, then the
owner shall sign a surrender form. Upon signing the form, the owner shall be
charged an impoundment fee, board charge, and a charge for disposal of the
animal. Refusal to abide by the provisions of the section shall be construed as
abandonment of the animal.
(Prior Code, § 5.09) (Ord. 344, passed 7-28-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.11 CENSUS TAKING.
   The city may, at its option, and at such intervals, utilizing appropriate
notice to the public, employ suitable persons upon such terms and conditions as
it may see fit, to make a house-to-house census and issue warnings to owners
then and there to procure their rabies shots and licenses. The city shall
impose such additional charge for each license issued in the course of such
census as set forth in §
90.30.
(Prior Code, § 5.10)
§ 90.12 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   All provisions of this chapter shall apply to cats and shall be
construed quoted and cited when applied to cats by substituting the word “cat
(s)” and “kitten(s)” in lieu of “dog(s)” and “pup(s)” and in lieu of “barking,”
“cat noises.”
(Prior Code, § 5.11)
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to dogs, cats and all other
animals, domestic or otherwise, which persons may bring to any location within
the corporate limits of the city. These provisions shall not be regarded as
permitting the presence of any such other animals anywhere within the corporate
limits of the city if prohibited by other code provision or contrary to the
general laws of the state.
(Ord. 344, passed 7-28-97)
§ 90.13 ANIMALS IN PUBLIC PARKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibited in certain parks. Except for Vetsch Park, Eagle Bluff Park,
Vollenweider Park and Apple Blossom Park, no dogs shall be allowed in city
parks in the city.
   (B)   Signage. To effectively inform all persons who have occasion to use
city parks, signs shall be posted at entrances to parks apprising the owners
and persons having control of dogs of these regulations.
(Ord. 344, passed 7-28-97; Am. Ord. 440, passed 5-12-08)
§ 90.14 DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL WASTE.
   Any person conducting animal(s) within the corporate limits of the city
whether or not the animal is owned by such person, shall then and there possess
tools or equipment suitable for the sanitary pick up and removal of all animal
fecal material and shall promptly and effectively remove to his premises all
such fecal material and there make sanitary disposition thereof.
(Ord. 344, passed 7-28-97)
§ 90.15 CITY WIDE LEASH REGULATION.
   All dogs shall, at all times while out of doors, (except on the property of
the owner or person having the control thereof) in the city, be on leash and
the owner and/or person in control thereof shall at all times have in
possession tools or equipment suitable for the sanitary pick-up, removal and
ultimate disposal in a sanitary fashion of all dog fecal material. To not have
such tools or equipment when dogs are on leash and out of doors, is a violation
of this section.
(Ord. 440, passed 5-12-08)
§ 90.16 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO DOGS AND CATS.
   These regulations apply equally to dogs and cats and to other animals
domestic or otherwise which may be brought into the city. The provisions of
this chapter, especially this section, shall not be construed as permitting the
presence of any such other animals anywhere within the city if prohibited by
other ordinance and code provisions or contrary to the general laws of the
State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 440, passed 5-12-08)
§ 90.17 SERVICE DOGS.
   Bona fide guide dogs and service dogs of all kinds, including those utilized
in law enforcement are exempt from these provisions and regulations.
(Ord. 440, passed 5-12-08)
§ 90.18 LIMITED KEEPING OF CHICKENS.
   (A)   The limited keeping of chickens may be permitted as an accessory use
to a legally established single-family residence subject to the following:
      (1)   The property shall be occupied with a single-family home. The owner
of the chickens shall live in the dwelling on the property.
      (2)   No single-family residence shall keep more than six total hen
chickens.
      (3)   No person shall keep roosters or adult male chickens.
      (4)   Chickens shall be kept within a separate enclosed accessory
building and fenced outdoor containment area subject to the following:
         (a)   The accessory building shall be less than 120 square feet in
size and not exceed six feet in height.
         (b)   The accessory building shall comply with all standards for
accessory buildings, unless otherwise stated herein.
         (c)   Any outdoor containment areas shall be screened from view from
all neighboring properties and rights-of-way. Outdoor containment areas shall
not exceed 20 square feet per bird and shall not have a fenced enclosure
greater than six feet in height.
         (d)   Any accessory building or containment area shall be located in
the rear yard only and shall be at least 15 feet from any side or rear property
lines.
         (e)   Fencing used to contain chickens shall comply with applicable
conditions of the city code.
         (f)   Chickens shall not be kept within the dwelling unit or garage.
         (g)   The accessory building and/or containment area shall be
maintained in good repair, in a clean and sanitary manner, free of vermin, and
free of objectionable odors.
         (h)   Chickens shall remain in the accessory building and/or
containment area at all times and shall not run at large.
         (i)   Chickens shall remain in the accessory building from sunset to
sunrise each day to prevent nuisance noise and the attraction of vermin and
predators.
         (j)   Accessory buildings for the purpose of this section shall count
towards the number of accessory buildings permitted or the size limitations as
stated in Zoning Ordinance Ch. 12.
         (k)   The slaughter of chickens on site is prohibited.
         (l)   The raising of chickens for breeding purposes is prohibited.
         (m)   The sale of eggs or other commercial activity on the premises is
prohibited.
         (n)   Feces and discarded feed shall be regularly collected and only
stored temporarily on site in a leak-proof container with a tight-fitting cover
to prevent nuisance odors and the attraction of vermin. Such waste may be
composted on site if objectionable odors are not generated and maintained.
         (o)   Chicken feed shall be stored in leak-proof containers with a
tight-fitting cover to prevent attracting vermin.
   (B)   The keeping of farm animals other than chickens or in greater numbers
than permitted by division (A) shall comply with all other requirements of the
city code.
   (C)   The limited keeping of chickens is permitted at established schools
providing kindergarten through grade 12 (K—12) education.
   (D)   Permit required. No person shall keep or maintain chickens unless they
have been granted a permit. The permit shall be subject to all terms and
conditions of this section, and any additional conditions deemed necessary by
the City Council to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the
animal. The necessary permit applications are available in the City Clerk's
Office. Included with the completed application, must be a scaled diagram that
indicates the location of any chicken coop and run, the approximate size and
distance from adjoining structures, and property lines.
   (E)   Violation. A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor subject
to penalty not to exceed $300.
(Ord. 568, passed 6-12-23; Am. Ord. 578, passed 12-11-23)
§ 90.19 BEEKEEPING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to permit and
establish requirements for the keeping of honey bee colonies, hives, and
equipment within the City of La Crescent.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of bees on a single lot.
      BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
honey bees.
      COLONY. An aggregate of honey bees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and honey.
      FLYWAY BARRIER. A solid fence, wall, or dense vegetation at least six
feet in height that continues parallel to the apiary site lot line at least ten
feet in each direction from the colony, that requires bees to fly over, rather
than through the barrier. Depending on the barrier type and construction, or
location, additional permitting may be required prior to installation.
      HIVE. The receptacle inhabited by a colony.
      UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. A lot adjacent to an apiary where residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, trails, sidewalks, or streets do not currently
exist, or are greater than 25 feet from an existing hive.
   (C)   Location requirements.
      (1)   Beekeeping is permitted in all zoning districts in accordance with
this code section. In the C-1 - Commercial District, CBD 1 - Commercial
Business District, CBD 2 - Commercial Business District, and I - Industrial
District, hives must be kept on the roof of a building at least 12 feet in
height.
      (2)   Hives may be located in the front yard. Hives located in the front
yard must meet the hive setback requirements. For the purpose of this section,
a corner lot has two front yards.
      (3)   Hive setback must be in accordance with the following requirements:
 
Hive Setback                   Distance
Lot line                       20 feet
Lot line with a flyway barrier 15 feet
Adjacent dwelling              25 feet
Trail/sidewalk/patio           25 feet
 
   (D)   Colony design.
      (1)   Colonies must be kept in removable frame hive bodies no more than 9
and 5/8 inches deep with no more than ten frames.
      (2)   An adequate and convenient water source must be within ten feet of
active hives.
      (3)   Hives must not exceed six feet in total height.
      (4)   Each beekeeper shall ensure that no wax comb or other material that
might encourage robbing by other bees is left exposed outdoors. Such materials
must be stored in sealed insect-proof containers or placed within a building.
   (5)   Maximum number of colonies permitted based on lot size:
 
Lot Size              Number of Colonies
Less than 0.50 acres  1 colony
0.51 to 1.0 acres     2 colonies
1.01 to 2.50 acres    4 colonies
2.51 to 4.99 acres    8 colonies
5.00 to 9.99 acres    16 colonies
Greater than 10 acres 32 colonies
 
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   All beekeepers must register active hive sites with the Building
Official or designee. Existing hives must register within 60 days of the
publishing of this section. All beekeepers must register active hive sites
annually.
      (2)   Sale of honey or related bee products. Retail sales in residential
zones must only be from hives on that property. Home occupations must meet all
of the existing requirements in this code.
      (3)   Beekeepers shall provide written documentation that all immediate
neighbors have been notified that bees will be kept on property.
      (4)   If an undeveloped property adjacent to a colony is developed, the
colony locations must comply with all sections of this code within 90 days of
the development.
      (5)   Hive bodies must be maintained in good condition, including
maintenance of paint, and when not in use must be removed within 14 days if
they are no longer occupied.
      (6)   Beekeepers shall submit a written plan on how they intend to
minimize or prevent swarming to the Building Official or designee. For swarm
prevention purposes a beekeeper may exceed the maximum colony requirement for
up to 35 days, but must meet all other requirements of this section.
      (7)   Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate living
space for their resident honey bees in order to control swarming.
      (8)   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive
behavior, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly implement
appropriate actions to address the behavior. Queens shall be selected from
European stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming characteristics.
      (9)   The city Building Official or designee shall have the right to
inspect any apiary for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this section
between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. once annually upon prior notice to the owner of
the apiary property and more often upon complaint without prior notice. It
shall be deemed a violation of this section for any person to resist, impede,
or hinder the Building Official or designee in the performance of their duties
in inspecting any apiary and apiary site.
   (F)   Violation. A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor subject
to penalty not to exceed $300.
(Ord. 570, passed 7-24-23; Am. Ord. 581, passed 3-25-24)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.30 FEES.
   The fee for impounding and the per day charge for feeding for fowls and
rabbits are set forth as follows:
Description Fee
Description                                                                       Fee
Dog license:
   Each spayed or neutered dog or cat                                          $7.50
                                                                                  $10
   Each male or female dog or cat not altered                                  per
                                                                                  animal
   Surcharge for late application or for license issued in connection with the $5
census prescribed in §                                                           each
90.11
   License - yearly 1/1 through 12/31 per dog/cat                              $12
   Replacement tag                                                             $1
Late fee after January 15 in addition to regular license fee                      $15
Animal Impoundment                                                                $50
                                                                                  $10
   Boarding (food/shelter) plus tax                                            per
                                                                                  day
Note: The $25 per multiple pet license charge is in addition to all other basic license
fees.
 
(Prior Code, § 5.14) (Ord. 260, passed 11-21-88; Am. Ord. 594, passed 9-8-25)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.31 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of this chapter may, in the discretion of the City Enforcement
Officer, be charged petty misdemeanors or misdemeanors and upon conviction
shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 344, passed 7-28-97; Am. Ord. 440, passed 5-12-08)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   State Fair Housing rules and regulations adopted by reference
   
91.02   Applicability of regulations
   
91.03   Discrimination declared to be a public nuisance
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 STATE FAIR HOUSING RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The fair housing rules and regulations contained in M.S. Chapter 363A,
including the definitions insofar as unfair and discriminatory housing
practices are concerned, are hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference
and made a part of this chapter as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 8.37) (Ord. 265, passed 8-7-89)
§ 91.02 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to:
   (A)   All landowners, developers, lessors, sublessors, assignors, lessees,
sublessees, assignees and managing agents of real estate situated in the city.
   (B)   All real estate brokers and sales people.
   (C)   All banks, mortgage companies, insurance companies and financial
institutions.
   (D)   Any and all employees and agents of divisions (A), (B) and (C) of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 8.38) (Ord. 265, passed 8-7-89)
§ 91.03 DISCRIMINATION DECLARED TO BE A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any discrimination with respect to housing, whether perpetrated directly or
indirectly on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
sexual orientation, age, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, disability or familial status perpetrated in the city by any person
to which the regulations of this code apply as set forth in §
91.02 are deemed public nuisances and violations of this code.
(Prior Code, § 8.39) (Ord. 265, passed 8-7-89)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any violations of this chapter are deemed misdemeanors and upon conviction
are punishable according to the laws of the state, together with the costs of
prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 8.40) (Ord. 265, passed 8-7-89)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Gas burning equipment
   
92.02   Wood burning stoves
Open Burning
   
92.15   Definitions
   
92.16   Open burning prohibited; exception for outdoor fireplace or fire
   
92.17   Prohibition of demolition operations by open burning
   
92.18   Exemptions
   
92.19   Permit application
   
92.20   Permit issuers
   
92.21   Permit revocation
   
92.22   Liability
   
92.23   Conflicting laws
Fire Hydrants
   
92.40   Purpose
   
92.41   Authorized use
   
92.42   Use of hydrants with permit
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 GAS BURNING EQUIPMENT.
   No person, firm or corporation shall install any gas appliance or accessory
or gas piping system unless licensed to do so by the state.
§ 92.02 WOOD BURNING STOVES.
   (A)   Outside wood burning stoves prohibited. The installation or
maintenance or operation of outside wood burning stoves in the city is
prohibited.
   (B)   Outside wood burning stoves defined. An outside wood burning stove is
defined as a freestanding outside device designed to burn wood, wood pellets or
other combustible material, typically maintained in a small shed-like structure
containing a firebox to heat water in a water jacket which surrounds the
firebox, with a short smoke stack.
   (C)   Preexisting outside wood burning stoves. Outside wood burning stoves
existing in the city prior to the enactment of this section may continue as a
nonconforming use but as such are subject to the prohibition within the city of
the maintenance of nuisance(s) which their operation may constitute.
   (D)   Violations of the provisions of this section may be charged as petty
misdemeanors or misdemeanors and upon conviction thereof punishable in
accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota. Each day a violation exists
constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 441, passed 5-12-08)
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURNING PERMIT. A written permit issued by the Fire Chief (or in the absence
of the Chief, the Fire Marshal) of the Volunteer Fire Department authorizing
fires exempted from the general provisions of this subchapter, and setting
conditions therefor, pursuant to Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
requirements.
   CONTROL EQUIPMENT. Any device, approved by the DNR, which has the function
of controlling or abating the emission of air contaminants to the atmosphere.
   DISEASED SHADE TREE. Any tree infected by Dutch elm disease or oak wilt
disease or any tree constituting a hazard to a disease control program
established by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.
   DISPOSAL FACILITY. A facility or site permitted by the DNR for the
intermediate or final disposal of solid waste.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter whereby the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through
any adequately controlled stack, duct or chimney.
   REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE. A public or private operation engaged in solid
waste collection and transportation.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid waste, such as paper, cardboard, yard
clippings and other natural matter, not including garbage.
   WETLAND. A natural marsh where water stands near, at or above the soil
surface during a significant portion of most years.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
§ 92.16 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR OUTDOOR FIREPLACE OR FIRE.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this subchapter other than as
specifically excepted in this subchapter, open burning shall be prohibited
within the city and the burning of garbage and rubbish is absolutely prohibited
within the city.
   (B)   (1)   This subchapter does not prohibit the use of an outdoor
fireplace or outdoor fire used exclusively for cooking, warmth or a
recreational purpose. Outdoor fireplaces, barbeques or fires shall not be used
for the burning of litter, refuse, garbage, leaves, paper, etc. The material to
be burned shall be contained within an outdoor fireplace, barbecue or
noncombustible fire ring and shall be limited to a pile no larger than three
feet in diameter by two feet high. Fires within such ring and outside of an
outdoor fireplace or barbecue shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet from any
and all structures and not more than 150 feet from a 20 foot wide access for
fire apparatus.
      (2)   The use of commercially manufactured wood burning appliances shall
be allowed provided such appliance is equipped with a spark arresting screen
and is located a minimum distance of 20 feet from an occupied structure and 10
feet from any other structure. The appliance shall be constantly attended while
in use. Only unfinished wood shall be burned in such appliance and the burning
shall be done in such a manner so that dense smoke and noxious fumes are not
created.
      (3)   The attendance at open burning. Opening burning, bonfires or
recreational fires shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished.
A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with § 906 with a minimum
of 4-A rating or other approved onsite fire-extinguishing equipment, such as
dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for
immediate utilization.
      (4)   Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame
cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10
feet of combustible construction.
         (a)   Exceptions:
            1.   One and two family dwellings.
            2.   Where buildings and decks are protected by an automatic
sprinkler system.
      (5)   Liquefied-petroleum-gas-fueled cooking devices. LP-gas burners
having a LP-gas container with a water capacity greater than 2.5 pounds
(nominal 1 pound LP-gas capacity) shall not be located on combustible balconies
or within 10 feet of combustible construction. (Exception: One and two family
dwellings.)
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90; Am. Ord. 405, passed 3-29-04)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.17 PROHIBITION OF DEMOLITION OPERATIONS BY OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit demolition operations by open
burning.
   (B)   No person shall process motor vehicles or scrap metals by reduction by
open burning or incineration in a device or equipment which has not received an
operating permit from the DNR and the La Crescent Fire Department.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.18 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Open burning of the types, and subject to the conditions as
stated in this subchapter, shall be exempt from the prohibition of §92.16 and
§92.17 to the extent that exemptions are consistent with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the DNR.
   (B)   Exemptions:
      (1)   Fires set for recreational, ceremonial, food preparation or social
purposes are permitted; provided, only wood, charcoal, coal or gas is burned
and the fire is contained in an approved container or containment.
      (2)   Fires under managed supervision, for which a written burning permit
has first been obtained from the Fire Chief (or in the absence of the Fire
Chief, the Fire Marshal) of the Volunteer Fire Department, but limited to the
following:
         (a)   Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public
and industrial firefighting personnel.
         (b)   Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be
abated by any other practicable means.
         (c)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction in the
maintenance of street, road and highway right-of-way.
         (d)   Activities in accordance with accepted forest or game
management, and in accepted agricultural land management practices.
         (e)   The disposal of diseased shade trees.
         (f)   Bonfires such as homecoming events and other school or community
celebration, or fires which are an integral part of religious or cultural
ceremony.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
§ 92.19 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Applicants for burning permits shall be issued on prescribed forms therefor
approved by the City Council if the burning is for one of the purposes set
forth in §
92.18(B)(2), and the applicant specifically agrees that all burning conducted
pursuant to the permit, if issued, shall be done implementing the following
safeguards:
   (A)   The prevailing wind at the time of the burning shall be away from
nearby residences.
   (B)   The burning shall be conducted as far away as practical from any
highway or public road and controlled so that a traffic hazard is not created.
   (C)   The burning may not be conducted during the duration of an air
pollution alert, warning or emergency.
   (D)   The recipient of the permit or his or her authorized representative
shall be present for the duration of any fire authorized by the permit.
   (E)   Prior notice shall be given to the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal of the
time and location of any fire authorized by the permit.
   (F)   Open burning for ground thawing shall be conducted in accordance with
the following additional restrictions:
      (1)   Fuels and starting materials shall be of a kind which do not
generate appreciable smoke.
      (2)   Coke used for ground thawing within 500 feet of dwellings or
occupied buildings shall contain less than 1% sulfur.
      (3)   Ambient air quality standards for sulfur dioxide and carbon
monoxide shall not be exceeded at occupied residences other than those located
on the property on which the burning is being conducted.
      (4)   Propane gas thawing torches or other devices causing minimal
pollution shall be used when practicable.
   (G)   Open burning of materials pursuant to §
92.18(B) shall be conducted in accordance with the following additional
restrictions:
      (1)   The location of the burning shall not be within 600 feet of an
occupied residence other than those located on the property on which the
burning is conducted.
      (2)   Motor oils, rubber and other similar smoke-producing materials
shall not be burned or used as starting materials.
      (3)   The burning shall not be conducted within one mile of any airport
or landing strip, unless approved by the DNR.
   (H)   Open burning of materials pursuant to §
92.18(B) shall also be conducted under controlled burning methods approved by
the DNR and the La Crescent Fire Department.
   (I)   The burning is conducted under such other reasonable conditions as the
permit issuing authority may impose.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.20 PERMIT ISSUERS.
   All permits issued under and pursuant to this subchapter shall be issued
either by the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
§ 92.21 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Any permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of the Fire Chief or
Fire Marshal if:
   (A)   A reasonable practical alternative method of disposal of the material
is found.
   (B)   A fire hazard exists or develops during the course of the burning.
   (C)   Any of the conditions of the permit are violated.
   (D)   A nuisance condition would result from the burning.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
§ 92.22 LIABILITY.
   Exemption to conduct open burning or the granting of an open burning permit
under any provisions of this subchapter shall not excuse a person from the
consequences, damages or injuries which may result therefrom.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
§ 92.23 CONFLICTING LAWS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to allow open burning in those
areas in which open burning is prohibited by other laws, regulations or
ordinances, and where the provisions of this subchapter conflict with those of
any other valid laws, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive
provisions shall control.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
FIRE HYDRANTS
§ 92.40 PURPOSE.
   The purpose for enactment of these regulations is to maintain and keep safe
and secure, free from tampering and unauthorized usage, the fire hydrant system
in the city.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-28-05)
§ 92.41 AUTHORIZED USE.
   There shall be no use of any part of the fire hydrant system in the city
except by the duly qualified and acting members of the fire department in
connection with and as necessary in the discharge of its duties, including
suppression of fires, and except by the duly appointed, qualified, and acting
public utilities supervisor of the city and his or her agents in the
performance of his or her duties.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-28-05)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.42 USE OF HYDRANTS WITH PERMIT.
   (A)   Contractors and other persons who, in the conduct of their business,
may have need to access fire hydrants, may do so upon their prior securing a
permit which shall be issued only for the duration of the project for which
access of the fire hydrant is necessary. Permit is not transferable to another
project. Application and permit shall be on forms as made and directed by the
City Council and upon payment of $100 deposit; the deposit amount may be
revised from time to time by resolution of the City Council duly enacted and
shall be in such amounts as will assure the payment for the water used, if
applicable, and to assure that any damage which may have occurred to the system
or any part thereof shall be repaired and restored. Any balance remaining of
the deposit shall be refunded to applicant upon completion of project minus
monies owed for damage or payable water usage, if applicable.
   (B)   A request to open a hydrant following approval of application and
issuance of a permit must be submitted to city hall a minimum of 24 hours in
advance. Should the expense items to be paid from the deposit exceed the amount
of the deposit, the amount not paid from the deposit shall be forthwith due and
payable by permittee to the city.
   (C)   Such permits to access hydrants shall require that permittee utilize
back flow valve(s) and such device(s) as will prevent the introduction to the
water system of any foreign substances.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-28-05)
Penalty see § 92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter to which no other specific penalty
applies shall subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
92.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided by
the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 6.12)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
92.15 through
92.23 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, is punishable by a
fine not as provided by the laws of the state. Fines levied shall be no less
than $100.
(Ord. 271, passed 2-5-90)
   (D)   Violations of §§
92.40 et seq., including the failure to secure a permit where one is issuable
under and pursuant to these regulations and the failure to deposit the
prescribed fee and cash deposit, are deemed misdemeanors and upon conviction
thereof punishable in accordance with the laws of the state. In the discretion
of the city, the official determined by the City Council to be responsible for
the enforcement of these regulations by the City Council may charge these
violations petty misdemeanors, in which case they shall be punishable upon
conviction as prescribed by the laws of thestate.
(Ord. 428, passed 12-28-05)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
Miscellaneous Nuisances
   
93.01   Insect electrocution devices
   
93.02   Incomplete structures
   
93.03   Noise
   
93.04   Public nuisance
   
93.05   Specific public nuisances
   
93.06   Abatement
   
93.07   Election of remedies
   
93.08   Solid fuel burning devices
   
93.09   Bulk storage of deicing chemicals
Weeds and Harmful Vegetation
   
93.50   Definition
   
93.51   Cutting and removal of grass, weeds and other rank, poisonous, noxious,
or harmfulvegetation
   
93.52   Duty of owner, lessee, or occupant
   
93.53   When city to do work
Disorderly Property and Nuisance Events
   
93.60   Purpose
   
93.61   Definitions
   
93.62   Prohibited conduct
   
93.63   Police response and services
 
   
93.99   Penalty
MISCELLANEOUS NUISANCES
§ 93.01 INSECT ELECTROCUTION DEVICES.
   Except in C, C.B.D., I & T Districts, no persons shall operate an insect
electrocution device, a so-called “bug zapper,” within the city limits any day
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the succeeding day.
(Prior Code, § 3.32) (Ord. 250, passed 7-20-87)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.02 INCOMPLETE STRUCTURES.
   The maintenance on any property in the city of buildings, the construction
of which is not completed or where the remodeling of any such structure in the
city is undertaken and not completed within the time prescribed in the building
permit issued in cases where a building permit is required, is hereby deemed a
nuisance. In instances where no permit is required, any structure in an
unfinished condition which remains substantially uncompleted for a period of 60
days after notice to complete has been given by the Building Official shall
likewise be deemed a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 14.50) (Ord. 266, passed 8-7-89)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.03 NOISE.
   (A)   Generally. It is unlawful and a violation of this section for any
person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any unreasonably
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the city.
   (B)   Prohibited noises commonly unnecessary and disturbing:
      (1)   Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device, whether mounted or on a vehicle or not, on private or any public
property including public thoroughfares except as a signal or a danger warning;
the creation by means of any such device of an unreasonably loud or harsh sound
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
      (2)   Radios, phonographs, stereophonic systems. The using, permitting to
be used or operated of a radio, musical instrument, phonograph or stereophonic
or amplification system for production or reproduction of sounds which
unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of especially neighboring
residents at any time. The operation of any such device between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. so as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the building structure or vehicle from whence emanating shall be prima
facie evidence of violation.
      (3)   Amplified advertising. The using or permitting to be used of
amplified advertising devices which casts sound upon the public streets to
commercially advertise or attract attention of the public for commercial
purposes.
      (4)   Yelling and shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public streets or on private property if plainly audible from
especially adjoining properties between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
or at any time or place if annoying or disturbing the peace, comfort or repose
of persons in the city.
      (5)   Animal noises. The keeping or permitting to be kept of animals of
any kind which cause frequent or long continued noise disturbing the peace,
comfort or repose of the residents of the city. Unreasonable barking as defined
by this code at §
90.01 shall constitute a nuisance.
      (6)   Discharge of exhaust. The discharge into open air of exhaust except
through a muffler or other devise which effectively prevents loud or explosive
noises; or the use or allowing to be used of any vehicle so out of repair, or
so loaded or operated as to create loud and unnecessary noises.
      (7)   Construction activities; loading and unloading. Engaging in or
permitting construction activities including but not limited to the use of any
kind of electric, diesel or gas powered machine or other power equipment
including motor vehicles in connection with the erection, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building on weekdays (Mondays through Fridays)
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and on all other days and
all holidays except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., unless in case
of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only
with a permit issued by the Building Official which permit may be granted for a
period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency exists but which
permit may be renewed.
      (8)   Schools and churches. The creation of any excessive noise which may
not otherwise be violative of this section but which unreasonably interferes
with the functions of school or church services.
      (9)   Domestic power equipment. The use of power lawn mowers, hedge
clippers, edgers, chain saws, garden tillers, mulchers, power saws, drills,
hammers, sanders and such other domestic power equipment shall not be violative
of this section unless used between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
   (C)   Responsibility of property owners, parents, guardians and custodians
with regard to juvenile offenders. The owner and owners shall include fee owner
as well as the tenant (and the proprietor as to businesses and commercial
establishments), parents, guardians and custodians with regard to juvenile
offenders who knowingly permit the emission of noise violative of this section
shall be himself, herself or themselves deemed to be in violation of this
section as well as the actual perpetrator or persons or otherwise allowing
noises violative of this section.
   (D)   Violations a public nuisance. The violation of any provision of this
section whether the act or omission was perpetrated or allowed on public or
private property is deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 269, passed 10-16-89)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.04 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty does any of the
following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor,
punishable upon conviction as provided by the laws of the state.
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage, any
public highway or right-of-way or public thoroughfares or waters used by the
public; or
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law to be a public
nuisance.
(Ord. 373, passed 6- -00)
§ 93.05 SPECIFIC PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The following are declared to be public nuisances affecting health and
public peace and safety:
   (A)   An accumulation of garbage, manure, refuse, and toxic and hazardous
waste exposed for over seven consecutive days.
   (B)   A diseased animal running at large.
   (C)   A pond or pool of foul water.
   (D)   A carcass of an animal not buried, destroyed or disposed of within 24
hours after death.
   (E)   A privy vault.
   (F)   A refuse container including toxic and hazardous waste containers not
securely covered.
   (G)   A building or its appurtenances, a road, a driveway, a parking area or
any open area used without the application of all reasonable measures to
prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne. Particulate matter includes
dust, dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, cinders or other discharge of any
material or substance, or vapor irritating or noxious to human life.
   (H)   A building or structure erected, altered, repaired or used in
violation of a zoning ordinance provision.
   (I)   An accumulation of snow or ice or both on a public sidewalk.
   (J)   Obstructions which prevent a person's clear view of traffic
approaching an intersection.
   (K)   Wires, limbs of trees or other objects so close over the surface of a
public sidewalk, alley or street as to constitute a danger to a person or a
vehicle.
   (L)   Storage or accumulation of junk or other refuse in the open. Property
kept in a licensed place is excepted. Building materials may be kept outside of
an enclosed structure for a maximum of 30 days following the expiration of a
building permit for which such material has been acquired. For the purpose of
this section, junk is defined as any material or substance which does not
serve, nor is it intended to serve, any useful purpose or the purpose for which
it was originally intended. Junk is considered to include, but not limited to,
empty cans, bottles, debris, used abandoned furniture and appliances.
   (M)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
such a condition as to constitute a danger to a person or a vehicle.
   (N)   An obstruction of trash or other materials to the free flow of water
in a natural waterway or public drain, gutter or ditch.
   (O)   Explosives kept without a license or otherwise contrary to law.
   (P)   A place where intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt beverages
are manufactured or disposed of in violation of law.
   (Q)   A dog present in or kept in a residential district or in a district
adjacent to a residential district, which dog habitually whines or habitually
growls. For the purposes of this paragraph "habitually" means often during each
day for a period of consecutive days or often on most of the days in a period
of consecutive days.
   (R)   A building or structure within the city infested with rats or other
vermin.
   (S)   In any area of the city, the existence of a structure which because of
fire, wind, natural disaster or physical deterioration is no longer suitable as
a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it was intended.
   (T)   In any area zoned for residential purposes, the existence of a vacant
dwelling, garage or other out-building, unless such building is kept securely
locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up, or otherwise protected to
prevent entrance by vandals or children.
   (U)   In any area, the storage of junk automobiles, racing cars and stock
cars in the open. For the purpose of this section, the term "junk automobiles"
shall include any motor vehicle, part of a motor vehicle, or former motor
vehicle, stored in the open, which is not currently licensed for use on the
highways of the state or is:
      (1)   Unusable or inoperable because of lack of, or defects in component
parts;
      (2)   Unusable or inoperable because of damage from collision,
deterioration, or having been cannibalized;
      (3)   Beyond repair and therefore not intended for future use as a motor
vehicle; or
      (4)   Being retained on the property for possible use of salvageable
parts.
   RACING CAR shall include any motor vehicle designed or intended for
operation on a speedway, racetrack or other facility used or designed for high-
speed contests between vehicles or for timing of speed. STOCK CAR shall include
any motor vehicle of standard design and construction which is modified,
adapted or altered in any manner to increase its speed or safety and designed
or intended for operation on a speedway, racetrack, or other facility used for
high speed contests between vehicles or for timing of speed.
   (V)   In all areas zoned for residential uses:
      (1)   The outside storage of more than one recreational vehicle of the
motor home variety.
      (2)   The outside storage of more than three or any three combinations of
boats, personal water craft, campers and trailers.
      (3)   Any outside storage of tractors, backhoes, cranes and other such
vehicles and/or construction and/or demolition equipment.
(Ord. 373, passed 6- -00)
§ 93.06 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   When an emergency exists and it reasonably appears there is a present
danger to persons or property unless the nuisance is promptly abated, the
Building and Zoning Official or his designated representative may direct that
the work be undertaken upon such notice, as he deems appropriate under the
circumstances.
   (B)   When no emergency exists and the Building Inspector charged with
enforcement determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on
premises in the city, the Inspector shall notify in writing the owner and
occupant, if other than the owner, of such fact and order that such nuisance be
terminated and abated. The notice shall be served upon the owner of the
property and the occupant, if other than the owner, either personally or by
certified mail sent to the last known address of the owner and occupant of the
property. For purposes of serving by certified mail, the addressee is
considered to have been served the notice five days after the date appearing on
the certificate of mailing. A notice tag shall also be affixed to the door of
any building situated on the property. If the premises are not occupied and the
owner is unknown, the notice may be served by posting it on the premises. The
notice shall identify the nature of the nuisance; specify the steps to be taken
to abate the nuisance and the time, not exceeding ten days, within which the
nuisance is to be abated.
   (C)   The property owner or occupant may appeal the notice to the City
Council provided that any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city not
later than ten days following receipt of the notice.
   (D)   If the property owner or occupant requests an appeal in compliance
with the provisions of this section, a hearing shall be held before the City
Council. Following the hearing, the City Council shall by resolution determine
whether a nuisance is evident. Upon the finding of a nuisance, the City Council
shall order that the cited conditions be removed, stored or eliminated within
ten days.
   (E)   If an appeal to the City Council's order is not made to the district
court within ten days following the City Council's decision and the property
owner or occupant has not brought the property into compliance as ordered, the
city shall initiate action to abate the nuisance.
   (F)   The city shall proceed with making the necessary arrangements to have
the nuisance abated so as to comply with this section and other applicable
provisions of the city code. The owner of the premises on which the nuisance
has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city
of the abatement, including administrative costs of $40 per incident. As soon
as the work has been completed and the costs determined, the Building Inspector
shall cause a bill to be prepared for the costs and mailed to the owner.
Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
City Treasurer.
   (G)   Any unpaid charges shall be collected as a special assessment pursuant
to M.S. Chapter 429.
   (H)   The City Attorney is empowered and directed, in addition to other
remedies provided by law, and in the name of the city, to institute appropriate
action or proceedings to restrain and abate a public nuisance.
(Ord. 373, passed 6- -00; Am. Ord. 396, passed 6-9-03)
§ 93.07 ELECTION OF REMEDIES.
   (A)   The institution of civil remedies of abatement or for injunctive
relief shall not preclude the subsequent institution of criminal charges nor
shall the bringing of criminal charges initially preclude subsequent action(s)
to abate or for injunctive relief.
   (B)   The classification of nuisances as being misdemeanors not with
standing, violations may in the discretion of the officers responsible for
enforcement, be charged petty misdemeanors.
(Ord. 373, passed 6- -00)
§ 93.08 SOLID FUEL BURNING DEVICES.
   (A)   The emission in unreasonable quantity and volume of smoke, noxious
fumes, gas and soot, cinders or other particulate from solid fuel fired heating
devices is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this
section.
   (B)   The emissions from solid fuel fired heating devices is unreasonable if
found to be in volume, quantity, and quality violative of MPCA and/or UL
guidelines. The written complaint of five residents describing the situation
and circumstances thought to be violative of this section received by city
enforcement authority within any ten-day period shall constitute prima facia
evidence of the violation of this section.
   (C)   The use as fuels or the disposition thereof in any fuel-fired heating
device of pressed wood projects and other non-wood products, petroleum,
kerosene and gasoline products, garbage, painted or treated wood, grass,
leaves, oils, railroad ties, construction and demolition debris, tar paper is
strictly prohibited and the use thereof violative of these regulations.
   (D)   A solid fuel heating devise shall have a chimney or stack that extends
minimally 15 feet above the average elevation of the ground surface on the lot
or parcel of land whereon such heating device is maintained. The height
thereof, the foregoing prescribed height not withstanding, shall extend at
least three feet above the highest roof elevation of structures on adjoining
properties. Chimneys and stacks shall be of masonry or insulated metal, having
a minimum six-inch flue, and shall be secured to withstand high winds and other
prevailing environmental conditions.
    (E)   Violation of any provision of this section is deemed a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof punishable as provided by the laws of the State of
Minnesota. The City Enforcement Officer may, in the discretion of such officer,
charge violations as petty misdemeanors, which likewise are punishable as
provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota
(Ord. 444, passed 6-23-08)
§ 93.09 BULK STORAGE OF DEICING CHEMICALS.
   (A)   Statement of purpose. Individuals and businesses engaged in the
operation of a winter maintenance business for the private operation of a
snowplowing service or the use of or storage of salt or other deicing
materials, or to assist others in the same for the purpose of managing ice and
snow from private roadways, parking areas and sidewalks and on commercial,
industrial, institutional, office, multi-family and private single-family
residential dwellings are encouraged to become a smart salt certified
applicator.
   (B)   Deicer storage requirements. Proper salt storage practices are
required at commercial, institutional, and industrial facilities in accordance
with the effective Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's general permit to
discharge stormwater associated with small municipal separate storm sewer
systems. The following requirements apply to all designated salt bulk storage
areas at commercial and industrial zoned facilities:
      (1)   Salt storage areas must be fully covered or indoors.
      (2)   Salt storage areas must be located on an impervious surface.
      (3)   Practices must be implemented to reduce exposure when transferring
material in designated salt storage areas (e.g., sweeping, diversions, and/or
containment).
(Ord. 582, passed 6-10-24)
WEEDS AND HARMFUL VEGETATION
§ 93.50 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. One or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations,
partnerships, associations, joint stock companies, societies, and all other
entities of any kind capable of being sued.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-4-70)
§ 93.51 CUTTING AND REMOVAL OF GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER RANK, POISONOUS, NOXIOUS,
OR HARMFUL VEGETATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupant or any agent,
servant, representative, or employee of any such owner, lessee, or occupant
having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or land or any part thereof,
within 100 feet of any lot or land in the city to permit or maintain on any
such lot or land, or on or along the sidewalk, street, or alley adjacent to the
same between the property line and the curb or middle of the alley or for ten
feet outside the property line if there be no curb, any growth of weeds, grass,
brush, or other rank vegetation to a greater height than 12 inches on the
average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush. It shall also be
unlawful for any such person or persons to cause, suffer, or allow poison ivy,
ragweed, or other poisonous, noxious, or harmful weeds to extend upon,
overhang, or border any public place or allow to seed, pollen, or other
poisonous or noxious particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through
the air into any public place.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-4-70)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.52 DUTY OF OWNER, LESSEE, OR OCCUPANT.
   It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee, or occupant of any lot or land to
be cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds, grass, brush,
or other rank, poisonous, noxious, or harmful vegetation as often as may be
necessary to comply with the provisions of § 94.51, provided that cutting and
removing such weeds, grass, and vegetation at least once in every three weeks,
between May 15 and September 15 shall be deemed to be compliance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-4-70)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.53 WHEN CITY TO DO WORK.
   If the provision of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the Clerk-
Administrator shall service written notice upon the owner, lessee, or occupant
on any person having the care or control of any such lot or land to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter. If the person upon whom the notice is served
fails, neglects, or refuses to cut and remove or to cause to be cut and removed
such weeds, grass, brush, or other vegetation within five days after receipt of
such notice, or if no person can be found in the city who either is or claims
to be the owner of such lot or land, or who either represents or claims to
represent such owner, the city shall cause the weeds, grass, brush, and other
vegetation on the lot or land to be cut and removed and the actual cost of the
cutting and removal, plus 10% for inspection and other additional costs in
connection therewith, shall be certified by resolution adopted by the City
Council to the County Auditor and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the
property on which the weeds, grass, brush, and other vegetation were located
and shall be added to and become part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon the lot or land and shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner
as taxes.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-4-70)
DISORDERLY PROPERTY AND NUISANCE EVENTS
§ 93.60 PURPOSE.  
   The purpose of this subchapter is to enhance the public health, safety and
welfare by prohibiting continued or repeated nuisance events at properties in
the City of La Crescent and to recoup extraordinary costs incurred in policing
such events.
(Ord. 434, passed 6-25-07)
§ 93.61 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISORDERLY PROPERTY. A building, dwelling, establishment, premises or place
where nuisance events occur. If the building, dwelling, establishment, premises
or place is a multi-unit dwelling or residence, hotel or motel, or commercial
or office building, this definition only includes the specific areas or units
in which the nuisance events occur.
   EXTRAORDINARY POLICE MEASURES. Police officers, equipment and services
required for policing a subsequent nuisance event at a disorderly property
after the responsible person or persons have received the notice required under
this subchapter.
   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS. The address shown on the official property records of
the county, or a more recent address of which the police have actual knowledge.
In the event no address is listed or known to the police, the address shall be
that obtained by the police after a reasonable search.
   NOTICE OF DISORDERLY PROPERTY. A notice stating that a nuisance event has
occurred on the property and that the property may be charged the costs of
providing extraordinary police measures in the event of a future nuisance event
within 60 days of the date of the initial noticed event. The notice shall be
served upon the responsible person or persons after the initial nuisance event
at a property.
   NUISANCE EVENT. An event not having specific prior City Council approval,
requiring special police services in order to protect the public peace, health,
safety and welfare. A nuisance event includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)    Unlawful sale, possession, storage, delivering, giving,
manufacture, cultivation or use of a controlled substance or paraphernalia for
use of a controlled substance;
      (2)    Prostitution or prostitution-related activity;
      (3)   Illegal gambling or gambling-related activity;
      (4)    Unlicensed sale of alcohol beverages or unlawful sales or gifts of
alcoholic beverages by an unlicensed person or unlawful consumption of
alcoholic beverages;
      (5)   Loud and boisterous conduct, noises, and activities that disturb
the peace or arouse angry or resentment in others; and events or incidents in
violation of
Chapter 93 of the City of La Crescent.
      (6)   Events between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., official time, which
disturb the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood;
      (7)   Congregating in a tumultuous, noisy or rowdy crowd;
      (8)   Fighting or use of obscene or inflammatory language;
      (9)    Loud music constituting a nuisance or disturbing the peace;
      (10)   Activities causing excessive pedestrian or vehicular traffic and
parking problems and congestion; and/or
      (11)   Indecent exposure or lewd conduct.
   OWNER. The person or persons shown on the official property records of the
county to be the recorded owner(s) of the real property.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  The person who owns and/or is in charge of a disorderly
property and/or the person who organized and hosted a nuisance event. If the
responsible person is a minor, the responsible person's parents shall also be
considered responsible persons for purposes of recouping city costs associated
with extraordinary police measures.
   SERVICE OF NOTICE. The notice required by this subchapter may be served by
personal service or by mailing the notice first class with the United States
Postal Service addressed to the responsible person at his or her last known
address.
(Ord. 434, passed 6-25-07)
§ 93.62 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)    No person shall own, operate, manage, maintain or conduct a
disorderly property, or invite or attempt to invite others to visit or remain
in such disorderly property.
   (B)    No person shall visit or remain in a disorderly property for the
purpose of aiding, abetting, or engaging in prohibited conduct occurring in
such disorderly property.
   (C)    No person shall visit or remain in a disorderly property knowing, or
having reason to know, that prohibited conduct in violation of these
regulations is then occurring.
   (D)    No person shall, as owner or agent, let a building or portion thereof
knowing it is intended to be used for any purpose prohibited by this
subchapter, nor permit a building or portion thereof to be used for any such
prohibited purpose.
   (E)    No person shall fail or refuse to pay fees properly assessed for
extraordinary police services under this subchapter.
(Ord. 434, passed 6-25-07)
Penalty, see § 93.99(D)
§ 93.63 POLICE RESPONSE AND SERVICES.
   (A)   Initial response to nuisance event. After any police officer responds
to any nuisance event and determines that there is a threat to the public
peace, health, safety or general welfare, the police officer may serve a
written notice of disorderly property to the responsible person or persons.
   (B)    Response to subsequent nuisance event.
      (1)   If, after a written notice of disorderly property is served/given
pursuant to this subchapter, a subsequent nuisance event at the property within
90 days of the original event shall be construed as requiring extraordinary
police measures, the responsible person or persons shall be jointly and
severally liable for the costs incurred in providing the extraordinary police
measures up to $500 per nuisance event.
      (2)   The imposition of the charges pursuant to this subchapter shall not
constitute an election of remedies, thus disenabling the institution of
criminal charges arising from the same incident should the event provide the
necessary elements and basis therefor, nor shall the making of criminal charges
prohibit the imposition of civil charges by reason of the need for
extraordinary police and other municipal services.
      (3)   The charges made by the city pursuant to this subchapter shall be
deemed due and owing upon service of notice as provided herein and if not paid
within 30 days shall be subject to a 10% of the amount due, late penalty. The
city reserves the right to seek reimbursement for costs exceeding $500 through
other legal remedies or procedures. The City Council may, from time to time, by
resolution duly enacted amend the amount of the charges prescribed above.
      (4)   In the event the fees/charges and penalties, if any, prescribed by
this subchapter are not paid as provided for herein, any such unpaid amounts
may be certified by city to the County Auditor for payment by the owner of the
property as in the case of special assessments levied upon the owner of the
property whereat the calls deemed extraordinary were rendered.
   (C)   Costs; collection. The Chief of Police or his or her designee, or
Public Safety Director, shall notify the City Finance Office in writing
concerning the imposition of charges for extraordinary police measures,
including of the provision of extraordinary police measures, and shall include
in such notification the name and address of the responsible person or persons,
the date and time of the nuisance event giving rise to the measures, and a
description of the police measures provided, complete with a detailed breakdown
of the costs for such measures. The Finance Office Director shall make the
appropriate billings and take all steps necessary and available to effect
collection thereof upon them.
   (D)   Administrative Appeal. An administrative appeal of the fee or charges
for extraordinary police measures may be made to the City Council. Request for
an appeal hearing shall be submitted to the City Finance Office Director within
10 days of receipt of the billing. The request for an appeal shall state with
specificity the grounds for appealing the charges, and shall state the exact
relief requested. The Council may modify or excuse the charges upon a finding
that the appellant made a good faith effort to prevent or remedy the situation
that led to the fee, or that the required notice was not served upon the
responsible person.
(Ord. 434, passed 6-25-07)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter to which no other specific penalty
applies shall subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Violations of §§
93.01 et seq. are misdemeanors and shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code. The acts or omissions prohibited in this chapter may be
enjoined or abated and such civil law remedy shall not preclude subsequent
prosecution for violations on the criminal side of the court. Nor shall an
initial criminal prosecution of a violation prohibit the subsequent institution
of civil remedies where indicated.
(Ord. 269, passed 10-16-89)
   (C)   Any person who shall neglect to cut and remove weeds, grass, brush,
and other vegetation as directed in §§
93.50 et seq., or who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the
provisions of any notice herein provided, or who shall violate any of the
provisions of §§
93.50 et seq., or who shall resistor obstruct the city or its employees or its
agents in the cutting and removal of weeds, grass, brush,and other vegetation,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $15
normore than $300, and each day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Violation of any provision of §
93.62 is a misdemeanor; however, the City Official responsible for the
enforcement of these regulations may, in his or her discretion, charge the
violation a petty misdemeanor. Whether misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor, the
punishment in the event of conviction shall be in accordance with and pursuant
to the laws of the State of Minnesota.
   (E)   A violation of §
93.09(B) is a petty misdemeanor subject to penalty not to exceed $300.
(Ord. 106, passed 11-4-70; Am. Ord. 434, passed 6-25-07; Am. Ord. 582, passed
6-10-24)
CHAPTER 94: RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Election to manage the public right-of-way
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Permit requirements
   
94.04   Permit applications
   
94.05   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
94.06   Permit fees
   
94.07   Patching and restoration
   
94.08   Supplementary applications and notification
   
94.09   Denial of permit
   
94.10   Installation requirements
   
94.11   Inspection
   
94.12   Work done without a permit
   
94.13   Supplementary notification
   
94.14   Revocation of permit
   
94.15   Mapping data
   
94.16   Location of facilities
   
94.17   Damage to other facilities
   
94.18   Vacation; reservation of right
   
94.19   Indemnification and liability
   
94.20   Abandoned facilities
   
94.21   Appeal
   
94.22   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
   
94.23   Snow removal from sidewalks
Public Bicycle and Pedestrian Bridge Regulations
   
94.35   Purpose
   
94.36   Definitions
   
94.37   Prohibited acts
   
94.38   Sales and performances
   
94.39   Hours of operation
   
94.40   Penalty
Parade Safety and Conduct
   
94.50   Purpose
   
94.51   Definitions
   
94.52   Regulations
   
94.53   Enforcement
   
94.54   Exceptions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects pursuant to
this chapter to manage rights-of-ways within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions included in M.S.§ 237.162 and Minnesota Rules, part
7819.0100 subparts 1 through23 are hereby adopted by reference and are
incorporated into this chapter as if set out in full.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.03 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate permit from the city.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate
that part of the right-of-way described in the permit and to hinder free and
open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1000
subpart 3 and notwithstanding division (B) of this section, the city shall
establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way
excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be
established from time to time by City Council resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the Building Official.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.04 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete only
upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:
      (1)   Each permittee's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
permittee by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the Building Official;
         (b)   Verifying that the permittee is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the permittee, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the permittee, its officers,
agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities and collapse of property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all the coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the City Clerk be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the Building Official in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public
and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required
to be filed under M.S. § 300.06 as recorded and certified by the Secretary of
State.
      (6)   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the certificate
from the commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city; and
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the Building Official shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The Building Official may impose reasonable conditions
upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder
to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.06 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   There shall be a fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following
costs:
      (1)   The city management costs,
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.
   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay the fees within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the
Building Official has revoked for a breach as stated in §
94.21 are not refundable.
   (E)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
   (F)   All permit fees shall be established consistent with the provisions of
Minnesota Rules, part 7819.100.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.07 PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under §
94.14.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city
may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If following the
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with having to correct the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rules, part 7819.3000.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and
shall comply with Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1100
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Permittee, upon
notification from the Building Official, shall correct all restoration work to
the extent necessary, using the method required by the Building Official. Work
shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from
the Building Official, not including days during which work cannot be done
because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is
prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under §
94.14,
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the Building Official, or fails
to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the Building
Official, the Building Official at its option may do the work. In that event
the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may
exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.08 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.09 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.10 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota
Rules, part 7819.1100 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.11 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a Completion Certificate in accordance
Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1300.
   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available to city
personnel and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of Building Official.
      (1)    At the time of inspection the Building Official may order the
immediate cessation of any work, which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well being of the public.
      (2)   The Building Official may issue an order to the permittee for any
work, which does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct
the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Building
Official that the violation has been corrected. If proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Building Official may revoke the permit pursuant
to §
94.14.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.12 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.  
      (1)   Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately
notify the city of any event regarding its facilities, which it considers to be
an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency the owner shall apply for the necessary permits,
pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements
necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the actions it
took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the
city will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility owner
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the
normal fee for permit, pay double all the other fees required by this code,
deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-
way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.13 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the Building
Official of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.14 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittees control; and
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to § 96.15.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so
contact the city, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause
for immediate revocation of the permit.
   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney's fees
incurred in connection with the revocation.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.15 MAPPING DATA.
   Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city in
accordance with Minnesota Rules, parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.16 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the
act, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules, parts 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority
otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the right-of-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary for each type of
facilities; that is or pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
   (C)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the Building
Official shall have the power to prohibit or Building Official shall strive to
the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the
right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public
interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition
of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.17 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the Building Official
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible and
placed as required. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that
facility owner and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each
facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in
the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each facility owner shall
be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of
another caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that
owner's facilities.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.18 VACATION; RESERVATION OF RIGHT.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way, which contains facilities, the facility
owner's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules,
part 7819.3200.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.19 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1250.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.20 ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove
them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way
repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the
Building Official.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.21 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied a
permit; has had permit revoked; or believes that the fees imposed are invalid,
may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written
request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written
request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council
affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and
supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.22 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 430, passed 2-13-06)
§ 94.23 SNOW REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Every owner or occupant of any real property fronting upon or
adjoining any street upon the side thereof where there is a cement sidewalk
constructed by the direction of the Council, shall clean such sidewalk as far
as the same extends in front of or opposite such premises of all snow to the
whole width thereof within 24 hours after such snow shall cease to fall.
   (B)   Any owner or occupant of any real property who shall violate any
provisions of this section by failing to remove such snow as herein provided,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor according to Minnesota Statutes. In any
case where any such cement sidewalk in front of or adjoining any such lot or
parcel of ground within the city shall remain covered in any part with snow for
24 hours after such snow shall have fallen and shall have ceased to fall, it
shall be the duty of the City Building Official to immediately, after the
expiration of such 24 hours, cause such snow to be removed from the full width
of such sidewalk and to report the expense thereof to the City Council at their
next regular meeting thereafter with a description of the lot or parcel of land
in front of or adjoining which such snow was removed and the City Council shall
cause such expense to be audited and paid out of the general city fund, and
shall direct the City Building Official to charge such expense to the lot or
parcel of lot fronting such street in front of which such expense shall have
been incurred and the amount of such expense shall, on or before June 1 of each
year, be, by a resolution of the City Council, assessed and levied against each
such lot or parcel of ground as a special tax against the same. On October 10,
next following, if any assessments so made against any lot or parcel of ground
be not previously paid to the City Treasurer, the City Clerk shall certify the
same to the County Auditor, who shall extend all such unpaid amounts against
the land assessed and the same shall be enforced, collected and paid to the
City Treasurer.
(Ord. 148, passed 4-5-76)
PUBLIC BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE REGULATIONS
§ 94.35 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that regulation of conduct on public pedestrian
bridges over, across and above city rights-of-way is necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 559, passed 7-11-22)
§ 94.36 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and terms used in this section shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   LITTER. To throw, deposit, discard or place or cause to be thrown,
deposited, discarded or placed upon or within any surface other than a
designated trash receptacle any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, cans,
garbage, swill, papers, refuse, offal, trash or rubbish.
   PUBLIC BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE. Any structure located over, across, or
above the public right-of-way that provides for public pedestrian traffic
circulation, elevated above ground, within the public rights-of-way
(hereinafter "public pedestrian bridge"). For purposes of this section, a
PUBLIC PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE shall include sidewalks or ramps onto the public
pedestrian bridge and areas under ramps leading to and connecting to public
streets or other public property.
(Ord. 559, passed 7-11-22)
§ 94.37 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall commit any of the following acts within the public
pedestrian bridge:
   (A)   Fight.
   (B)   Engage in disorderly conduct.
   (C)   Smoke or vape.
   (D)   Urinate or defecate.
   (E)   Race, on foot or with equipment.
   (F)   Obstruct the free passage of others.
   (G)   Sit or lie on the public pedestrian bridge, ramp, or sidewalk fixtures
or elements.
   (H)   Litter or throw or deposit any cans, bottles, garbage, construction
materials, landscape materials, or other trash or rubbish on or from public
pedestrian bridge.
   (I)   Use of or passage on the public pedestrian bridge by any person
operating any motor or power-driven vehicle, only excepting the city's
authorized emergency vehicle(s), and public works vehicle(s), at any time.
   (J)   Ride any wheeled apparatus, such as a skateboard, rollerboard, or
similar devices. This prohibition does not apply to bikes, electric bikes,
rollerblades, strollers, or mobility assistance devices.
   (K)   Place unpermitted art, markings, or drawings on the public pedestrian
bridge or any of its fixtures or elements.
   (L)   Damage the public pedestrian bridge or any of its fixtures or
elements.
   (M)   Defeat, remove, or damage doors, locks, or video cameras or systems.
   (N)   Play or operate a phone, radio, loudspeaker, other device used for the
amplification of sound, or musical instrument, in a manner audible above the
level of conversational speech.
   (O)   Display, place, erect, post, maintain, install, affix, or carry any
sign, flags, banners, pennants, streamers, balloons or any other similar item
on any portion of the public pedestrian bridge.
(Ord. 559, passed 7-11-22)
§ 94.38 SALES AND PERFORMANCES.
   No group, entity or person shall promote, advertise or sell articles or
conduct, engage in or cause to be presented any type of exhibition, show,
performance, parade, race or entertainment or affix or cause to be affixed any
type of banner or exterior sign to the public pedestrian bridge.
(Ord. 559, passed 7-11-22)
§ 94.39 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The city may establish hours of operation by posting signs at all entrances
to the public pedestrian bridge. No person shall enter or remain within the
area of the public pedestrian bridge outside of the posted hours of operation.
(Ord. 559, passed 7-11-22)
§ 94.40 PENALTY.
   Violations of any provision of this subchapter shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor under state law.
(Ord. 559, passed 7-11-22)
PARADE SAFETY AND CONDUCT
§ 94.50 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the safety of parade
participants and spectators, minimize noise-related disturbances, and ensure
responsible event management practices during parades held within the City of
La Crescent.
(Ord. 593, passed 8-11-25)
§ 94.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. A public procession, including floats, vehicles, or participants,
organized for celebratory, commemorative, or promotional purposes along a
defined route within the City of La Crescent.
   PARADE PARTICIPANT. Any individual, group, organization, or entity
participating in a parade.
   SAFETY PLAN. A document prepared by parade organizers outlining measures to
ensure traffic control, security, and emergency access during the event.
(Ord. 593, passed 8-11-25)
§ 94.52 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Noise level control. The use of sirens, horns, or other high-decibel
noise-making devices is prohibited.
   (B)   Candy distribution.
      (1)   Throwing candy or any other objects from moving vehicles during
parades is strictly prohibited.
      (2)   Parade participants may distribute candy or other small items by
walking alongside their floats or vehicles and handing them directly to
spectators.
      (3)   Guidelines for candy distribution shall be incorporated into the
parade permit application process, and all participants must adhere to these
rules.
   (C)   Application for parade permit.
      (1)   Any individual or organization seeking to host a parade within the
City of La Crescent must apply for a parade permit no less than 30 days prior
to the scheduled date of the parade.
      (2)   The application must be submitted to the City Clerk and must
include:
         (a)   Proposed date, time, and route of the parade;
         (b)   Estimated number of participants and vehicles;
         (c)   Contact information of the responsible organizer(s);
         (d)   Complete safety plan, as outlined in division (D); and
         (e)   Proof of insurance policy, as outlined in division (F).
      (3)   The city reserves the right to deny or revoke a parade permit if
the applicant fails to meet safety, timing, insurance requirements or
procedural requirements, or if prior violations are on record.
   (D)   Safety plan requirement.
      (1)   All parade organizers must submit a safety plan to the city as part
of the parade permit application process. The plan must address:
         (a)   Traffic control measures;
         (b)   Security provisions;
         (c)   Emergency vehicle access; and
         (d)   Open flames (e.g., torches or fire performances).
      (2)   The safety plan must be reviewed and approved by the La Crescent
Police Department and Public Works Department prior to the issuance of a parade
permit.
      (3)   Organizers must ensure clean-up of the parade route and surrounding
areas following the event.
   (E)   Nighttime parade safety (torchlight parades).
      (1)   Parades occurring after sunset, including torchlight parades, must
include additional safety measures in the submitted safety plan. These measures
must address visibility and lighting concerns to protect both participants and
spectators.
      (2)   All floats, vehicles, and walking participants must be equipped
with appropriate lighting such as LED lights, reflective materials, or other
illumination devices that ensure visibility in low-light conditions.
      (3)   Open flames (e.g., torches or fire performances) are prohibited
unless specifically approved by the La Crescent Fire Department and included in
the safety plan with detailed fire safety precautions.
      (4)   Organizers must ensure adequate street lighting along the parade
route and may be required to supplement with temporary lighting if existing
infrastructure is insufficient.
   (F)   Insurance.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of the permit by the City of La Crescent, each
permittee shall furnish evidence of a liability insurance policy in amounts of
not less than $500,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 annual aggregate and shall
be in force and effect at the time such usage is to take place. Said evidence
of insurance shall include a certificate of insurance naming the City of La
Crescent as additional insured in connection with said usage.
      (2)   The parade permit holder is responsible for ensuring that all
participating units are properly insured.
(Ord. 593, passed 8-11-25)
§ 94.53 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this subchapter may result in:
      (1)   Immediate suspension or termination of the parade permit.
      (2)   Fines as established by the city's fee schedule.
      (3)   Denial of future parade permits for the violating organization or
individual.
   (B)   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be the responsibility of the La
Crescent Police Department and other city-designated personnel.
(Ord. 593, passed 8-11-25)
§ 94.54 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Emergency vehicles participating in parades may use sirens or loud
horns as necessary for public safety purposes.
   (B)   Military observances, including ceremonial gun salutes, are permitted.
   (C)   Other exceptions may be granted by the City Council upon request and
subject to conditions deemed appropriate to ensure public safety.
(Ord. 593, passed 8-11-25)
CHAPTER 95: SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
Section
   
95.01   General provisions
   
95.02   Permit required
   
95.03   Permit application and fees
   
95.04   Construction setback requirements
   
95.05   Safety fence required
   
95.06   Miscellaneous requirements
   
95.07   Prospective application
   
95.08   Violation
§ 95.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Private swimming pools of 3,000 gallons and over are regulated by this
chapter and are defined as follows: Any enclosure, designed or intended or used
for the containment of water, whether constructed below ground level or above
ground level, which is designed, intended, or used for swimming, wading, or
other recreational use by the owner or tenant of private property upon which
the pool is constructed or by their family or invited guests.
(Ord. 279, passed 2-4-91)
§ 95.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No swimming pool shall be constructed or established, and no such pool
construction shall be commenced in the city without first obtaining a permit
from the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 279, passed 2-4-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.03 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES.
   Application for a swimming pool permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator, and fees will be set using Table 3.A in the Uniform Building
Code, as amended. The application for the permit shall include, without
limitation, the following information:
   (A)   Complete plans and specifications for the construction of the pool;
   (B)   A site plan showing the location of all structures on the lot,
including the house, garage, fences, trees, overhead or underground wiring,
utility casements, and other significant improvements or natural features;
   (C)   The proposed location of pumps, filters, electrical power source (if
applicable), flushing and drainage, outlets and other operational features; and
   (D)    Location and specifications of protective fencing.
(Ord. 279, passed 2-4-91)
§ 95.04 CONSTRUCTION SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   Private swimming pools shall be constructed so as to avoid hazard or damage
to the occupants of the subject property or the occupants of adjacent property
and shall meet the following minimum requirements:
   (A)   No pool shall be located within ten feet (measured horizontally) or
have its water surface or base of diving platform closer than 18 feet from any
overhead electric utility;
   (B)   Underground electrical wiring shall not be permitted under the pool or
under the area extending five feet horizontally from the inside wall of the
pool;
   (C)   Exceptions to minimum electrical utility clearances permitted only as
allowed by the "National Electric Code";
   (D)   No pool shall be located within any public or private utility
easement, ingress-egress easement, drainage way, marsh, or other location in
which it will represent a threat to the natural environment; and
   (E)   Swimming pools are accessory structures in all residential districts
under the City Zoning Ordinance and must meet appropriate setback regulations.
(Ord. 279, passed 2-4-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.05 SAFETY FENCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A safety fence, so as to inhibit entry, at least five feet in height,
shall completely enclose the pool. All openings or points of entry into the
pool area, including those through a dwelling or other building which forms a
part of the enclosure in lieu of fence, shall be equipped with lockable gates
or doors. All gates in safety fences shall have a latch which shall be so
constructed and so placed as to be at least 48 inches above ground level. Any
opening between the bottom of the fence and the ground level shall not exceed
four inches.
   (B)   Gates shall be self-latching when closed and lockable and the fence
designed so as to inhibit entry except through gates or doors.
   (C)   The wall of any pool constructed above ground level, regardless of the
height thereof, shall not qualify as a safety fence.
   (D)   The requirement for fencing shall be met to the extent and as to those
parts of the perimeter of the pool located adjacent to a private residence or
building where entry at this location can be attained only through such
residence or building.
(Ord. 279, passed 2-4-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.06 MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All back flushing water or pool drainage water shall be directed onto
the property of the owner or onto approved drainage ways. Drainage onto public
streets or other public drainage ways shall require permission from the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   The filling of pools from fire hydrants or other public facilities is
prohibited without prior approval of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 279, passed 2-4-91)
§ 95.07 PROSPECTIVE APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter, after enactment, shall apply to all future
swimming pools constructed on all nonpublicly owned lands in the city.
(Ord. 279, passed 2-4-91)
§ 95.08 VIOLATION
   Violation of any part of this chapter is deemed a public nuisance and a
misdemeanor and is punishable as provided by the laws of the state. The civil
remedy of injunction and actions for abatement shall not preclude prosecution
for the same violation as constituting a misdemeanor nor shall the prior
institution of criminal charges preclude injunctive relief or, actions in
abatement.
(Ord. 279, passed 2-4-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 96: TREES
Section
Shade Tree Pest Control Regulations
   
96.01   Declaration of policy
   
96.02   Jurisdiction
   
96.03   Declaration of a shade tree pest
   
96.04   Public nuisances defined
   
96.05   Shade tree pest nuisances are unlawful
   
96.06   Tree inspector
   
96.07   Abatement of shade tree pest nuisances
   
96.08   Reporting discovery of shade tree pest
   
96.09   Registration of tree care firms
   
96.10   Inspection and application of control measures
   
96.11   Abatement procedures
   
96.12   Appeal procedure
   
96.13   Abatement procedure in event of imminent danger
   
96.14   Recovery of cost of abatement
Tree Care Regulations
   
96.30   Findings
   
96.31   Purpose
   
96.32   Definitions
   
96.33   Authority and power
   
96.34   Tree Advisory Board
   
96.35   Tree care and planting standards
   
96.36   Prohibition against harming public trees
   
96.37   Boulevard trees and adjacent owner responsibility
   
96.38   Nuisance trees
   
96.39   Public tree care
   
96.40   Pruning, corner clearance
   
96.41   Appeals
 
   
96.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Declared shade tree pest, control measures, and control areas
SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL REGULATIONS
§ 96.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The health of the trees in the city is threatened by shade tree pests, and
the loss or ill health of trees growing upon public and private property
substantially depreciates the value of property within the city and impairs the
safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. In addition
to and in accordance with M.S. §§ 89.001, 89.01, and 89.51–89.64, the
provisions of this section are adopted as an effort to control and prevent the
spread of these shade tree pests.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.02 JURISDICTION.
   The city shall have control of all street trees, shrubs, and other plantings
now or hereafter in any street, park, public right-of-way or easement, or other
public place within the city limits, and shall have the power to plant, care
for, maintain, remove, and replace such trees, shrubs, and other plantings.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.03 DECLARATION OF A SHADE TREE PEST.
   The Council may by ordinance declare any vertebrate or invertebrate animal,
plant pathogen, or plant in the community threatening to cause significant
damage to a shade tree or community forest, as defined by M.S. § 89.001, to be
a shade tree pest and prescribe control measures to effectively eradicate,
control, or manage the shade tree pest, including necessary timelines for
action.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   A shade tree pest, as defined by Appendix A, occurring within a defined
control zone is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.05 SHADE TREE PEST NUISANCES ARE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in
this section to remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the
city. The nuisance may be abated as provided in this section.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.06 TREE INSPECTOR.
   The Council may appoint a tree inspector to coordinate the activities of the
city relating to the control and prevention of damage by shade tree pests. The
tree inspector will recommend to the Council the details of any program for the
declaration, control, and prevention of shade tree pests. The tree inspector is
authorized to enforce or cause to be enforced the tasks incident to such a
program adopted by the Council. The term "tree inspector" includes any person
designated by Council or the tree inspector to carry out activities authorized
in this section.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.07 ABATEMENT OF SHADE TREE PEST NUISANCES.
   (A)   In abating a nuisance, defined by ordinance under § 96.04, the
organism, condition, plant, tree, wood, or material identified as injurious to
the health of shade trees shall be removed or effectively treated so as to
destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the shade tree pest.
Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with the control
measures and areas prescribed
Appendix A.
   (B)   In addition, if the appropriate abatement procedure is removal, and
the tree(s) and/or hedge(s) are within the limits of a highway in a rural area
within the city's jurisdiction, M.S. § 160.22 shall be complied with as
necessary.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.08 REPORTING DISCOVERY OF SHADE TREE PEST.
   Any owner or occupier of land or any person engaged in tree trimming or
removal who becomes aware of the existence of a public nuisance caused by a
shade tree pest as defined under § 96.04 shall report the same to the city.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.09 REGISTRATION OF TREE CARE FIRMS.
   Any person, firm or corporation that provides tree care, tree trimming, or
removal of trees, limbs, branches, brush, or shrubs for hire must be registered
with the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture under M.S. § 18G.07.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.10 INSPECTION AND APPLICATION OF CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   The tree inspector is authorized to inspect premises and places within
the city to determine whether shade tree pests exist thereon and to investigate
all reported incidents of shade tree pests. The tree inspector is authorized to
take all reasonable measures to prevent the maintenance of public nuisances and
may enforce the provisions relating to abatement in this section. Diagnosis of
shade tree pests may be by the presence of commonly recognized symptoms; by
tests as may be recommended by the commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Agriculture or the commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources; or other reliable means.
   (B)   Except in situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, the
tree inspector shall not enter private property for the purpose of inspecting
or preventing maintenance of public nuisances without the permission of the
owner, resident, or other person in control of the property, unless the tree
inspector has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with the tree
inspector or with anyone acting under the tree inspector's authority while
engaged in activities authorized by this section.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.11 ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Standard abatement procedure. Except as provided in division (B) of
this section and §
96.13, whenever a tree inspector determines with reasonable certainty that a
public nuisance, as described by this chapter, is being maintained or exists on
premises in the city, the tree inspector is authorized to abate a public
nuisance according to the procedures in this section.
      (1)   The tree inspector will notify in writing the owner of record or
occupant of the premises that a public nuisance exists and order that the
nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice may be given in person or by mail.
Failure of any party to receive the mail does not invalidate the service of the
notice. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the City Clerk.
      (2)   The notice of abatement shall state that unless the public nuisance
is abated by the owner or occupant, it will be abated by the city at the
expense of the owner or occupant. The notice shall specify the control measures
to be taken to abate the nuisance, and provide a reasonable amount of time to
abate the nuisance. The notice will also state that the owner or occupant has
the right to appeal the determination that a public nuisance exists by
submitting a request in writing to the City Clerk within seven days after
service of the notice, or before the date by which abatement must be completed,
whichever comes first.
      (3)   If no timely appeal is submitted, and the control measures
prescribed in the notice of abatement are not complied with within the time
provided by the notice or any additional time granted, the tree inspector or
designated person shall have the authority to obtain permission or an
administrative search warrant, enter the property, and carry out abatement in
accordance with the notice of abatement.
   (B)   High-cost abatement. If the tree inspector determines that the cost of
abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good faith
estimate, the written notice referred to in this section must provide that if
the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of time provided, the
matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing. The date, time, and
location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.12 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   If the City Administrator or the City Clerk receive a written request for a
hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance exists, the City Council
shall hold a hearing within seven calendar days following receipt by the Clerk
of the written request. At least three days' notice of the hearing shall be
given to the individual who made the written request for the hearing. The
Council may modify the abatement notice or extend the time by which abatement
must be completed. Each owner, agent of the owner, occupant, and lienholder of
the subject property or properties in attendance, if any, shall be given the
opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. After holding the hearing, the
City Council may issue an order requiring abatement of the nuisance.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.13 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE IN EVENT OF IMMINENT DANGER.
   (A)   If the tree inspector determines that the danger of infestation to
other shade trees is imminent, and delay in control measures may put public
health, safety, or welfare in immediate danger, the tree inspector may provide
for abatement without following §
96.11. The tree inspector must reasonably attempt to notify the owner or
occupant of the affected property of the intended action and the right to
appeal the abatement and any cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled City
Council meeting.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or
other process, from immediately abating any condition that poses an imminent
and serious hazard to human life or safety.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
§ 96.14 RECOVERY OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city
shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including
administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the cost
determined, the City Clerk or other official shall prepare a bill for the cost
and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and
payable at the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   After notice and hearing, as provided in M.S. § 429.061 (which may be
amended from time to time), the City Clerk shall, on or before September 1 next
following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges as well as
other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101 against
each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City
Council may then certify the charges against the property to the County Auditor
for collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments as the City Council may determine in each case.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
TREE CARE REGULATIONS
§ 96.30 FINDINGS.
   The La Crescent City Council hereby finds and declares as follows:
   (A)   By taking in carbon dioxide and releasing oxygen, trees are important
to improving air quality.
   (B)   The planting of trees results in less runoff and erosion, which
improves water quality. Trees recharge the ground water supply.
   (C)   Trees planted in and around buildings can reduce heating and cooling
costs. Trees also cool the city by breaking up urban "heat islands" and
releasing water vapor into the air through their leaves.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.31 PURPOSE.
   La Crescent is fortunate to have a robust inventory of mature trees that
form an integral part of the unique character and history of the city, and that
contribute to the long-term aesthetic, environmental, and economic well-being
of the city. The goal of this subchapter is to preserve La Crescent's high
valued trees, while allowing reasonable development to take place and to limit
interference with how existing property owners use their property. The purpose
of the subchapter is to:
   (A)   Establish, maintain, and grow La Crescent's tree canopy cover by
protecting mature trees throughout the city; ensuring maximum tree cover;
   (B)   Maintain trees in a healthy condition through best practices for tree
care;
   (C)   Promote conservation of tree resources;
   (D)   Establish and maintain species diversity;
   (E)   Improve the quality of life for all stakeholders, including city
residents, visitors and wildlife;
   (F)   Protect the environment by the filtering of air and soil pollutants,
increasing oxygen levels and reducing CO2; preventing and reducing erosion and
stormwater by stabilizing soils; reducing heat convection; decreasing wind
speeds; reducing noise pollution and decreasing the urban heat island effect;
   (G)   Enhance energy conservation through natural insulation and shading;
and
   (H)   Increase and maintain property values.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.32 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the subchapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
   BOULEVARD. The area along a public street between the curb and the sidewalk;
or if there is no curb or sidewalk, the unpaved portion of the area between the
street right-of-way line and the paved portion of the street or alley.
   DAMAGE. Any injury to or destruction of a tree, including but not limited
to: uprooting; severance of all or part of the root system or main trunk;
storage of material on or compaction of surrounding soil; a substantial change
in the natural grade above a root system or around a trunk; surrounding the
tree with
impervious paving materials; or any trauma caused by accident or collision.
   NUISANCE. Any tree, or limb thereof, that has an infectious disease or
insect; is dead or dying; obstructs the view of traffic signs or the free
passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or threatens public health, safety, and
welfare.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All grounds and rights-of-way (ROWs) owned or maintained by
the city.
   PUBLIC TREE. Any tree or woody vegetation on city-owned or city-maintained
property or rights-of-way.
   TOP or TOPPING. The non-standard practice of cutting back of limbs to stubs
within a tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.33 AUTHORITY AND POWER.
   (A)   Delegation of authority and responsibility. The Public Works Director,
in consultation with the Natural Resources Advisory Group, and/or their
designee, hereinafter referred to as the "Director," shall have full authority
to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees and woody plants growing in or upon
all municipal streets, municipal rights-of-ways, city parks, and other public
property. This shall include the removal of trees that may threaten electrical,
telephone, gas, or any municipal water or sewer line, or any tree that is
affected by fungus, insect, or other pest disease.
   (B)   Coordination among city departments. All city departments will
coordinate as necessary with the Director and will provide services as required
to ensure compliance with this subchapter as it relates to streets, alleys,
rights-of-way, drainage, easements, and other public properties not under
direct jurisdiction of the Director.
   (C)   Interference. No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Director or his agents while engaged in carrying out the execution or
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.34 TREE ADVISORY BOARD.
   The City Council hereby creates a "Tree Advisory Board," hereinafter
referred to as the "Board."
   (A)   Duties. The Natural Resources Advisory Group shall constitute the
"Tree Advisory Board." The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the
Director and shall:
      (1)   Coordinate and promote Arbor Day activities;
      (2)   Review and update a five-year plan to plant and maintain trees on
city property;
      (3)   Support public awareness and education programs relating to trees;
      (4)   Review city department concerns relating to tree care;
      (5)   Submit an annual report of its activities to the City Council;
      (6)   Assist with the annual application to renew the Tree City USA
designation;
      (7)   Recommend a list of tree species for planting on city property, and
a list of prohibited species; and
      (8)   Other duties that may be assigned by City Council.
   (B)   Membership. The Board shall consist of members of the Natural Resource
Advisory Group, appointed by the City Council. Members of the Board will serve
without compensation.
   (C)   Officers. The Board shall annually select one of the members to serve
as Chair, may appoint a second member to serve as Vice-Chair, and may appoint a
third member to serve as Secretary.
   (D)   Meetings. The Board shall meet a minimum of four times each year. All
meetings shall be open to the public. The Board Chair may schedule additional
meetings as needed.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.35 TREE CARE AND PLANTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards. All planting and maintenance of public trees shall conform
to the USDA Tree Owner's Manual for the Northeastern and Midwestern United
States.
   (B)   Requirements of franchise utility companies. The maintenance of public
trees for utility clearance shall conform to all applicable utility industry
standards.
   (C)   Species list. The Director shall maintain an official list of
desirable tree species for planting on public property in three size classes:
small (approximately 25 feet or less in height at maturity), medium (25 to 40
feet at maturity) and large (greater than 40 feet at maturity). Trees from this
approved list may be planted without special permission; other species may be
planted with written approval from the Director. The official tree list for La
Crescent can be found in Appendix A.
   (D)   No property owner shall plant a conifer tree in the boulevard.
   (E)   Planting distances. The Director shall develop and maintain an
official set of spacing requirements for the planting of trees on public
property.
      (1)   No tree may be planted within the visibility triangle of a street
intersection.
      (2)   Trees shall not be planted closer than: 25 feet from the curb line
of an intersection, 25 feet from adjacent trees, or 25 feet from street lights.
      (3)   If a narrower-growing species of tree is selected, the distance may
be reduced to 20 feet or more from adjacent trees. This is determined by the
species of tree selected and the species of adjacent trees.
      (4)   Trees should be planted at least:
         (a)   Twenty feet from stop or yield signs.
         (b)   Ten feet from fire hydrants and directional traffic signs.
         (c)   Five feet from alley margins, driveways, underground utilities,
and utility poles.
         (d)   Two feet from property lines.
   (F)   Planting trees under electric utility lines. Only trees listed as
small trees on the official city tree species list may be planted under or
within 15 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire.
   (G)   Newly planted trees shall be watered regularly by the property owner
for the first two to three years. During the summer dry season (roughly June to
October), deep-root watering to a depth of 30 inches is recommended. Begin with
15 gallons of water per tree per week, and adjust as needed. During the
remaining months of the year, monitor the root zone for dryness and water as
needed.
   (H)   Newly planted trees shall be mulched by the property owner. Do not
pile mulch up around the trunk of the tree. This creates an environment which
can lead to trunk decay.
   (I)   Trees planted in the Central Business Mixed Use District (CBD-1 and
CBD-2) shall comply with § 12.21 of the City Zoning Code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6756385be9cbc70b35b9eaa79b8eab3e829d32e7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2168.png]
 
   (J)    All stumps of boulevard trees shall be removed by the abutting
property owner below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump
shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.36 PROHIBITION AGAINST HARMING PUBLIC TREES.
   (A)   A property owner shall obtain written permission for the removal of a
tree on public property from the Director.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to attach
any cable, wire, sign, or any other object to any boulevard, park, or public
tree, unless for the expressed purpose of staking or guying tree.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or
city department to top any boulevard tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this subchapter at the determination of the
Director.
   (D)   Any person, firm, corporation, or city department performing
construction near any public tree(s) shall consult with the Director and shall
employ appropriate measures to protect the tree(s), according to procedures
contained in the USDA Tree Owner's Manual for the Northeastern and Midwestern
United States.
   (E)   Each violation of this section as determined and notified by the
Director shall constitute a separate violation, punishable by fines and
penalties under § 96.99, in addition to mitigation values placed on the tree(s)
removed or damaged in violation of this section.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.37 BOULEVARD TREES AND ADJACENT OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The owner of land adjacent to any city street, when acting within the
provisions of this subchapter, may plant and maintain trees in the adjacent
boulevard area. The owner shall contact utility locating services before any
digging takes place.
   (B)   Trees planted in the boulevard should be selected from the official
species list for La Crescent. Trees in the boulevard should be maintained
(mulched, watered, pruned, etc.) by the abutting property owner.
   (C)   If the abutting property owner wishes to remove a boulevard tree they
should consult with the Director.
   (D)   No property owner shall allow a tree, or other plant growing on his or
her property to obstruct or interfere with pedestrians or the view of drivers,
thereby creating a hazard. If an obstruction persists, the Director, or staff
under the direction of the Director, shall notify the property owner to prune
or remove the tree. If the owner fails to comply with the notice, the city may
undertake the necessary work and charge the cost to the property owner.
   (E)   Where curb and sidewalks now exist, all trees shall be planted on the
centerline between the curb and sidewalk edge line.
   (F)   Tree trimming clearances shall meet the requirements found in Appendix
B Tree Trimming.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.38 NUISANCE TREES.
   Any tree, or limb thereof, on private property determined by the Director to
have contracted a lethal, communicable disease or insect; to be dead or dying;
to obstruct the view of traffic signs or the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles; or that threatens public health, safety, and welfare is declared a
nuisance and the city may require its treatment or removal.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.39 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. This
section does not prohibit the planting of boulevard trees by adjacent property
owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance
with §§
96.35 through
96.99 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.40 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.
   Trees overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall be pruned
by the abutting property owner so that branches shall not obstruct the light
from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so
that there shall be a clear space of 13 feet, six inches above the surface of
the street and eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. Said abutting
property owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken
or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The
city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when
it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street
light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.41 APPEALS.
   Appeals to decisions by the Director or to penalties imposed after
violations of this subchapter, shall be heard by City Council.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty, which
may be imposed for any crime that is a misdemeanor under this section,
including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a
sentence of not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $ 1,000, or both.
   (B)   Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which
a violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this section shall not subject the officer or employee
to the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (D)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this
section, the City Council or any official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the
violation.
   (E)   In §§ 96.30 et seq., a violation is a petty misdemeanor subject to a
penalty charge not to exceed $300.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14; Am. Ord. 591, passed 8-11-25)
APPENDIX A:
DECLARED SHADE TREE PEST, CONTROL MEASURES, AND CONTROL AREAS
   (A)   Emerald Ash Borer. The Emerald Ash Borer is a shade tree pest and is
defined as an insect that attacks and kills ash trees. The adults are small,
iridescent green beetles that live outside of trees during the summer months.
The larvae are grub- or worm-like and live underneath the bark of ash trees.
   (B)   Control measures. Control measures that may be taken to abate Emerald
Ash Borer are those provided in the document, Minnesota Emerald Ash Borer
Science Advisory Group Recommendations on Preparing for Emerald Ash Borer in
Minnesota:
[www.mda.state.mn.us/news/publications/pestsplants/pestmanagement/eab-
recommends.pdf]
   (C)   Definition of control areas. The control area for emerald ash borer is
defined as: all lands within the boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 490, passed 12-8-14)
CHAPTER 97: PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND PUBLIC GROUNDS
Section
   
97.01   Application
   
97.02   Hours of use
   
97.03   Uses prohibited
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply to all parks, playgrounds and public grounds owned
by or otherwise under the control of the City Council within the municipal
boundaries of the city, irrespective of whether or not any such lands are open
to the unsolicited use thereof by city residents or other persons.
(Ord. 577, passed 11-13-23)
§ 97.02 HOURS OF USE.
   Unless otherwise posted, no person shall be present in or located upon any
park, playground or other public ground, including parking areas appurtenant
thereto, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. without the express
written approval of the City Council; provided, that this section shall not
apply to persons who, without delay, are traveling through such parks,
playgrounds, or public grounds upon established walks, paths and streets.
(Ord. 577, passed 11-13-23)
§ 97.03 USES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person not an employee of the city shall pick or cut any wild or
cultivated flower or cut, break or in any way injure or deface any tree, shrub
or plant or otherwise disturb or disrupt the soil or grounds of such public
areas unless prior approval is obtained from the city.
   (B)   No person not an employee of the city shall plant any wild, cultivated
or exotic tree, shrub or plant.
   (C)   No person shall kill, pursue, injure, molest, disturb or have in
possession any species of wildlife including birds, waterfowl or other animals
found within the confines of the park.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motorized or electrified vehicle in any city
park or trail, except on designated roadways and parking lots.
   (E)   No person shall start any fire in any such public area.
   (F)   No person shall tamper with, climb, deface, destroy, disturb, damage
or remove any part of any park building, sign, light, table, grill, shelter,
equipment or other property found therein.
   (G)   No person shall disregard or fail to comply with any posted
regulations, directional signs, barriers or other control devices located
within any city park or public ground.
   (H)   No person shall deposit, allow to accumulate or dispose of any
inorganic waste in or upon a stated public area, except to place the same in
garbage receptacles provided therefor.
   (I)   No person shall engage in boisterous, disruptive behavior, or
excessively loud music or noise within or upon any stated public area or
otherwise conduct himself or herself so as to unreasonably disturb or aggravate
another person or persons.
   (J)   No person shall erect or place in any or upon any stated public area a
tent, camping equipment or other temporarily located structure, nor shall any
person leave any vehicle or movable structure which could be used for the
purpose of overnight camping unless approved by the La Crescent City Council.
No staking is allowed of said structures without written approval from the
city.
   (K)   No person shall place or erect any sign or advertisement on any park
land, trees, structures or equipment located therein without prior approval of
the city.
   (L)   No person shall cast, deposit, throw, damage, lay, place or scatter
upon any of the stated public areas, or in or upon any water located therein or
adjacent thereto, any cigars, cigarettes, glass, bottles, nails, tacks, wire,
crockery, cans or any other refuse matter. No person shall have in his or her
possession any glass or other objects easily fragmented in or upon any water
located within the park.
   (M)   No person shall possess, consume or otherwise provide to others any
controlled substance in any park, playground or public ground.
   (N)   All dogs while within any park shall be on a leash and the person in
control of the dog shall have in possession tools or equipment suitable for the
sanitary pick-up, removal and disposal of all dog fecal matter.
   (O)   No person shall possess, ride, or drive a horse in any park,
playground, or public ground.
    (P)   No person shall utilize any park, playground, or public ground for a
for-profit enterprise unless in conjunction with a city-approved event.
   (Q)   Hunting with the use of a weapon is not permitted, and deer stands are
not allowed to be installed on city property.
   (R)   No person shall sell liquor in any park or public ground owned by or
otherwise under control of the city unless in compliance with § 110.17.
   (S)   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place in compliance
with § 130.30.
   (T)   No person shall use any form of tobacco at or on any public grounds
owned by the City of La Crescent.
(Ord. 577, passed 11-13-23)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be
expelled or ejected at such time from a park at the discretion of a law
enforcement officer.
(Ord. 577, passed 11-13-23)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LIQUOR REGULATIONS
      
111.   PAWNBROKERS
      
112.   ITINERANT MERCHANTS
      
113.   TOBACCO
      
114.   REGULATION OF MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS
      
115.   TREE TRIMMERS
      
116.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
117.   ROOFERS
      
118.   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
119.   TAXATION
      
120.   SHORT TERM RENTALS
      
121.   CANNABIS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: LIQUOR REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
110.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
110.03   Definitions
   
110.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
   
110.05   Raffles, silent auctions, and fund raising events for charitable
purposes of wine, beer or intoxicating liquors
Intoxicating and 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses
   
110.15   Number of licenses which may be issued
   
110.16   Term and expiration of licenses
   
110.17   Kinds of liquor licenses
   
110.18   License fees; pro rata
   
110.19   Council discretion to grant or deny a license
   
110.20   Application for license
   
110.21   Description of premises
   
110.22   Applications for renewal
   
110.23   Transfer of license
   
110.24   Investigation
   
110.25   Hearing and issuance
   
110.26   Restrictions on issuance
   
110.27   Conditions of license
   
110.28   Hours and days of sale
   
110.29   Minors on premises
   
110.30   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
110.31   Suspension and revocation
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by
reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the
intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A are
hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at
the time this chapter is adopted.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter:
   LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words an
"intoxicating" or a "3.2 percent malt" includes both intoxicating liquor and
3.2 percent malt liquor.
   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a restaurant as
defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state
as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet
the definition of either a "small establishment," "medium establishment" or
"large establishment" as defined in M.S. § 157.16, Subdivision 3(d), as it may
be amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food
that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that
is heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes
of this chapter unless it meets the definitions of a "small establishment",
"medium establishment" or "large establishment".
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   (C)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by
law and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or
3.2 percent malt liquor license or any other license issued under this chapter
or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of §
110.99(B).
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.05 RAFFLES, SILENT AUCTIONS, AND FUND RAISING EVENTS FOR CHARITABLE
PURPOSES OF WINE, BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   No person shall conduct a silent auction, raffle or other fund raising event
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.707 with prizes or awards of wine, beer or intoxicating
liquors without notifying the City Clerk of the event at least ten days prior
to the occurrence of the event. The event holder shall provide the city with
the following information: the person or organization holding the event, the
day, time and location of the event, type of fund raising event (silent
auction, raffle or otherwise), type and amount of wine, beer, intoxicating
liquor to be awarded as prizes, and the charitable purposes to which the event
proceeds will be donated.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19 )
INTOXICATING AND 3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR LICENSES
§ 110.15 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
   On-sale licenses. The number of on-sale licenses shall be restricted by the
number of licenses authorized in M.S. § 340A.413 as may be amended.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.16 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All
licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year
unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the
same date.
   (B)   Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
   (C)   Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public
Safety, and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March
31 of each year.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.17 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
   (A)   On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses. May be issued only to golf
courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks.
   (B)   Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses.
   (C)   Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses. May be issued only to a
club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.
   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. May be issued only to exclusive
liquor stores.
   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. May be issued to the following
establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers, theaters, clubs
or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, theaters and exclusive
liquor stores.
   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. May be issued only to a
restaurant as defined in §
110.03 of this chapter, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating
capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food.
The maximum fee for this license, which shall be established by the Council
under the provisions of §
110.18 of this chapter, shall not exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided
by M.S. § 340A.504, Subdivision 3(c) as it may be amended from time to time.
   (G)   On-sale wine licenses.
   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. With the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with
a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit
corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for
longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12
days worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.
   (I)   One day consumption and display permits. With the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a
social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.
   (J)   Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which
may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and
display permit under the provisions of §
110.18 of this chapter shall not exceed $300, or the maximum amount permitted
by M.S. § 340A.414, Subdivision 6, as it may be amended from time to time.
Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.
   (K)   Culinary class limited on-sale licenses. May be issued to a business
establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which
payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The
license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class,
at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine
or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for
consumption on the licensed premises only.
   (L)   Temporary off-sale wine licenses. With the approval of the Commission
of Public Safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction. A
license issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale of only vintage wine
of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale by any
wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine for not
more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of wine are
sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license
fee, imposed by §
110.18.
   (M)   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquor licenses. With the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be
issued to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture and
who meet the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.301, Subdivision 6(d) and 7
(b), as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on-
sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed under this
section possesses a license for off-sale under division (N) below, the brew
pub's total combined retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500
barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.
   (N)   Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. With the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee
under division (M) above or that produces fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt
liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria established at M.S. §
340A.301, Subdivision 6(d) and 7(b), as it may be amended from time to time.
Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at
exclusive liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed
from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive
liquor stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in the
manner required by M.S. § 340A.301, Subdivision 7, as it may be amended from
time to time. Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year. If
a brewer licensed under this section possesses a license under division (M)
above, the brewer's total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed
3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500
barrels.
   (O)   Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. May be issued,
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers who
manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale
of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the brewer.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19; Am. Ord. 543, passed
4-27-20)
§ 110.18 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a
liquor license.
   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time in the chapter
establishing fees and charges the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws
and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing
mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees
at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is
filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only
if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, Subdivision 5, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.19 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application
for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has
a right to a license under this chapter.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.20 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to the applicant's
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant
is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from
time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times
effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the
license.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.21 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may
not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.22 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
   At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision
whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.23 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval
of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.24 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial
application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in
the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so,
on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may
contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The
applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of $500 which
shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary
investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be returned to the
applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either
conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public
Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be
$500, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation
is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid for the
initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The
unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the
application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation
and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable
in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive
investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the
application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine
license.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.25 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license
shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved
by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, issued 3-25-19)
§ 110.26 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
   (B)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (C)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under state law.
   (D)   No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church.
The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the church to the
closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to be
sold.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.27 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   (A)   Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving
liquor in an establishment which has an on-sale license shall receive training
regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training shall be
provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof of training shall be
provided by the licensee.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally
with the employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee
during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and
of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
   (F)   Failure by on off-sale intoxicating liquor license who has received a
fee reduction pursuant to §
110.18(E) of this chapter to abide with the provisions of §
110.18(E).
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.28 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   (A)   On sale.
      (1)   No on-sale of liquor may be made between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
the days of Monday through Saturday;
      (2)   The sale of on-sale liquor may be made between the hours of 10:00
a.m. on Sundays through 1:00 a.m. Monday provided that there is a Sunday liquor
license.
   (B)   Off sale. The sale of off-sale liquor is prohibited at the following
times:
      (1)   On Sundays; except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
      (2)   Before 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday;
      (3)   After 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday;
      (4)   At other times as may be required to be closed by state law.
   (C)   No person shall consume, nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale
licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally
occur.
   (D)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container
containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any
table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 30
minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (E)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on
the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale
can legally occur.
   (F)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 512, passed 4-10-17; Am. Ord. 532, passed
3-25-19)
§ 110.29 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor
are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be
employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host or
dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other
multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or
3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment
except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor
is not sold.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.30 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of
business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it
may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and
no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.31 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating
to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of
Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation
which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any
rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time:
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2 percent malt liquor, or
violation of §
110.04, the license shall be revoked.
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under
division (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable
statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as
follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year period, at least
one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed.
         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year period, at least
three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year period, at least
seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which the license
will be suspended.
   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten days.
Any suspension under this division (B) shall continue until the Council
determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state law and this
chapter have again been met.
   (D)   The provisions of §
110.99 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in
lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter.
(Ord. 478, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Chapter
340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under
that chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each
violation of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of
this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in
order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended
from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the
Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty
and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds
for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum
schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to
any suspension unless the license is revoked:
      (1)   For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.
      (2)   For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.
      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year
period, $2,000.
   (C)   The term "violation" as used in §
110.99 includes any and all violations of the provisions in this section, or of
M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules
promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The
number of violations shall be determined on the basis of the history of
violations for the preceding three-year period. Revocation shall occur within
60 days following a violation for which revocation is imposed.
(Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-25-19)
CHAPTER 111: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definition
   
111.03   License required; application
   
111.04   Bond and fee
   
111.05   Pawnbroker register, inspection, forms and retention
   
111.06   Prohibited practices
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and regulation
of pawnbrokers.
(Prior Code, § 8.37(a)) (Ord. 304, passed 6-7-93)
§ 111.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER. The term shall have the definition assigned to it by M.S. §3
25J.01(4), as amended.
(Prior Code, § 8.37(b)) (Ord. 304, passed 6-7-93)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   License required. No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker
unless licensed to do so by the city. A separate license shall be required for
each place of business.
   (B)   Application. A person desiring a pawnbroker license shall make
application therefor in writing to the City Clerk on application forms approved
by the City Council, which application forms shall minimally state the names of
persons conducting the business, the place of residence and nature of business
thereof. Licenses shall be issued for one year and the one-year period shall
coincide with the duration of other licenses issued annually by the city. The
license fees may be prorated, but are nonrefundable. Licenses are not
transferable.
   (C)   Eligibility. No person shall be eligible for a license under this
chapter who is not eligible for a license under M.S. § 325J.03. No license
shall be issued for a location which is not eligible for a license under M.S. §
325J.10.
(Prior Code, § 8.38) (Ord. 304, passed 6-7-93)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.04 BOND AND FEE.
   (A)   Prior to commencement of business, license applicants shall file
corporate surety bonds with the City Administrator in the minimum penal sum of
$1,000, which bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful and honest conduct of
business and upon payment by such licensed dealer of damages incurred by any
person injured by the negligent, willful, malicious or wrongful acts of the
licensee in the conduct of the license business.
   (B)   The annual license fee shall be $50.
   (C)   The City Council may from time to time prescribe a different bond
amount and adjust the license fee amount upon resolution therefor duly passed
and enacted. Such adjustment in bond or fee shall not become effective until
the next ensuing license year.
(Prior Code, § 8.39) (Ord. 304, passed 6-7-93)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.05 PAWNBROKER REGISTER, INSPECTION, FORMS AND RETENTION.
   (A)   Pawnbroker register.
      (1)   A person licensed as a pawnbroker shall keep in his or her place of
business a register in which shall be entered minimally the following
information:
         (a)   A minute description of each article of personal property
acquired by him or her by purchase or received on deposit or as a pledge in the
course of his or her business, mentioning particularly in such entry any
prominent, distinguishing mark or number.
         (b)   The date and time when the property is received.
         (c)   The name and address of the person from whom it was acquired.
         (d)   The price paid or loaned.
         (e)   The date of birth of the person from whom the property was
received.
         (f)   Type of identification presented by the person from whom the
property was received.
      (2)   The prescribed register information described in division (A)(1) of
this section shall be obtained at the time each transaction takes place and
shall be immediately entered into the register. The register shall be kept
clean and legible and without erasure or defacement of any entry. Pages of the
register shall be prenumbered.
      (3)   The City Council, by resolution duly enacted, may, in lieu of the
pawnbroker register, approve a system of consecutively numbered, printed forms
to evidence all pawnbroker transactions.
   (B)   Inspection. The register, such as utilized, or in lieu thereof, all
other records maintained, shall be at all times open for inspection by any law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   Forms. All forms, including but not limited to claim checks used in
the conduct of business, shall be approved by the City Council.
   (D)   Retention. All records maintained under this section shall be retained
for a period of not less than three years pursuant to M.S. § 325J.05.
(Prior Code, § 8.40) (Ord. 304, passed 6-7-93)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.06 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   (A)   Minors under the age of 18 years. A licensee shall not purchase
property from or otherwise exchange or transact business with a minor under the
age of 18 years.
   (B)   Loans; pledges by minors under the age of 18 years. A licensee shall
not loan money to a minor under the age of 18 years or make or accept a pawn or
pledge from a minor under the age of 18 years.
   (C)   Lost or stolen property. Licensees under these provisions shall not
receive lost or stolen property, and when notified by law enforcement officer
that any property in the possession of the licensee may be lost or stolen, such
property shall be retained by the licensee until a final disposition with
respect thereto can be made.
   (D)   Other licenses required. The transaction of any business, the subject
matter of which is otherwise licensed under and pursuant to the laws of the
state or any other licensing authority by licensee shall, in addition to the
license provided for in these provisions, require all other mandated licenses
as a prerequisite to the commencement of business the subject matter of which
deals with such items.
   (E)   Pornographic matter. The maintenance of so-called adult reading, video
materials or other devices and merchandise of the “adult” pornographic variety
is specifically prohibited.
   (F)   Other acts. No pawn transaction, or action related to such a
transaction, shall occur in violation of any of the requirements of M.S.
Chapter 325J or any other applicable law.
   (G)   Violations. Violation of any provisions in this section shall be the
basis for license revocation. The revocation of a license in this chapter shall
be preceded by opportunity for the licensee to be heard by the City Council
with ten days prior notice.
(Prior Code, § 8.41) (Ord. 304, passed 6-7-93)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter upon conviction shall be deemed a misdemeanor
conviction and punishment therefor the same as in the case of misdemeanors
under and pursuant to the laws of the state together with the costs of
prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 8.43) (Ord. 304, passed 6-7-93)
CHAPTER 112: ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
   
112.01   Registration required
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Exemptions
   
112.04   Application
   
112.05   Investigation
   
112.06   Appeal
   
112.07   Regulation of peddlers, transient merchants and solicitors
   
112.08   Records
   
112.09   Revocation of registration
   
112.10   Exclusion by placard
   
112.99   Penalties
§ 112.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED. 
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler or transient merchant to conduct
business within the city without first obtaining a license from the city.
   (B)   Solicitors who take orders to be delivered at a later time and which
are shipped from another state (hence involving interstate commerce), although
not requiring a licence from the city, are required to register with the city.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97) (Am. Ord. 394, passed 4-28-03)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or
eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, purporting to be
such, but shall not include religious organizations.
   CLERK. The City of La Crescent City Clerk.
   GOODS. Includes personal property of any kind and shall include goods
provided incidental  to services offered or sold.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house to house, door to door, business to
business, street to street or any other type of place to place for the purpose
of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to
sell and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personnel property that the person is carrying or
otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
hawker.
   PERMANENT MERCHANT. A direct seller who, for a one-year period of the
application of this chapter to said merchant:
      (1)   Has continuously operated an established place of business in this
city; or
      (2)   Has continuously resided in this city and now does business from
his/her residence, consistent, however, with all other local regulations and
zoning;
   PERSON. All natural persons of any age or either sex, partnerships,
corporations, associations, groups, organizations and any other description of
a collection of natural persons working in concert or for the same purpose or
objective.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house to house, door to door, business to
business, street to street or any other type of place to place for the purpose
of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting delivery or performance shall occur at a later time.
The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of
this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or
attempt to obtain orders. This term shall mean the same as the term
"canvasser."
    TRADE SHOW, FLEA MARKET or CONVENTION. A gathering of multiple merchants
upon one premises, location or area, for a period not to exceed seven
consecutive days, for the purpose of selling goods which are similar in nature
or related to a particular activity, such as a hobby.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent other portable shelter or empty store front for
the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell,
and delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property
and who does not maintain or intend to remain in any one location for more than
14 consecutive days.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97; Am. Ord. 394, passed 4-28-03)
§ 112.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Any person making regular deliveries of newspapers, fuel, or dairy
products or other similar marketed good to regular customers on established
routes.
   (B)   Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
   (C)   Any person selling locally grown agricultural products which such
person has grown.
   (D)   Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from
the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular course
of business.
   (E)   Any person who has an established place of business where the goods
being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has
initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit and/or delivery
by said person.
   (F)   Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had
a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with
the prospective customer.
   (G)   Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of goods.
   (H)   Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
   (I)   Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided that
there is submitted to the City Clerk proof that such charitable organization is
registered under applicable Minnesota Statutes, or which is exempt from any
otherwise applicable registration requirement, shall be required to register
under this chapter.
   (J)   Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant but against whom
complaint has been made to the City Clerk that such person is a transient
merchant, provided that there is submitted to the City Clerk proof that such
person has leased for at least one year, or purchased the premises from which
he is conducting business, or proof that such person has conducted such
business in this city for at least one year prior to the date complaint was
made.
   (K)   Included, but not limited to, any public or private school located
within the city , Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts and organizations associated
therewith located within the city, purporting to be such, but shall not include
religious organizations. However, these groups and organizations shall be
required to register with the City Clerk's office on a yearly basis to advise
all sales activities and dates.
   (L)   Any person selling holiday trees, wreaths or other fresh greenery
associated with the holiday season except as may be violations of other city
zoning and any other regulations.
   (M)   Persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales,
rummage sales or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an
organized multi-person bazaar or flea market.
   (N)   Any person going from house to house, door to door, business to
business, street to street or other type of place to place when the activity is
for the purpose of exercising that person's state or federal constitutional
rights such as the freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except that
this exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of constitutional rights is
merely incidental to a commercial activity.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97; Am. Ord. 394, passed 4-28-03)
§ 112.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applicants for registration must complete and return to the City Clerk
an application form furnished by the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application form shall require the following information:
      (1)   Name, permanent address and telephone number. A post office box
shall not be accepted as an address for the applicant.
      (2)   Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth.
      (3)   Name. address and telephone number of the person, firm, association
or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose
merchandise is being sold. A post office box shall not be accepted as an
address for the applicant.
      (4)   Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be
conducted during solicitation in the city.
      (5)   Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
goods and/or services offered.
      (6)   Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable.
      (7)   Make. model and license number of any/all vehicle(s) to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
      (8)   All of the last cities, villages, and towns where applicant
conducted similar business immediately prior to making this registration or the
preceding three, whichever the lesser.
      (9)   Place where applicant can be contacted for at least six months
after leaving the city.
      (10)   Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime
or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant business or
any other gross misdemeanor or felony within the last five years, the nature of
the offense(s) and place of conviction(s).
      (11)   Dates solicitation will take place.
      (12)   The application for any license shall be made to the City Clerk at
least five business days prior to the issuance of said license.
      (13)   Applicants shall present to the City Clerk for examination and
photocopying:
         (a)   A driver's license or an identification card with a picture.
         (b)   A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer
of weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of weighing and
measuring devices approved by state authorities.
         (c)   A state health officer's certificate where applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under
state law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from any
contagious or infectious disease. It shall be dated not more than 90 days prior
to the date the application for license is made.
      (14)   At the time the application is returned, a fee of$50 shall be paid
to the City Clerk to cover the cost of investigation and processing such
application and the printing of an identification card. There shall be an
additional $5 for each additional individual issued an identification card.
Transient merchants/direct sellers may employ two assistants without payment of
an additional license fee, but such persons must comply with the other
provisions of this chapter and purchase an identification card.
      (15)   The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the City Clerk his
agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the
applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in
connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant in the event the
applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally.
      (16)   Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the
City Clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry.
Unless revoked or suspended, any license issued under this section to
solicitors, peddlers or transient merchants, shall be valid for the period of
60 days from the date of issuance.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97; Am. Ord. 394, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. 589, passed
12-16-24)
§ 112.05 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of each application, the City Clerk shall refer it
immediately to the Police Department which shall make and complete an
investigation of the statements made in such registration.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is
determined, pursuant to the investigation above, that the application contains
any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a
material nature have been lodged against the applicant by authorities in the
last cities, villages and towns in which the applicant conducted similar
business; the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or
ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly
related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or of any gross
misdemeanor and felonies within said five-year period or the applicant failed
to comply with any applicable provision of §
112.04 above.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97)
§ 112.06 APPEAL.
   Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through an appeal
procedure by written application to the City Council.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97)
§ 112.07 REGULATION OF DIRECT SELLERS.
   (A)   Renewal; transfer. Applications for renewals shall be handled in the
same manner as original applications. Licenses issued under this section are
personal and may not be transferred.
   (B)   Prohibited practices.
      (1)   A direct seller shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling
or other place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. nor on Sundays
except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar
meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any
premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person
having authority over such premises.
      (2)   A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any
goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity
of the organization he represents. A charitable organization direct seller
shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being
offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the
organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a percentage of
the sale price of the goods.
      (3)   No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets
by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic
and parking regulations shall be observed.
      (4)   No direct seller shall make or suffer to be made any loud noises or
use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is
capable of being plainly heard beyond a 100 foot radius of the sound source.
      (5)   No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or
around the area in which the seller's business is conducted.
   (6)   Conducting the sale of goods of any and all kinds upon any part of any
public right-of-way is prohibited, except the occasional use of a part of a
public right-of-way adjacent to the property owned by the would-be merchant and
which is the merchant's "home base of operations" and the goods displayed being
of the kind marketed by the adjacent land owner.
   (C)   Disclosure requirements.
      (1)   After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made
to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name,
the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the
identity of goods or services offered for sale, and have city license
prominently displayed.
      (2)   If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller or any sales order
for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have
the right to cancel said transaction if it involved the extension of credit or
is a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance with, and pursuant to
applicable Minnesota Statutes; the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a
typed or printed notice of rights of cancellation in form consistent with all
applicable law and regulations.
      (3)   If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of
goods, he shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a
written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in
advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made, the name, address
and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or performance date and
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97; Am. Ord. 394, passed 4-28-03)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.08 RECORDS.
   The Chief of Police shall initiate all indicated preoccipital action and
shall as well report to the City Clerk all convictions for violation of this
chapter and the City Clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the
registrant convicted.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97)
§ 112.09 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATIONS.
   (A)   Any registration issued pursuant to these regulation may be revoked by
the City Council after notice and hearing if the registrant made any material
omission or materially inaccurate statement in the application for
registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or
representation in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any
provision of this chapter or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or
statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to
engage in direct selling.
   (B)   Written notice of the hearing shall be served on the registrant at
least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain
the time and place of hearing and a statement of the facts upon which the
hearing will be based.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.10 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating "No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants," or "Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants Prohibited," or other comparable statement. No person, other than the
property owner or tenant, shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any
sign or placard under this section.
(Ord. 394, passed 4-28-03)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of any provision of these regulations is a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof is punishable in accordance with the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 340, passed 4-14-97)
CHAPTER 113: TOBACCO
Section
   
113.01   Purpose
   
113.02   Definitions and interpretations
   
113.03   License requirements
   
113.04   Fee
   
113.05   Basis for denial of license
   
113.06   Prohibited sales
   
113.07   Vending machines
   
113.08   Self-service sales
   
113.09   Responsibility of license
   
113.10   Compliance checks and inspections
   
113.11   Other illegal acts
   
113.12   Violations; administrative procedures
   
113.99   Penalties
§ 113.01 PURPOSE. 
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco-related devices and such sales, possession and use are in violation of
both state and federal law; and because studies, which the city hereby accepts
and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached
the age of 18 years and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years
without having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking;
and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health
problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of
government, this ordinance is intended to regulate the sale, possession, and
use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices for the purposes
of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the
serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products,
and tobacco related devices, and to further the official public policy of the
state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in
M.S. § 144.391.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall include
the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine shall
include the feminine and neuter, and vice-versa. The term "shall" means
mandatory and the term "may" means permissive. The following terms shall have
the definitions given to them:
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices
are following and complying with the requirements of this chapter. Compliance
checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this chapter.
Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices for educational, research
and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. Compliance
checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purposes of
enforcing appropriate federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating
to tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco-related devices.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product  wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs,
single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing
more than a single pack or other container as described in this subdivision
shall not be considered individually packaged.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged
cigarette.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a
fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for
sales transactions.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products,
or tobacco- related devices are available for sale to the general public.
Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores,
convenience stores, and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.
   SEL -SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco- related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to
the tobacco, tobacco, products, or tobacco-related devices, without the
assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee(s). The
assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the
tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device between the customer and
the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising shall not include vending
machines.
    TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf,
including but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut
or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plus cut,
crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish;
shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and form of tobacco leaf
prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking.
    TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling
papers, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a
manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco
products.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices
upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the
machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or
tobacco related device.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
§ 113.03 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS. 
   (A)   Generally. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco- related device without first having obtained a license to
do so from the city.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco-related devices shall be made on a form provided by the
city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the
applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name
of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional information
the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City
Clerk shall forward the application to the Council for action at its next
regularly scheduled Council meeting. If the Clerk determines that an
application is incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant
with written notice of the information necessary to make the application
complete.
   (C)   Council action. The Council may either approve or deny the license, or
it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete
any investigation of applicant and application it deems necessary. If the
Council approves the license, the Clerk shall issue the license to the
applicant. If the Council denies the license, written notice of the denial
shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to
appeal the Council's decision.
   (D)   License term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid
for one year from January 1 to December 31.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in §
113.12 and §
113.99.
   (F)   Transfer of license. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be
valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the
person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another
location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City
Council.
   (G)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location business shall be eligible to be
licensed under this chapter.
   (H)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premise.
   (I)   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be
processed in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days before the
expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license under this chapter
shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right and shall not entitle
the holder to automatic renewal thereof.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.04 FEE.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter shall be
$45.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97; Ord. 564, passed 12-19-22)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.05  BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE. 
   The following and otherwise as may be provided by law shall be grounds for
denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices.
   (C)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco-related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of
application.
   (D)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information.
   (E)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation, from holding such a license.
   (F)   The existence of any particular ground for denial of license does not
mean the city must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or
renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was
ineligible for license.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
§ 113.06 PROHIBITED SALES. 
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to
sell any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device:
   (A)   To any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be
provided in this chapter.
   (C)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to
make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in
order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device and
whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco-related device between the licensee or the licensee's employee, and the
customer.
   (D)   By means of loosies as defined in §
113.02 of this ordinance.
   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process.
   (F)   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.07 VENDING MACHINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices by the means of a
vending machine.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices by any means whereby the
customer may have access to such items without having to request the item from
the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a physical
exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the tobacco-related device between
the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco
products and tobacco-related devices shall either be stored behind the counter
or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage
unit not left open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices at the time this chapter
is adopted shall comply with this section within 30 days.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.09 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-
related devices on the licenses premises, and the sale of such an item by an
employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the
clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this chapter, state or
federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
    All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or
other authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over
the age of 15 years but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed premises to
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices.
Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city-
designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. Minors
used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices when such items are
obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks
shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age,
and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all
questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee
and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is
asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by
state or federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or
required for the enforcement of particular state or federal law.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
§ 113.11 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provoked, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter.
   (A)   Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related
device to any minor.
   (B)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any
minor to have in possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related
device. This subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a
compliance check.
   (C)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to
smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-
related device.
   (D)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco,
tobacco product, or tobacco-related device, and it shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of
a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to
coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco,
tobacco product, or tobacco-related device. This subdivision shall not apply to
minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   (E)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual. age of the person.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.12 VIOLATIONS; ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be
issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged
violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right to be
heard on the accusation.
   (B)   If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a hearing
shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and provided
to the accused violator.
   (C)   The Chief of Police of the city shall serve as the hearing officer.
   (D)   If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this chapter did
occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a
violation and the penalty to be imposed under §
113.99 of this chapter, shall be filed in writing, a copy of which shall be
provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that
no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such
written findings shall be filed and a copy provided to the acquitted accused
violator.
   (E)   Appeals of any decision officer may be filed in the district court in
and for Houston County, Minnesota.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a petty misdemeanor or a misdemeanor for any alleged violation
of this chapter. Election by the city to seek criminal or petty misdemeanor
prosecution shall not preclude the levy of an administrative penalty or vice-
versa.
   (G)   Each violation and every day in which a violation occurs or continues,
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
§ 113.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any licensee found to have violated this chapter or whose employee
shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged an administrative fine of
$75 for a first violation of this chapter; $200 for a second offense at the
same licensed premises within a 24-month period and $250 for a third or
subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-month period. In addition
after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven
days.
    (B)   Other individuals, other than minors regulated by division (C) of
this section, found to be in violation of this chapter shall be charged an
administrative fee of $50.
   (C)   Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully purchase or
attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices,
shall be subject to the Houston County Juvenile Court for appropriate action.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor or as a petty misdemeanor of any violation of this
chapter and violations upon conviction shall be punishable as provided by the
laws of the state.
(Ord. 345, passed 10-27-97)
CHAPTER 114: REGULATION OF MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Statement of policy
   
114.02   M.S. Chapter 146A adopted by reference
   
114.03   Definitions
   
114.04   Massage license exceptions
   
114.05   Liabilities for crimes of another
   
114.06   Severability
   
114.07   Fees
   
114.08   Data privacy considerations
Massage Business License
   
114.15   Massage business license requirement
   
114.16   Locations ineligible for license
   
114.17   Contents of application
   
114.18   Massage business license fee; license investigation fee; license year
   
114.19   Grant or denial of license
   
114.20   Conditions governing issuance of; operation thereof
   
114.21   Hours of business
   
114.22   Construction and maintenance requirements
   
114.23   Revocation; suspension; nonrenewal
   
114.24   Appeals
Massage Therapy License
   
114.35   Massage therapy license required
   
114.36   Contents of application
   
114.37   Massage therapist license fees
   
114.38   Investigation of massage therapy license application
   
114.39   Conditions governing issuance of
   
114.40   Restrictions; regulations
   
114.41   Health and disease control
   
114.42   Revocation; suspension; nonrenewal
   
114.43   Appeals
 
   
114.98   Violation
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   The City Council of the City of La Crescent deems it necessary to provide
for the special and express regulation of businesses or commercial enterprises,
which operate massage businesses and similar oriented services operating under
different names in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and
to guard against the inception and transmission of contagious disease.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.02 M.S. CHAPTER 146A ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   M.S. Chapter 146A, known as "Complementary and Alternative Health Care
Practices," is hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or the rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating, or rolling of
the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil,
powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other similar preparations.
   MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE. A license issued by the city authorizing the
practice of administering massage on premises within the City of La Crescent.
   MASSAGE LOCATION. Any premises at or in which massage is performed.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. An individual who practices or administers massage to the
public who can demonstrate to the city that he or she:
      (1)   Is affiliated with, employed by, or owns a therapeutic massage
enterprise licensed by the city.
      (2)   Has completed 400 hours of certified therapeutic massage training
from a bona fide school that has been properly accredited, or has one year of
experience practicing massage therapy as established by an affidavit and can
document within two years of obtaining the license that he or she has completed
400 hours of certified therapeutic massage training from a bona fide school. If
no such documentation can be established at the time of license renewal, the
license shall not be renewed and the person who received the license based upon
experience is precluded from receiving a license in the future unless the
person has the requisite certified hours.
   MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE. A license issued by the city to a massage therapist
authorizing the holder thereof to practice or administer massage in the City of
La Crescent at a licensed massage business location.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.04 MASSAGE LICENSE EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The following people and businesses are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter while performing activities covered by their professional licenses
or professional affiliations:
      (1)   People licensed by the State of Minnesota to practice medicine,
surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, occupational therapy,
podiatry, and nursing, and people working solely for and under the direction of
those individuals.
      (2)   Athletic trainers, certified by the National Association of
Athletic Trainers (NAAT), when working with an amateur, semiprofessional or
professional athlete or athletic team.
      (3)   Beauty culturists and barbers licensed by the State of Minnesota
who do not hold themselves out to give massages, other than that customarily
given in the field and limited to the face, neck and scalp for beautification
purposes only.
      (4)   Health care facilities.
      (5)   The owner or operator of a licensed therapeutic massage enterprise
need not be licensed as a massage therapist unless the owner or operator
personally provides massage services.
   (B)   A person or organization providing temporary massage services such as
"chair massage" is not required to obtain a massage business license if the
following requirements are met:
      (1)   The massage is provided in a place of business where the massage
can easily be seen by any employee or visitor on the premises.
      (2)   The location does not hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages.
      (3)   Massages are offered at the location no more than ten days per
calendar year.
      (4)   Each recipient of a massage remains in an upright position, either
sitting or standing.
      (5)   Each recipient of a massage remains in the normal, daytime attire
worn when entering the business and does not remove any clothing except
outerwear such as a coat or jacket.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.05 LIABILITY FOR CRIMES OF ANOTHER.
   Every person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids
and abets in the commission of any act constituting a violation of this chapter
or any act, which constitutes an omission and, therefore, a violation of this
chapter, whether individually or in connection with one or more persons or as a
principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense and every person
who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces,
requires, permits or directs another to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter is likewise guilty of such offense.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.06 SEVERABILITY.
   Every section, provision or part of this chapter is declared separable from
every other section, provision or part to the extent that if any section,
provision or part of this chapter shall be held invalid, such holding shall not
invalidate any other section, provision or part thereof.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.07 FEES.
   (A)   The fees mandated by these regulations are, to wit:
      (1)   Therapeutic establishment fee: $150 yearly fee including initial
background check.
      (2)   Therapeutic massage therapist license: $50 yearly fee including
initial background check.
   (B)   These fees are subject to supplement and modification from time to
time by resolution of the City Council duly enacted.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord.530, passed 1-14-19)
§ 114.08 DATA PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS.
   Given the nature of the subject matter involved with the implementation and
administration of these regulations, certain information and data will be
generated which by its nature is nonpublic information, the release of which is
strictly regulated if at all subject to disclosure, this in accordance with
applicable data privacy regulation.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE
§ 114.15 MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of operating a massage business
location either exclusively or in connection with any other business enterprise
without obtaining a business license as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever any business location ceases to be licensed as a massage
establishment, whether through the suspension, cancellation, revocation, non-
renewal or lapse of its license, its owners shall immediately remove from
public view any sign or display which identifies the business as being a
massage business location or as offering massage services.
   (C)   A massage business license may be granted only to an applicant that
has insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for personal liability in the
practice of therapeutic massage, which provides coverage for all therapists
working on the business premises. A massage business may satisfy this
requirement by requiring each therapist working on the business premises to
provide that person's own insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for
personal liability in the practice of therapeutic massage.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.16 LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   No massage business may be located on property that:
   (A)   Is zoned as a classification of residential property under the zoning
ordinance unless a conditional use permit has been granted by the City Council.
The City Council may allow a person with a disability as defined by the Federal
Americans with Disability Act to offer massage services from a separate office
in the person's home, subject to appropriate conditions and subject to
compliance with zoning provisions.
   (B)    Is subject to taxes, assessments, or other financial claims from a
governmental agency that are due and delinquent, except if a suit has been
commenced and is being diligently prosecuted to question the amount or validity
of taxes.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.17 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   Application for a business location license shall be made only on the forms
provided by the City Clerk. One complete application shall be furnished to the
office of the City Clerk containing the following information:
   (A)   Business name, address and legal description of the premises to be
used.
   (B)   The names, addresses, date of birth and phone number of the owner,
lessee, if any, and the operator or manager.
   (C)    Whether the applicant, manager or operator has ever been convicted of
a crime or offense other than a traffic offense and, if so, complete and
accurate information as to the time, place and nature of such crime or offense
including the disposition thereof.
   (D)   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, joint business
venture, partnership or any legally constituted business association, it shall
submit along with its application, accurate and complete business records
showing the names and addresses of all individuals having an interest in the
business, including partners, officers, owners, managers and members of the
board of directors.
   (E)   All blueprints, diagrams, plans, layouts and the like showing the
construction, revision, remodeling, alteration or additions of or to the
premises and specifically showing the layout, design and arrangement of the
bathing and restroom facilities and the site and type of equipment and
facilities to be used must be approved by the building official.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.18 MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE FEE; LICENSE INVESTIGATION FEE; LICENSE YEAR.
   The investigation fee and first annual license fee for a new business
license shall be in the amount established from time to time by city ordinance.
A license, unless revoked, is for the calendar year, or a part thereof, for
which it has been issued and shall not be prorated. The investigation fee and
annual license fee shall be paid when the application is filed. In the event
that the license application is denied, the license fee shall be refunded;
however no part of the license investigation fee shall be returned to the
applicant. In the event that the license, once issued, is revoked, canceled or
surrendered, no part of the annual investigation or license fee shall be
returned to the applicant. A separate license shall be obtained each year for
each place of business. The fee for the annual renewal of the business license
shall be in the amount established from time to time by city ordinance. The
licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed
premises at all times. A license for the operation of a massage business
location is nontransferable.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.19 GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   License applications shall be reviewed by the Police Department, Fire
Department, Building Department and any other departments that the City Clerk
shall deem necessary to determine whether the premises conforms to all
applicable code requirements.
      (1)   Within 45 days after receipt of a complete application and payment
of all required fees, the City Clerk will verify the information provided, and
submit a written recommendation to the City Council relative to the issuance or
non-issuance of the license. The City Council may request additional
information, but must grant or deny the application within 90 days after
receipt of the complete application by the city. A denial must be communicated
to the applicant in writing specifying the reasons for denial. Failure to act
on the application within the time provided will constitute approval of the
license.
      (2)   Applications for license renewals must be submitted to the City
Clerk at least 30 days before the license expiration. The City Clerk will
verify all the information provided and submit a written recommendation to the
City Council relative to the approval or denial of the license renewal. A
denial must be communicated to the applicant in writing specifying the reasons
for denial.
   (B)   Grounds for denial. A license may be denied for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraud or deception in the license application.
      (2)   History of violations of laws and ordinances that apply to health,
safety or moral wrongdoing.
      (3)   Convictions of crimes or offenses involving sexual misconduct.
      (4)   Other matters deemed to be relevant by the City Council.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.20 CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE OF; OPERATION THEREOF.
   (A)   No massage business location license shall be issued if the applicant
or any of its owners, lessees, managers, employees or agents is a person of bad
repute.
   (B)   A massage business location license shall be issued only if the
applicant and all of its owners, lessees, managers, employees and agents are
free of convictions for offenses which involve moral wrong doing or which
relate directly to such person's ability, capacity, or fitness to perform the
duties and discharge the responsibilities of the licensed activity.
   (C)   A massage business location license shall be issued only to applicants
who have not, within one year proper to the date of application, been denied
licensure, or who have not within such period had their license revoked.
   (D)   A massage business location license shall be issued only to applicants
who have answered fully all of the information requested in the application,
have paid the full license fee and have cooperated with the city in review of
the application.
   (E)   A massage business location license shall not be granted to an
applicant who is under the age of 18 years.
   (F)   A massage business location license may be granted only for locations
within business zones allowing similar activities or have been granted a
conditional use permit by the City Council.
   (G)   A massage business location license may be granted only to business
locations which meet safety, sanitary, and building code requirements of the
city.
   (H)   A massage business location license shall not be granted if granting
the license:
      (1)   Would be inconsistent with the comprehensive development plan of
the city; or
      (2)   Would otherwise have a detrimental effect upon the property or
properties in the vicinity.
   (I)   No massage business licensee shall employ any person as a massage
therapist without first ensuring that said employee possesses a valid license
for the administration or practice of massage in the City of La Crescent. The
license shall be prominently and openly displayed on the premises.
   (J)   Every licensed massage business shall permit and allow an examination
and inspection of every part of the premises by police, fire or other authority
of the city during normal business hours. Refusal to allow such inspection or
to answer the request of city police, fire, or other authority to be admitted
to a licensed premises shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of all
licenses.
   (K)   No massage business licensee shall employ any person as a massage
therapist without first ensuring that said employee possesses a valid license
for the administration or practice of massage in the City of La Crescent. The
license shall be prominently and openly displayed on the premises.
   (L)   The licensee, massage therapist and any persons in their employ or
agents or officers thereof and any and all persons with interest in said
business shall comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations and laws of
the City of La Crescent, the State of Minnesota and the United States of
America.
   (M)   No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted in, serve in, or be
employed in any located licensed under the provisions of this chapter except in
a clerical, receptionist or other non-massage capacity.
   (N)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.21 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   The licensed location shall not be open or in operation between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the succeeding day nor shall any person engaged in
the practice of massage be on the premises or perform any massage or administer
any such services between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the
succeeding day.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.22 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A licensed massage business shall be equipped with adequate and
conveniently located toilet rooms for the accommodation of its employees and
patrons. The toilet room shall be well ventilated by natural or mechanical
methods and be enclosed with a door. The toilet room shall be kept clean and in
good repair and shall be adequately lighted.
   (B)   Floor, walls and equipment in massage rooms, restrooms and bathrooms
must be kept in a state of good repair and sanitary condition at all times.
Linens and other materials shall be stored at least 12 inches off the floor or
in an enclosed cabinet.
   (C)   Each licensed premise shall provide adequate refuse receptacles, which
shall be emptied as often as required.
   (D)   The doors to the individual massage rooms shall not be equipped with
any locking device nor shall they be locked or obstructed from either side of
the door. Each individual massage room shall contain a private dressing area.
Clean towels, wash cloths and linens must be available for each customer.
   (E)   Main entrance doors to the premises shall be unlocked at all times
during business hours.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.23 REVOCATION; SUSPENSION; NONRENEWAL.
   A massage business license may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the
City Council upon recommendation of the City Clerk by showing that the
licensee, its owners, managers, employees, agents or any other interested
parties, as enumerated in §
114.05 with the exception of creditors or the massage therapist, have engaged
in any of the following conduct:
   (A)   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing
of the licenses.
   (B)   Intemperance in the use of alcohol and or drugs including but not
limited to the use of drugs defined in M.S. § 618.01, barbiturates,
hallucinogenic drugs, amphetamines, benezedrine, dexedrine or other sedatives,
depressants, stimulants or tranquilizers.
   (C)   Engaging in conduct involving moral wrongdoing by permitting or
allowing others within their employee or agency to engage in conduct involving
moral wrongdoing or failing to prevent agents, officers or employees in
engaging in conduct involving moral wrongdoing.
   (D)   Failure to fully comply with any requirements of the City Code of the
City of La Crescent regarding sanitary and safety conditions, zoning
requirements, building code requirements or other ordinances, the violation of
which involves moral wrong doing, or failure to comply fully with any of the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Conviction of an offense involving moral wrongdoing by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (F)   Engaging in any conduct, which would constitute grounds for refusal to
issue a business location license or massage therapy license herein.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.24 APPEALS.
   (A)   The licensee or massage license holder may appeal such suspension,
revocation or non-renewal to the City Council. The City Council shall consider
the appeal at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting on or after ten days
from service of the notice of appeal on the City Clerk. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the Council may order:
      (1)   That the revocation, suspension or non-renewal be affirmed.
      (2)   That the revocation, suspension or non-renewal be lifted and that
the license be reinstated.
   (B)   The City Council may base either suspension or issuance of the license
upon any additional terms, conditions and stipulations which it may, in its
sole discretion, impose.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE.
§ 114.35 MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall perform massage services within the city without obtaining a
massage therapist license as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.36 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   An application for a massage therapist license shall be made only on forms
provided by the city. The application shall contain the following information
together with any other information the city may require:
   (A)   Evidence of the applicant's educational qualifications, including
proof of receiving at least 400 hours of certified therapeutic massage training
from a bona fide school that has been properly accredited, or documentation of
one year of experience practicing massage therapy as established by an
affidavit and can document within two years of obtaining the license that he or
she has completed 400 hours of certified therapeutic massage training from a
bona fide school.
   (B)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or offense
other than a traffic offense and, if so, information as to the time, place and
nature of such crime or offense.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.37 MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE FEES.
   The annual new massage therapy license fee shall be in an amount established
from time to time by city ordinance. The license year shall be the calendar
year and a license shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year in
which it is issued and shall not be prorated. The investigation fee and first
annual license fee for the issuance of a license shall be paid when the
application is filed. In the event that the license application is denied, the
license fee shall be refunded; however no part of the license investigation fee
shall be returned to the applicant. In the event that the license, once issued,
is revoked, canceled or surrendered, no part of the annual investigation and
license fee shall be returned to the applicant. A license shall be obtained
each calendar year. The annual renewal fee shall be in an amount established
from time to time by city ordinance, and shall be accompanied by a completed
application. The license holder shall display the license in a prominent place
in the licensed location at all times. A license permitting the holder thereof
to practice massage therapy is nontransferable.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.38 INVESTIGATION OF MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Massage therapy license applications shall be reviewed by the Police
Department, who shall furnish written recommendations to the La Crescent City
Council.
   (B)   A massage therapist license is considered active upon the receipt of a
signed, completed application form and all applicable fees have been paid. The
license is considered active at the time of application and contingent upon a
successful background check to be conducted by the La Crescent Police
Department. This activation is temporary until the activation an be reviewed by
the La Crescent City Council. The background check conducted by the Police
Department will be conducted in a timely manner and notification will be made
to the applicant if the license will not be granted. Ineligible applicant
license fees will not be refunded by the City of La Crescent.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 530, passed 1-14-19)
§ 114.39 CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE OF.
   (A)   The license shall be issued only to persons who have completed 400
hours of certified therapeutic massage training from a bona fide school that
has been properly accredited, or has one year of experience practicing massage
therapy as established by an affidavit and can document within two years of
obtaining the license that he or she has completed 400 hours of certified
therapeutic massage training from a bona fide school. If no such documentation
can be established at the time of license renewal, the license shall not be
renewed and the person who received the license based upon experience is
precluded from receiving a license in the future unless the person has the
requisite certified hours.
   (B)   The license shall be issued only to persons of good moral character
and repute.
   (C)   The license shall be issued only to persons free of convictions for
offenses which involve moral wrongdoing or which relate directly to such
person's ability, capacity, or fitness to perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the occupation.
   (D)   The license shall not be issued to persons who have, within one year
prior to the date of application, been denied licensure; or who have had his or
her license revoked or surrendered in or by any political subdivision,
municipality or by the State of Minnesota.
   (E)   The license shall be issued only to applicants who have fully and
truthfully answered all of the information requested in the application and
have paid the full license and investigation fee.
   (F)   The license shall be issued only to persons 18 years of age or older.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.40 RESTRICTIONS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The licensee, massage therapist and any persons in their employ or
agents or officers thereof and any and all persons with interest in said
business shall comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations and laws of
the City of La Crescent, the State of Minnesota and the United States of
America.
   (B)   Any person acting as a massage therapist shall have his or her license
displayed in a prominent place at his or her place of employment and, upon
demand by any police officer or other authorized officer or agent of the City
of La Crescent, any person engaged in practicing massage shall identify himself
or herself giving his or her true legal name, correct address, date of birth
and home telephone number.
   (C)   Any person practicing massage therapy within the City of La Crescent
shall initially advise the city of his or her full legal name, address, date of
birth, home telephone number and shall advise the city of any changes in
address or telephone number within 30 days of such change.
   (D)   Any person practicing massage within the city may do so only at
business locations which are licensed for the conduct of such business as
herein provided and further, any person practicing massage shall inform the
city of any changes in employment or the location of his or her employment
within the city within seven days after such change.
   (E)   Every person to whom a massage therapy license is issued shall provide
and allow copying of the person's photograph for identification purposes.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.41 HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL.
   No person while afflicted with any disease in a communicable form or while a
carrier of such disease or wounds, sores or any acute respiratory infection
shall work in or use the services of any public massage room and no person
known or suspected of being afflicted with any such disease or condition shall
be employed or permitted in such area or capacity.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.42 REVOCATION; SUSPENSION; NONRENEWAL.
   A massage therapy license may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the
City Council upon recommendation of the City Clerk by showing that the massage
therapist has engaged in any of the following conduct:
   (A)   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing
of the licenses.
   (B)   Intemperance in the use of alcohol and or drugs including but not
limited to the use of drugs defined in M.S. § 618.01, barbiturates,
hallucinogenic drugs, amphetamines, benezedrine, dexedrine or other sedatives,
depressants, stimulants or tranquilizers.
   (C)   Engaging in conduct involving moral wrongdoing by permitting or
allowing others within their employee or agency to engage in conduct involving
moral wrongdoing or failing to prevent agents, officers or employees in
engaging in conduct involving moral wrongdoing.
   (D)   Conviction of an offense involving moral wrongdoing by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Engaging in any conduct, which would constitute grounds for refusal to
issue a massage therapy license.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.43 APPEALS.
   The licensee holder may appeal such suspension, revocation or non-renewal to
the City Council. The City Council shall consider the appeal at the next
regularly scheduled Council meeting on or after ten days from service of the
notice of appeal on the City Clerk. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Council may order:
   (A)   That the revocation, suspension or non-renewal be affirmed.
   (B)   That the revocation, suspension or non-renewal be lifted and that the
license be reinstated.
   (C)   The City Council may base either suspension or issuance of the license
upon any additional terms, conditions and stipulations, which it may, in its
sole discretion, impose.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
§ 114.98 VIOLATION.
   Violation of any provision of these regulations is a misdemeanor and
punishable as provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota. The municipal
official designated by the City Council responsible for the enforcement of
these regulations may charge violations petty misdemeanors, punishable as
provided by Minnesota law.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 530, passed 1-14-19) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever does any act forbidden by this chapter or omits or fails to do any
act required by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 460, passed 4-12-10)
CHAPTER 115: TREE TRIMMERS
Section
   
115.01   Commercial tree trimmers licensed
   
115.02   License and application
   
115.03   Access to city disposal site
   
115.04   Disposal site regulated
   
115.05   Commercial for hire street trimmers defined
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 COMMERCIAL TREE TRIMMERS LICENSED.
   The commercial business of tree trimming and the cutting of trees on a for
hire basis in the city is hereby declared a licensed activity.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-14-00)
§ 115.02 LICENSE AND APPLICATION.
   Licenses for professional tree trimmers and cutters may be obtained at the
City Clerk's office upon submission of a subscribed application on forms
provided therefor by the city and upon payment of the annual nonrefundable fee
in the amount of $100 or such other amount as may be established from time to
time by City Council resolution duly enacted and the filing of a bond in the
penal sum of $1,000. The licensed period shall coincide with other city
licenses and the initial license fee may, by resolution of the City Council, be
prorated for a license period less than one year. Licensees shall be presented
to the City Clerk, as a prerequisite to the issuance of the license, evidence
of insurance against general liability risks, naming the city an additional
insured and shall be in an amount equivalent to the statutory maximum liability
for a municipality or as the City Council may by resolution otherwise
authorize.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-14-00)
§ 115.03 ACCESS TO CITY DISPOSAL SITE.
   Licensed tree trimmers shall have access to the city disposal site any day
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. official time and may be issued a
key or such other means to enable unattended access.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-14-00)
§ 115.04 DISPOSAL SITE REGULATED.
   The city disposal site shall be available for disposal of brush, slash and
chips generated from tree trimming and cutting operations within the corporate
limits of the city only. No stumps nor any such aforementioned materials
originating from locations outside the city shall be allowed and all other
incidental regulations which may be promulgated by the City Council regulating
the city disposal site are hereby incorporated herein by reference thereto as
if set out in full.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-14-00)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.05 COMMERCIAL FOR HIRE STREET TRIMMERS DEFINED.
   For purposes of these regulations, commercial or for hire trimmers and
cutters are such who perform tree trimming and cutting services for others for
compensation and who desire access to the city disposal site at any time during
the hours specified.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-14-00)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter including but not limited to the
regulations specified for the disposal site and those incorporated herein by
reference shall be upon conviction, misdemeanors punishable in accordance with
the laws of the state and shall in the discretion of the City Council result in
license forfeiture.
(Ord. 366, passed 2-14-00)
CHAPTER 116: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
General Provisions
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
116.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
116.04   License ineligibility
   
116.05   License suspension and revocation
   
116.06   License transferability
   
116.07   Registration
   
116.08   Prohibited activities
   
116.09   Exclusion by placard
Vending Vehicles or Mobile Units
   
116.25   Definitions
   
116.26   License required
   
116.27   Equipment
   
116.28   Restrictions on vending activity
   
116.29   Sound amplification devices
   
116.30   Backing of confection or ice cream vending vehicle or mobile unit
   
116.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personnel property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting. The term peddler shall mean the same as the term
hawker.
   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as regular business days.
   SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-
to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time.
The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of
this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or
attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as
the term "canvasser."
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for
more than 14 consecutive days.
§ 116.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR,  and TRANSIENT MERCHANT  shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or
any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
§ 116.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required.  No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S. Ch.
329 as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient
merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need
not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to §
116.07.
   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. Application for a
license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from
the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall be signed by the
applicant. All applications shall include the following information:
      (1)   Applicant's full legal name.
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers.
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence.
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any).
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant.
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license.
      (10)    Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
      (11)    The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive days).
      (12)    Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.
      (13)    A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses.
      (14)    A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
      (15)    Proof of any requested county license.
      (16)    Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
      (17)    A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
      (18)    All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
      (19)    The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form
of identification.
      (20)    The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee.  All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the City Clerk, within two regular business days, must
determine if the application is complete. An application is determined to be
complete only if all required information is provided. If the City Clerk
determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the
application is complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation, including
background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the
application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application the City Clerk must issue the license unless there exist grounds
for denying the license under §
116.04, in which case the Clerk must deny the license. If the City Clerk denies
the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the
reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal the denial by
requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing
before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days
of the date of the request. The decision of the City Council following the
public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals
for a Writ of Certiorari.
   (F)   Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid
for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted under
this chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the
license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of
place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's
State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press,
religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person's
exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
      (3)   Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt
person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this
chapter.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license.
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant.
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other similar business or consumer
rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints
filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 116.05 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application
form.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could
have been denied under §
116.04.
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within ten regular
business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall
be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a
public hearing is requested within the stated timeframe, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular
business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.06 TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.07 REGISTRATION.
   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter under §
116.03, shall be required to register with the city. Registration shall be made
on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be
required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City Clerk
shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of the
registration. Certificates of Registration shall be non-transferable.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person.
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating "No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants," or "Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient
Merchants Prohibited," or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign
or placard under this section.
Penalty, see § 10.99
VENDING VEHICLES OR MOBILE UNITS
§ 116.25 DEFINITIONS.  
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VENDING VEHICLES OR MOBILE UNITS. Any vehicle or mobile unit in which any
type of confections, ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or frozen desserts are
carried for the purposes of selling at retail sale on the city streets.
   VEND or VENDING. Offering confections, ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or
frozen desserts for sale from a motor vehicle or mobile unit on the city
streets.
   OPERATOR. Any person, firm or corporation who owns, leases, contracts or in
any other fashion permits a person to operate upon the city streets any
confections or ice cream vending unit for the purpose of vending, or the person
driving or operating any such vehicle or mobile unit.
(Ord. 431, passed 6-12-06)
§ 116.26 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No operator shall vend from a confection or ice cream vending vehicle
or mobile unit while on the public streets of the city unless a license to do
so is obtained from the city. The fee for an annual license shall be $50, and
shall entitle the operator to vend from one such vehicle or mobile unit for the
period from April 1 to March 31 of the following year. For each additional
individual vehicle or mobile unit utilized by a licensed operator, an
additional license fee in the amount of $5 shall be paid.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall issue an identification tag for each vehicle or
mobile unit licensed hereunder, which shall be displayed by the operator on the
left rear portion of the vehicle or mobile unit.
      (1)   No license shall be issued hereunder to an operator unless a
certificate is furnished to the city showing the names of the insurers
providing liability coverage on all vehicles or mobile units and amount of
coverage carried.
      (2)   The insurance certificate shall contain an acknowledgment signed by
the insured that prior to modification, cancellation or termination of the
subject policy, said insurance company shall give written notice to the City
Clerk ten days before the effective date of any such changes in coverage.
      (3)   The minimum amount of insurance to be carried is public liability
insurance in the amount of not less than $300,000 for personal injury or death,
resulting from anyone occurrence and on account of any one accident; property
damage insurance in an amount of not less than $25,000 for damages on account
of any one accident or occurrence.
(Ord. 431, passed 6-12-06)
§ 116.27 EQUIPMENT.
   Is required for confection or ice cream vending vehicles or mobile units. In
addition to other equipment required by law, every such vehicle or mobile unit
shall be equipped with:
   (A)   Signal lamps mounted at the same level and as high and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable. These lamps shall be five to seven inches in
diameter and shall display two alternately-flashing yellow lights on the front
of the vehicle or mobile units and two alternately flashing yellow lights on
the rear of the vehicle or mobile unit, both lights visible at 500 feet in
normal sunlight upon a straight level street.
   (B)   A convex mirror mounted on the front so the operator in his normal
seating position can see the area in front of the vehicle or mobile unit
obscured by the hood.
    (C)   An audible alarm, which automatically activates when the vehicle or
mobile unit moves backwards.
    (D)   The special lights, as herein provided, shall not be used when the
vehicle or mobile unit is stopped for the purpose other than vending.
(Ord. 431, passed 6-12-06)
§ 116.28 RESTRICTIONS ON VENDING ACTIVITY.
   (A)   An operator shall vend only when the confection or ice cream vending
vehicle or mobile unit is lawfully stopped.
   (B)   An operator shall vend only from the side of the vehicle or mobile
unit away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or side of
the street.
   (C)   An operator shall not vend to any person standing in the roadway.
   (D)   An operator shall not stop on the left side of a one-way street to
vend.
   (E)   An operator shall not vend on a street within or immediately adjacent
to any park or public facility maintained by the department of park and
recreation, nor in the central business district of the city.
    (F)   No vending activity shall occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:
00 a.m. the day following.
    (G)   An operator shall not vend in a single location for a period
exceeding 15 minutes. For purposes of this subchapter, a single location shall
be deemed to be a place 500 feet or more from the location of the last sale.
(Ord. 431, passed 6-12-06)
§ 116.29 SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES.
   No operator while vending shall use a sound amplification device, bell or
horn, which is audible for a distance of more than 500 feet from the vehicle or
mobile unit. No such device shall be used within 500 feet of any church or
place of worship or healthcare or assisted living facility.
(Ord. 431, passed 6-12-06)
§ 116.30 BACKING OF CONFECTION OR ICE CREAM VENDING VEHICLE OR MOBILE UNIT.
   The operator of a confection or ice cream vending vehicle or mobile unit
shall not back up to make or attempt a sale.
(Ord. 431, passed 6-12-06)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
116.25 through
116.30 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 117: ROOFERS
Section
   
117.01   Roofers licensed
   
117.02   Permits required
   
117.03   Exemptions
   
117.04   Violation
§ 117.01 ROOFERS LICENSED.
   The construction and installation of roofs, the replacement and repair
thereof for hire within the city, shall be done by licensed roofers only.
(Ord. 381, passed 7-23-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.02 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No roofing project whether for hire or as exempted under §
117.03, shall be undertaken without the prior issuance of a permit therefor.
Permits and permit applications prescribed and approved by the City Council are
obtainable at the City Clerk or City Building Official's office. Permit fees
shall be payable in advance as provided by state regulation and additionally as
may be required by resolution of the City Council duly enacted.
(Ord. 381, passed 7-23-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   Exempted from the provisions hereof are:
   (A)   Roofs of newly constructed structures where the roof is an integral
part of the structure for which permits are otherwise required and issued, and
the fees charged paid, and where regulations, municipal and/or other covering
the subject matter hereof are elsewhere prescribed; and
   (B)   Where the roof is installed, replaced or repaired by the owner of the
property whereon the structure is located and where no compensation direct or
indirect is paid for the work entailed therewith.
(Ord. 381, passed 7-23-01)
§ 117.04 VIOLATION.
   The violation of any provision hereof including the creaking of any
deliberate false statement in the license and permit process is a misdemeanor,
punishable upon conviction according to the laws of the state. The city may, in
its discretion, charge violations petty misdemeanors in which cases upon
conviction shall be punishable in accordance with the laws of the state.
(Ord. 381, passed 7-23-01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 118: COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
General
   
118.01   Purpose
   
118.02    Public safety telecommunications interference
   
118.03   Additional submittal requirements
   
118.04   Registration of commercial wireless telecommunication services and
towers
Towers, Antennas, and Other Structures
   
118.10   Location - zoning districts - procedural requirements
   
118.11   Tower and accessory structure height
   
118.12   Tower and accessory structure setback
   
118.13   Equipment, structure or cabinet setback
   
118.14   Towers and services as the principal use
   
118.15   Tower design requirements
   
118.16   Antenna co-location
   
118.17   Antennas mounted on existing structures or towers
   
118.18   Equipment buildings or cabinets
   
118.19   Buffering and screening
   
118.20   Signs and advertising
   
118.21   Tower lighting
   
118.22   Abandoned or unused towers
GENERAL
§ 118.01 PURPOSE.
   The city acknowledges the legal right of wireless telecommunications
providers to do business within the city. The city further acknowledges that,
pursuant to federal law, the city's regulations must be nondiscriminatory, must
not be based on the health effects of radio frequency emissions and must not
prohibit the delivery of telecommunications services. Accordingly, in order to
establish uniform, nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral regulations
that protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community,
these regulations are intended to:
   (A)   Facilitate the provision of commercial wireless telecommunication
services in the city and surrounding area;
   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and
siting standards;
   (C)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna
failure and weather related occurrences through structural standards, careful
siting and setback requirements;
   (D)   Encourage the placement of commercial wireless telecommunication
service towers in non-residential zoning districts or alternatively on
commercial, industrial, or institutional property and large publicly owned
parcels as is specified in the Locational Priorities section; and
   (E)   Minimize the total number of existing and new towers needed to serve
the community, and maximize the use of existing towers and buildings to
accommodate commercial wireless telecommunication service antennas.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
§ 118.02 PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS INTERFERENCE.
   Commercial wireless telecommunications services shall not interfere with
public safety telecommunications. All zoning certificate applications shall
include adequate information that will be reviewed by the city and county
public safety communications system before a certificate may be issued. Before
the introduction of new service or changes in existing service,
telecommunication providers shall notify the city at least ten calendar days in
advance of changes and allow the city to monitor interference levels during the
testing process.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.03 ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this chapter,
applications shall include the following information:
   (A)   A report from a licensed professional engineer that describes the
tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can
accommodate;
   (B)   A letter of intent from the commercial wireless telecommunication
service tower owner committing the tower owner and successors to allow the
shared use of a tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use; and
   (C)   Information specifically indicating how a tower affixed to the ground
shall be protected to discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized person.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
§ 118.04 REGISTRATION OF COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES AND
TOWERS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of registration under this chapter is to provide
the city with accurate and current information concerning commercial wireless
telecommunications services and to assist the city in the administration of
this section of the chapter. This requirement shall apply to companies that
offer or provide services within the city or that own or operate facilities,
including but not limited to antennas and towers, withing the city.
   (B)   Registration and application requirements. Commercial wireless
telecommunications services and tower companies that offer or provide any
telecommunications services for a fee directly to the public or have facilities
within the city shall register and provide to the city, pursuant to this
chapter the following information:
      (1)   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including
affiliates;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement;
      (3)   A narrative and map description of registrant's existing
telecommunications facilities with the city and adjacent townships; and
      (4)   Such other information as the city may reasonably require.
   (C)   This information shall be updated on an annual basis by the companies.
The city may request updates of the list whenever a tower or facility is added
or removed from service by a company.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
TOWERS, ANTENNAS, AND OTHER STRUCTURES
§ 118.10 LOCATION - ZONING DISTRICTS - PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except upon city-owned lands, no telecommunication facility may be
located in the following areas:
      (1)   Floodplains;
      (2)   Wetlands;
      (3)   Shorelands; and
      (4)   Residential-zoned districts.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B)(1), with conditional
use permit the applicant may:
      (1)   Attach an antenna to an existing tower, structure, or utility pole
provided;
      (2)   The antenna does not extend more than 20 feet above the highest
point of an existing tower, structure, or pole and the attachment otherwise
meets the requirements and provisions hereof and all other applicable provision
and regulation;
      (3)   With a conditional use permit, telecommunication facilities may be
allowed in the following zoning districts, provided they meet the requirements
of the district and the requirements of these regulations:
         (a)   All agricultural-zoned districts;
         (b)   All commercial-zoned districts; and
         (c)   All industrial-zoned districts.
      (4)   Conditional use permit requirements. All applications for
conditional use permits shall minimally include the following information:
         (a)   A report from a registered professional engineer and/or other
professional which:
            1.   Describes the facility's height and design, including a cross-
section and elevation;
            2.   Certifies the facility's compliance with electrical standards
and structural standards that allow it to accommodate at least three antennas;
            3.   Describes the tower's capacity, including the potential number
and type of antennas that it can accommodate;
            4.   Describe the lighting to be placed on the facility if required
by the FCC or FAA;
            5.   Certifies that the facility will not cause destructive
interference with a previously established public safety communication system;
            6.   A plat of survey showing the parcel boundaries and a legal
description, support facilities, location, access, landscaping and fencing;
            7.   Federal Communication Commission (FCC) license and
registration numbers, if applicable. Also copies of findings of no significant
impacts statement from FCC or environmental impact studies, if applicable;
            8.   Proof of liability coverage reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by the City Council;
            9.   An alternatives analysis shall be prepared by the applicant
which identifies all reasonable, technically feasible alternative locations
and/or facilities which could provide the proposed telecommunication service.
The intention of the alternatives analysis is to present alternative strategies
which could minimize the number, size, and adverse environmental impacts of
facilities necessary to provide the needed services to the city. The analysis
shall address the potential for co-location and the potential to locate
facilities as close as possible to the intended service area. It shall also
explain the rationale for selection of the proposed site in view of the
relative merits of any of the feasible alternatives.
            10.   A tabular and map inventory of all the applicant's existing
telecommunication towers that are located within the city and applicant's
towers within 1,500 feet of the city boundary. The inventory shall specify the
location, height, type, and design of each of the applicant's existing
telecommunication towers and the ability of the tower or antenna structure to
accommodate additional co-location antennas.
         (b)   Each application shall include a facility plan. The city will
maintain an inventory of all existing and proposed telecommunication facility
installations. All applicants shall provide the following information in each:
            1.   Written description of the type of consumer services each
applicant will provide to its customers (cellular, PCS, SMR, ESMR, paging, or
other anticipated telecommunication services), the carrier provider, applicant,
landowner, and service provider.
            2.   Provide a list of the applicant's existing telecommunication
sites, existing sites to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed facility sites
as they are determined and requested within the city.
            3.   Provide a map of the city which shows the geographic service
areas for the provider of the existing and proposed facility sites as they are
determined and requested by the provider.
            4.   The name, address, and telephone number of the officer, agent,
and/or employee responsible for the accuracy of the application.
            5.   Written acknowledgment by the landowner of the leased site
that he/she will abide by all applicable terms and conditions of all necessary
permits including the conditional use permit.
            6.   Additional information and analysis:
               a.   With review of the Planning Commission and the direction of
the City Council there may be required visual impact demonstrations, including
mock-ups and/or photo montages, screening and painting plans, network maps,
alternative site analysis, lists of other nearby wireless telecommunication
facilities, or facility design alternatives for the proposed facilities.
               b.   The City Council may employ, on behalf of the city, an
independent technical expert to review technical materials submitted by the
applicant or to prepare any technical materials required but not submitted by
the applicant. The applicant shall pay the costs of such review and/or
independent analysis.
            7. The procedure, including the manner of giving notice and the
jurisdictional requirements for hearings for conditional use permits required
for all towers and facilities as provided herein shall be the same in the case
of conditional use permit applications under the City Zoning Code.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.11 TOWER AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURE HEIGHT.
   In residential zoning districts, telecommunications towers shall not exceed
199 feet in height including the tower and attached antennas. All proposed
towers and all accessory structures or buildings shall meet the maximum height
provisions of the underlying zoning district. The height of towers shall be
determined by measuring the vertical distance from the tower's point of contact
with the ground or rooftop to the highest point of the tower, including all
antennas or other attachments. When towers are mounted on top of other
structures or buildings, the combined height of the structure or building and
tower must meet the height requirements of the applicable zoning district.
Antennas placed on non-telecommunications related structures or buildings shall
have a height of not more than 25 feet.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.12 TOWER AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACK.
   Towers shall conform to the setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district as determined for area accessory development.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.13 EQUIPMENT, STRUCTURE OR CABINET SETBACK.
   (A)   All structures or cabinets shall conform to the setback requirements
of the underlying zoning district.
   (B)   Under a conditional use permit the Planning Commission must determine
such technical matters as setbacks as a part of the conditional use
application, the structure or cabinet setback and buffering. The Planning
Commission must consider the lot size, surrounding land uses, site
characteristics such as topography and existing vegetation, and proximity of
dwellings to the proposed accessory structures. The Planning Commission must
determine the most appropriate method for buffering structures or cabinets in
the conditional use application process.
   (C)   Where fences are used to control unauthorized climbing of towers, the
site plan shall conform to the requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Fences or walls shall be located between the bufferyards and tower in the
conditional use application process.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.14 TOWERS AND SERVICES AS THE PRINCIPAL USE.
   In any residential district, a commercial wireless telecommunications tower
shall be the only principal use permitted on a lot, except where located
publicly owned property where it may be an accessory use.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.15 TOWER DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Towers and antennas shall blend in to the surrounding environment
through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment except where
color is dictated by federal or state authorities. Tower color shall be a solid
color, not multi-colored, and shall be light blue, light beige or rust colored.
Rust color on towers shall be used only on sites where there is a predominance
of woodland.
   (B)   New towers shall be a monopole design. Existing towers may be used for
the placement of antennas and will not be required to be of a monopole design.
   (C)   No tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any
way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during
periods of construction or repair when the tower is located in any residential
zoning district or located on a lot that is within 200 feet of a residential
zoning district, a designated residential area on the land use plan, or where
residential uses currently exist.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.16 ANTENNA CO-LOCATION.
   (A)   All commercial wireless telecommunication towers or antennas erected,
constructed or located within the city shall comply with the following
requirements.
   (B)   A proposal for a new tower or antennas shall not be approved unless
the city finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed
structure cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or structure
within a one mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one or more of the
following reasons:
      (1)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or structure, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower or structure
cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned equipment at
a reasonable cost;
      (2)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or structure
as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer or qualified
radio frequency engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost;
      (3)   Existing or approved towers and structures within the search radius
that are 60 feet or over in height that cannot accommodate the planned
equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer; and
      (4)   Other unforseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
structure.
   (C)   Any proposed tower shall be designed (structurally, electrically and
in all other respects) to accommodate both the applicant antennas and
comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over 100
feet in height, or for at least one additional user if the tower is over 60
feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.17 ANTENNAS MOUNTED ON EXISTING STRUCTURES OR TOWERS.
   The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas on existing buildings,
structures, or towers, and placement of equipment structures or cabinets shall
meet the standards of the underlying zoning district as specified for an area
accessory development and the procedural requirements and standards of this
chapter. A site plan and building plan shall be submitted to the city as part
of the conditional use application permit.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.18 EQUIPMENT BUILDINGS OR CABINETS.
   (A)   All buildings, excluding cabinets, accessory to a tower or antenna, or
separate from a tower or antenna location shall be:
      (1)   Constructed of material on the exterior of the building walls and
roof similar to the surrounding area when located on property within 200 feet
of a residential zoning district; and
      (2)   Buffered and screened from adjoining uses as shall be addressed in
the conditional use application process.
   (B)   Equipment buildings or cabinets shall meet the general height
limitations for the underlying zoning district.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.19 BUFFERING AND SCREENING.
   (A)   Towers and equipment structures and cabinets shall be buffered and
screened from adjoining uses as established in the requirements of the
underlying zoning district.
   (B)   In areas adjacent to residential zoning district all cabinets located
on the ground shall be surrounded by a wood stockade fence that is the same
height or higher than the cabinet or related electrical connections, but no
more than six feet in height. A fence will not be required where a cabinet is
located with one or more other buildings or structures housing
telecommunications equipment or located within another structure.
      (1)   Location of a new telecommunications service in a non-residential
zoning district. The minimum landscaping required of a new telecommunications
service location shall consist of applicable bufferyard requirements
comprehensively addressed in the conditional use application process.
      (2)   Location of a new telecommunications service at an existing
telecommunications service location. Where a proposed site is found to be non-
conforming for bufferyard requirements the application shall be required to
bring the site into conformance as prescribed in the conditional use
application process.
   (C)   All landscaping shall be maintained by the property owner or a
designated company or public agency. All plant material that dies must be
replaced within one growing season.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.20 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment
information signs is prohibited.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.21 TOWER LIGHTING.
   (A)   A tower shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
have affixed or attached to it in any way, except during time of repair or
installation, any lights, reflectors, flashers or other illuminating devise,
except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal
Communications Commission or any state agency. Strobe lights will not be
permitted for night time tower lighting. The applicant shall choose from
alternative lighting standards supplied by the Federal Aviation Administration,
Federal Communications Commission or state agency. The applicant shall submit
with their application the required lighting standards specified by these
agencies.
   (B)   When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light
fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots or similar areas may be
attached to the tower.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.22 ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS.
   Abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within
12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the Zoning Administrator. In the event that a tower is not removed
within 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and
associated facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of removal may
be assessed against the property.
(Ord. 386, passed 8-12-02)
CHAPTER 119: TAXATION
Section
Lodging Tax
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   Imposition of tax
   
119.03   Collections
   
119.04   Exemptions
   
119.05   Advertising no tax
   
119.06   Payments and returns
   
119.07   Examination of return, adjustments, notices, and demands
   
119.08   Refunds
   
119.09   Failure to file a return
   
119.10   Administration of tax
   
119.11   Examine records
   
119.12   Violations
   
119.13   Use of proceeds
   
119.14   Appeals
 
   
119.99   Penalty
LODGING TAX
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended, the following words, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have the
following meanings and inclusions:
   CITY. The City of La Crescent, Minnesota, acting by or through its duly
authorized representative.
   LODGER.  The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The furnishing for a consideration of lodging at a hotel, motel,
rooming house, tourist court, municipal campground, resort or bed and
breakfast, other than the renting or leasing of it for a continuous period of
30 days or more.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building in the
city, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   PERSON. All firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, and natural
persons.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether
paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services
rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge
itself.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 469.190 and provisions of Laws 2019, Chapter 6, Article
6, Section 21, there is hereby imposed a tax of 5% on the rent charged by an
operator for providing lodging to any person. The tax shall be stated and
charged separately and shall be collected by the operator from the lodger. The
tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator to the city
and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the tax
imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the
operator is authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a lodger.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.03 COLLECTIONS.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this section at the time the
rent is paid. The tax collection shall be deemed to be held in trust by the
operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a
receipt of payment from the operator.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it
is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be granted except
upon a claim therefore made at the time the rent is collected and such a claim
shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the
city. All such claims shall be forwarded to the city when the returns and
collections are submitted as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.05 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
hereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than one cent shall
be considered an additional cent.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.06 PAYMENTS AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the operator to the
city monthly not later than 20 days after the end of the month in which the
taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a
return upon such forms and continuing such information as the city may require.
The return shall contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return.
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of his agent
duly authorized in writing.
      (4)   The period covered by the return.
      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging
tax.
   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this chapter previously paid
as a result of any transaction the consideration for which became
uncollectible.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.07 EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES, AND DEMANDS.
   The city shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make any
investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making
the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed
on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is
found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the city
within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or
sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is
greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the
person who paid the tax to the City within ten days after determination of such
refund.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.08 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the city for a refund of taxes paid for a prescribed
period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no
application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one year after
such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever
period is the longer. The city shall examine the claim and make and file
written findings whereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and
shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to such person at the address
stated upon the return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the city
shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this
chapter from the claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any, shall be
paid by the city to the claimant.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.09 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return shall fail
to do so within the time prescribed or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice
and demand, file such return or corrected return within ten days of receipt of
such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis
thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected return, the
city shall make a return or corrected return for such person based upon such
knowledge and information as the city can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis
thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on account of the tax
for the taxable period covered by such return) shall be paid within ten days of
the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment. Any such return or
assessment made by the city shall be prima facie correct and valid, and the
burden of proving to the contrary rests with any person in any action or
proceeding in respect thereto.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including penalties
thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the city
may institute such legal action as may be necessary to cover the amount due
plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of any action.
   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant an operator one 30-
day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes
as required by chapter provided that interest during such period of extension
shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 8% per annum.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.10 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The city shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of the
taxes imposed by this chapter. The city shall cause to be prepared blank forms
for the returns and other documents required by this chapter and shall
distribute the same throughout the city. Failure to receive or secure such
forms and documents shall not relieve any person from any obligation required
of him under this chapter.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.11 EXAMINE RECORDS.
   Persons acting on behalf of the city and authorized in writing by the city
may examine the books, papers, and records of any operator in order to verify
the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
as provided in this chapter. Every such operator is directed and required to
give to the city the means, facilities, and opportunity for such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.12 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return by this chapter, or who
shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or who shall fail
to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this chapter
after written demand for such payment, or who shall refuse to permit the city's
authorized agents to examine the books, records, and papers under his control,
or who shall willfully make any incomplete, false, or fraudulent return shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.13 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes
pursuant to this chapter shall be used in concurrence with M.S. § 469.190 and
provisions of Laws 2019, Chapter 6, Article 6, Section 21 as may be amended
from time to time to fund a local Convention and Tourism Bureau for the purpose
of marketing and promoting La Crescent City. The city may use up to 5% of the
proceeds obtained hereunder to defray the costs and expenses of collection and
administration of such tax.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.14 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order, or determination made by
the city under this chapter may file a petition for review of such notice,
order, or determination. The petition shall contain the name of petitioner, the
petitioner's address, and the location of the lodging subject to the notice,
order, or determination.
   (B)   The petition for review shall be filed with the city within ten days
after the notice, order, or determination for which review is sought has been
mailed to or served upon the person requesting review.
   (C)    Upon receipt of the petition, the City Administrator/Clerk shall set
a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least ten days prior written
notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order, or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
   (E)   The hearing shall be conducted by the City Administrator/Clerk or his
authorized agent, and he shall make written findings of fact and conclusions
based upon the applicable section of this chapter and the evidence presented.
The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse, or modify the notice,
order or determination made by the city.
   (F)   (1)   Any decision rendered by the city pursuant to this section may
be appealed to the city Council. A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must
file a written notice of appeal with the city within 10 days after the decision
has been mailed to the petitioner.
      (2)   The matter will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon
as is practical. The Council shall then review the findings of fact and
conclusions to determine whether they were correct. Upon a determination by the
Council that the findings and conclusions were incorrect, the Council may
modify, reverse, or affirm the decision of the City Administrator/Clerk or
authorized agent under the same standards as set forth in section.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time herein
specified for the payment, or an extension thereof, there shall be added
thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.
   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that such failure is not due to
willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition the penalty
provided in division (A) above, a penalty of 5% for each 30-day period or
fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the
aggregate. There shall be a minimum penalty assessed of $10 if penalties in the
aggregate do not exceed that amount. The amount so added to any tax shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner and as part of the tax unless
the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the
amount so added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.
   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or makes any payment
required by this chapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or payment
thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any
tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of such false or fraudulent return)
found due for the period to which such return related. The penalty imposed by
this section shall be collected as part of the tax and shall be in addition to
any other penalties provided by this chapter.
   (D)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to
interest, and then to the tax due.
   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided
by this section, shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the time
such tax should have been paid until payment is made. Any interest and penalty
shall be added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
(Ord. 487, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 534, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. 573, passed
9-11-23)
CHAPTER 120: SHORT TERM RENTALS
Section
   
120.01   Purpose
   
120.02   Scope
   
120.03   Definitions
   
120.04   License required
   
120.05   Responsibility of owners
   
120.06   Disorderly conduct
   
120.07   License suspension or revocation
   
120.08   Appeal
   
120.09   Posting
   
120.10   Compliance
   
   
120.99   Penalty
§ 120.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the short-term rental of
dwelling units in the city is conducted, operated, and maintained so as not to
become a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhoods or an influence that fosters
blight and deterioration or creates a disincentive to reinvest in the
community.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter applies to the short-term rental of all dwelling units located
within all residential zoning districts of the City of La Crescent. Short-term
rentals within the Central Business District shall not be subject to the
restrictions of this chapter, except with respect to the registered agent and
short-term tax requirements contained herein.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   BEDROOM. A habitable room within a single-family dwelling which is used, or
intended to be used, primarily for the purpose of sleeping, but shall not
include any kitchen, dining room, or living room.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. An employee of the city designated as the BUILDING
OFFICIAL. The term BUILDING OFFICIAL also includes all city employees
authorized to issue citations.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an
independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with
separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies a dwelling unit or part of the same.
   OWNER. A person having legal or equitable interest in the dwelling unit or
its premises.
   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. An area on the permitted premises or within a
building that is a legally conforming parking space intended for the use of
parking of a motor vehicle which has a means of access to a public street.
   PERMITTED PREMISES. The platted lot or part of such lot or unplatted parcel
of land on which a dwelling unit permitted as a short-term rental is located.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The rental or lease of a dwelling unit in whole or in
part for a period of at least 28 consecutive days, but no more than 90
consecutive days. The rental or lease of a dwelling unit for less than 28
consecutive days is prohibited in all residential districts.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE. The license issued by the city for the rental or
lease of a dwelling unit for short-term rental.
   TENANT. Any person who is occupying a dwelling unit under any agreement,
lease, or contract, whether oral or written, which requires the payment of
money as rent for the use of the dwelling unit.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No property, structure or dwelling may be used as a short-term rental
unless an application is submitted, and a license is first granted by the city.
Short-term rentals located within the Central Business District shall not be
subject to the restrictions of this section except with respect to the
registered agent and short-term tax requirements as contained herein. The
license shall be entered on a short-term rental registry.
   (B)   Application. A person desiring to undertake or allow the short-term
rental of a dwelling unit in the city shall apply to the Building Official for
a short-term rental license. The application shall by submitted by the owner.
The license application shall be on a form prescribed by the city and include
all required information.
   (C)   Criteria for issuance.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of a short-term rental license hereunder, the
applicant shall ensure and the Building Official will verify the following
criteria are met:
      (2)   The licensee accurately certifies on the application form that all
applicable items found in this section are satisfied. In addition, the
certfication shall constitute an ongoing assurance of compliance herewith. Such
items shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   A policy number for a valid, in-force liability insurance policy
is provided to the city;
         (b)   That all garbage and rubbish are stored in compliance with
city's solid waste ordinance;
         (c)   Compliance with all applicable provisions of the city code;
         (d)   Compliance with any special conditions established in the
license.
         (e)   The dwelling must be materially used for its owner's enjoyment,
which shall mean to state the owner shall accurately certify and document to
the city annually that the dwelling has been physically inhabited by the owner
for more days and nights than it has been rented.
         (f)   Short-term rental tax.
            (i)   Minnesota Sales Tax under M.S. § 297A.61: Short-term rentals
must charge sales tax on lodging.
            (ii)   City of La Crescent lodging tax ordinance No. 573:
Properties in the City of La Crescent who rent short-term rentals are required
by law to comply with the City of La Crescent's lodging tax ordinance (
Ch. 119).
   (D)   License fee. Each application shall be accompanied by payment in full
of the required license fee. The annual license fee shall be determined by the
City Council and set forth in the city fee schedule. The fee shall not be
prorated.
   (E)   Number of bedrooms. Each license shall indicate the number of bedrooms
which are contained in the dwelling. No license shall advertise the dwelling as
containing any more than the identified number of bedrooms. The number of
bedrooms, as indicated on the license, shall be used for all calculations
required herein.
   (F)   Issuance of short-term rental license.
      (1)   If the Building Official determines that an applicant has met the
requirements for issuance of a short-term rental license, the Building Official
shall issue the applicant a short-term rental license.
      (2)   If the Building Official determines that an applicant has not met
the requirements for issuance of a short-term rental license, the Building
Official shall endorse on such application his/her disapproval and his/her
reasons for the same and provide the application and recommendation for denial
to the City Administrator. The City Administrator may either:
         (a)   Deny the application and return the endorsed application to the
applicant to notify the applicant that his/her application is denied and that
no license will be issued; or
         (b)   Direct the Building Official to issue the applicant a short-term
rental license.
   (G)   Expiration of license. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
all short-term rental licenses shall expire annually on December 31 of each
year unless suspended or revoked earlier. Licenses granted hereunder constitute
a revocable, limited right. Nothing herein shall be construed as granting a
vested property right. No party shall have any expectancy of re-issuance of any
license after its annual expiration.
   (H)   Renewal of license. Applications for renewal of an existing short-term
rental license shall be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the
current short-term rental license. All such applications shall be submitted to
the Building Official on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by
the required fee.
   (I)   License not transferable. No short-term rental license shall be
transferable to another person or to another dwelling unit. Every person
holding a short-term rental license shall give notice in writing to the
Building Official within five business days after having legally transferred or
otherwise disposed of the legal control of any dwelling unit for which a short-
term rental license has been issued. Such notice shall include the name and
address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such dwelling
unit.
   (J)   Resident agent required. No short-term rental license shall be issued
without the designation of a local agent. The agent must live within 30 miles
of the dwelling unit. The agent may, but is not required to be, the owner. One
person may be the agent for multiple dwelling units. At all times, the agent
shall have on file with the Building Official a primary and a secondary phone
number as well as a current address. The agent or a representative of the agent
shall be available 24 hours a day during all times that the dwelling unit is
being rented at the primary or secondary phone number to respond immediately to
complaints and contacts relating to the dwelling unit. The Building Official
shall be notified in writing within two business days of any change of agent.
The agent shall be responsible for the activities of the tenants and
maintenance and upkeep of the dwelling unit and shall be authorized and
empowered to receive service of notice of violation of the provisions of city
ordinances and state law, to receive orders, and to institute remedial action
to affect such orders, and to accept all service of process pursuant to law.
   (K)   Denial of short-term rental license. Any applicant aggrieved by the
denial of a short-term rental license, or the non-renewal of an existing
license may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the City Administrator within ten days after the date of issuance of the
written denial, a written statement requesting a hearing before the City
Council and setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. A hearing shall be
held within 60 days of receipt of the request. Notice of the hearing shall be
given by the City Administrator in writing, setting forth the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his/
her last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.05 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.
   (A)   (1)   No owner shall undertake or allow the short-term rental of a
dwelling unit in a Residential Use District that does not comply with all
applicable city ordinances, the laws of the State of Minnesota, and this
section. It shall be the owner's responsibility to ensure that all tenants,
occupants, and guests comply with the following:
      (2)   Maximum overnight occupancy. The number of overnight occupants
allowed for a short-term rental shall be limited as set out below. Children
under three years of age are not to be counted toward the limit.
      (3)   For lots of 1/2 acre or more if the livable square footage of the
primary building is:
         (a)   Under 1,500 square feet:         6 occupants
         (b)   1,500 square feet to 1,999 square feet:   8 occupants
         (c)   2,000 square feet or more:         12 occupants
      (4)   For lots of less an 1/2 acre:
         (a)   Under 1,500 square feet:         4 occupants
         (b)   1,500 square feet to 1,999 square feet:   6 occupants
         (c)   2,000 square feet or more:         8 occupants
      (5)   Off-street parking. The permitted premises shall contain off-street
parking spaces equal in number to the number of bedrooms contained in the
dwelling unit.
      (6)   Maintenance standards. Every dwelling unit used for short-term
rental shall conform to all building requirements of the city code, licenses
issued by the city, and the laws of the State of Minnesota.
      (7)   Rental limit. No dwelling unit shall be rented for a period of less
than 28 consecutive days.
      (8)   Occupants. The agent shall maintain a fully executed lease for all
tenants and a list of all current occupants of each dwelling unit. The agent
shall make the lease and list available to city staff and/or law enforcement
upon request. In addition, a copy of the fully executed lease shall be kept
available at the dwelling unit at all times during the lease term.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.06 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Disorderly conduct prohibited. Disorderly conduct is prohibited on all
permitted premises. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to ensure that
all tenants occupying the permitted premises and their guests conduct
themselves in such a manner as not to cause the permitted premises to be
disorderly. For purposes of this section, disorderly conduct includes but is
not limited to, a violation of any of the following statutes or ordinances:
      (1)   M.S. §§ 609.75 - 609.76, which prohibits gambling;
      (2)   M.S. §§ 609.321 - 609.324, which prohibits prostitution and acts
relating thereto;
      (3)   M.S. §§ 152.01 - 152.027, which prohibits the unlawful sale or
possession of controlled substances;
      (4)   M.S. § 340A.401, which prohibits the unlawful sale of alcoholic
beverages;
      (5)   M.S. § 340A.503, which prohibits the underage consumption of
alcoholic beverages;
      (6)   M.S. § 609.595, which prohibits damage to property;
      (7)   M.S. §§ 97B.021, 97B.045, 609.66-609.67, and 624.712-624.716, and
§§ 130.16, 130.19, 130.20, 130.22 of the City Code, which prohibits the
unlawful possession, transportation, sale, or use of a weapon;
      (8)   M.S. § 609.72, which prohibits disorderly conduct, when the
violation disturbs the peace and quiet of the other occupants of the permitted
premises or other surrounding premises;
      (9)   M.S. § 152.027, subd. 4, which prohibits the unlawful sale or
possession of small amounts of marijuana;
      (10)   M.S. § 152.092, which prohibits the unlawful possession or use of
drug paraphernalia;
      (11)   Minnesota State Fire Code 302 and 307-307.5, which limit
recreational fires to no larger than three feet by three feet, natural wood
only, attended until extinguished, conditions permitting; and
      (12)   M.S. §§ 624.20-624.21 which prohibits exploding fireworks.
   (B)   Determination of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   A determination that the permitted premises have been used in a
disorderly manner as described in this section shall be made by the Building
Official upon evidence to support such a determination. It shall not be
necessary that criminal charges are brought to support a determination of
disorderly use, nor shall the fact of dismissal or acquittal of such a criminal
charge operate as a bar to adverse permit action under this section.
      (2)   Upon determination by the Building Official that a permitted
premises was used in a disorderly manner, as described in this section, the
Building Official shall notify the owner and agent by certified mail of the
violation and direct the owner and/or agent to take appropriate action to
prevent further violations.
      (3)   If a second instance of disorderly use of the permitted premises
occurs within one year of an incident for which notice in this section was
given, the Building Official shall notify the owner and agent by certified mail
of the violation and shall also require the owner and agent to submit within 15
days a written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken, by the
owner and/or agent to prevent further disorderly use of the permitted premises.
      (4)   If a third incident of disorderly use of the permitted premises
occurs within one year after the second of any two previous instances of
disorderly use for which notices were sent to the owner and agent pursuant to
this subsection, the short-term rental license may be revoked, suspended, or
not renewed. An action to revoke, suspend, or not renew a license under this
section shall be initiated by the Building Official in the manner described
below.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574 passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.07 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   Every short-term rental license issued under this chapter is
subject to suspension or revocation by the City Administrator for any violation
of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city or the law of the state.
      (2)   The Building Official may recommend suspension or revocation of a
short-term rental license to the City Administrator. The City Administrator
shall review the recommendation and the reasons supporting the recommendation
and may suspend or revoke the license. The City Administrator shall provide
written notice to the owner and agent of the suspension or revocation. The
notice shall inform the owner and agent of the right to appeal the decision of
the City Administrator to the City Council.
      (3)   Any applicant aggrieved by the suspension or revocation of a short-
term rental license may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken
by filing with the City Administrator within ten days after date of issuance of
the written suspension or revocation notice, a written statement requesting a
hearing before the City Council and setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal. A hearing shall be held within 60 days of receipt of the request.
Notice of the hearing shall be given by the City Administrator in writing,
setting forth the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the applicant at his/her last known address at least ten
days prior to the date set for hearing.
   (B)   Effect of suspension or revocation. If a short-term rental license is
suspended or revoked, it shall be unlawful for anyone to thereafter allow any
new short-term rental occupancies of the dwelling until such time as a valid
short-term rental license is restored by the city.
   (C)   Effect of revocation. No person who has had a license revoked under
this section shall be issued a short-term rental license for one year from the
date of revocation.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.08 APPEAL.
   The decision of the City Council to deny, suspend, or revoke a short-term
rental license following a hearing as provided can be appealed by petitioning
the Minnesota Court of Appeals by a writ of certiorari.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.09 POSTING.
   The following language shall be posted at or near the entrance of every
short-term rental dwelling unit. The posting shall be printed in a minimum 18-
point font.
      “All short-term rental of dwelling units shall comply with this
ordinance. These posted regulations are a summary of a portion of the short-
term rental regulations. For additional information please refer to Ordinance
No. 574 or contact City Hall.
      No owner shall undertake the short-term rental of any dwelling unit
without a city license.
      A copy of the lease shall be available at the dwelling unit at all times
during the lease term.
      Every permitted premises shall have an agent within 30 miles available
during all times the unit is rented, 24 hours a day at the following phone
numbers: _____ _ and/or ______ to respond immediately to complaints and
contacts relating to the dwelling unit.
      The maximum overnight occupancy for this dwelling unit is: ____
occupants. Not counting children under three years of age.
      Disorderly conduct is prohibited. All disorderly conduct will be reported
to the property's agent and the La Crescent Police Department. Increased noise
regulations are in place between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.
      Littering is prohibited.
      Recreational fires are limited.
      Any violation of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor.”
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.10 COMPLIANCE.
   If the city has reason to believe that any provisions in this chapter are
not being complied with, the city has the authority to require the submittal of
an executed lease or other information needed to establish compliance.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who undertakes or allows any violation of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine or by imprisonment, or both, in accordance with the provisions of
Minnesota State Statutes.
(Ord. 567, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. 574, passed 9-11-23)
CHAPTER 121: CANNABIS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
121.01   Administration
   
121.02   Registration of cannabis businesses
   
121.03   Requirements for cannabis businesses
   
121.04   Temporary cannabis events
   
121.05   Use in public places
   
121.06   Performance standards
§ 121.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. City of La Crescent makes the following
legislative findings:
      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 342, which authorizes City of La Crescent to protect the public health,
safety, welfare of City of La Crescent residents by regulating cannabis
businesses within the legal boundaries of City of La Crescent.
      (2)   City of La Crescent finds and concludes that the proposed
provisions are appropriate and lawful land use regulations for City of La
Crescent, that the proposed amendments will promote the community's interest in
reasonable stability in zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed
provisions are in the public interest and for the public good.
   (B)   (1)   Authority and jurisidiction. The City of La Crescent has the
authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to:
         (a)   M.S. § 342.13(c), regarding the authority of a local unit of
government to adopt reasonable restrictions of the time, place, and manner of
the operation of a cannabis business provided that such restrictions do not
prohibit the establishment or operation of cannabis businesses.
         (b)   M.S. § 342.22, regarding the local registration and enforcement
requirements of state-licensed cannabis retail businesses and lower-potency
hemp edible retail businesses.
         (c)   M.S. § 152.0263, Subd. 5, regarding the use of cannabis in
public places.
         (d)   M.S. § 462.357, regarding the authority of a local authority to
adopt zoning ordinances.
      (2)   Chapter shall be applicable to the legal boundaries of City of La
Crescent.
   (C)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
   (D)   Enforcement. The City of La Crescent, through its police department
and building and inspections department, is responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements constitutes a
misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. Violations of this chapter can
occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a regulated
activity listed in this chapter.
   (E)   Definitions. Unless otherwise noted in this section, words and phrases
contained in M.S. § 342.01 and the rules promulgated pursuant to any of these
acts, shall have the same meanings in this chapter.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis
plants within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to
mature plant, harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label
immature plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis
businesses, transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the
same premises, and perform other actions approved by the office.
      CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES. A retail location and the retail location(s)
of mezzobusinesses with a retail operations endorsement, microbusinesses with a
retail operations endorsement, medical combination businesses operating a
retail location, excluding lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
      CANNABIS RETAILER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
      DAYCARE. A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human
Services to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child's own
home for gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
      LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. As defined under M.S. § 342.01, Subd. 50.
      OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as OCM in this chapter.
      PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
      PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL. OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business
license for applicants who qualify under M.S. § 342.17.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
      RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. As defined under M.S. § 245.462, Subd.
23.
      RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the City of La
Crescent to a state-licensed cannabis retail business.
      SCHOOL. A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05 or a nonpublic
school that must meet the reporting requirements under M.S. § 120A.24.
      STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota's
Office of Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
(Ord. 587, passed 12-9-24)
§ 121.02 REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Consent to registering of cannabis businesses.
      (1)   No individual or entity may operate a state-licensed cannabis
retail business within City of La Crescent without first registering with City
of La Crescent.
      (2)   Any state-licensed cannabis retail business that sells to a
customer or patient without valid retail registration shall incur a civil
penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state shall not issue
a license to any cannabis business to operate in Indian country, as defined in
United States Code, Title 18, § 1151, of a Minnesota Tribal government without
the consent of the Tribal government.
      (4)   Any cannabis retailer that proposes to occupy or construct a new
building for the purposes of operating a cannabis retail business must prepare
and submit the appropriate building permit and other applicable applications
concurrently to the required city registration application. The applicant
agrees that the application for registration shall be conditional and will only
become effective upon the certificate of occupancy being granted at the
completion of construction. The conditional registration shall be communicated
to the OCM during the zoning compliance check process identified in division
(B). The conditional registration shall be counted towards the city's
identified allocation in division (F) of this section.
   (B)   Compliance checks prior to retail registration.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of a cannabis retail business registration, City
of La Crescent shall conduct a preliminary zoning verification to ensure
compliance with local ordinances.
      (2)   Pursuant to M.S. Chapter 342, within 30 days of receiving a copy of
a state license application from OCM, City of La Crescent shall certify on a
form provided by OCM whether a proposed cannabis retail business complies with
local zoning ordinances and, if applicable, whether the proposed business
complies with the State Fire Code and Building Code.
   (C)   Registration and application procedure.
      (1)   Fees.
         (a)   A registration fee, as established in City of La Crescent's fee
schedule, shall be charged to applicants depending on the type of retail
business license applied for.
         (b)   An initial retail registration fee shall not exceed $500 or half
the amount of an initial state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever is
less. The initial registration fee shall include the initial retail
registration fee and the first annual renewal fee.
         (c)   Any renewal retail registration fee imposed by City of La
Crescent shall be charged at the time of the second renewal and each subsequent
renewal thereafter.
         (d)   A renewal retail registration fee shall not exceed $1,000 or
half the amount of a renewal state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever
is less.
         (e)   A medical combination business operating an adult-use retail
location may only be charged a single registration fee, not to exceed the
lesser of a single retail registration fee, defined under this section, of the
adult-use retail business.
      (2)   Application submittal. The City of La Crescent shall issue a retail
registration to a state-licensed cannabis retail business that adheres to the
requirements of M.S. § 342.22.
         (a)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the City of La Crescent. Said form shall
include, but is not limited to:
            1.   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
            2.   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
            3.   The address and pared ID for the property which the retail
registration is sought;
            4.   Certification that the applicant complies with the
requirements of local ordinances established pursuant to M.S. § 342.13.
         (b)   The applicant shall include with the form:
            1.   The application fee as required in division (C)(1);
            2.   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM
license preapproval;
            3.   If new development, summary of proposed project and timeline
for construction. Description must include building permits or approvals
identified by the city's Building and Zoning Department.
         (c)   If an application is for an existing location, and no other land
use or zoning approvals are necessary, the city shall determine that the
application for registration is complete or request additional information from
the applicant. The City of La Crescent shall inform the applicant as such,
process the application fees, and forward the application to the Building and
Inspections Department for approval or denial.
            1.   If the registration sought is associated with a new
development and the building is not yet constructed, the applicant must obtain
a conditional registration concurrently to the land use application process.
The conditional registration will become effective once the applicable land use
applications are deemed complete and approved. The conditional registration
shall count towards the city's registration allocation identified in division
(F). In order to obtain a conditional registration, the city reserves the right
to require an applicant to enter into a development agreement with the city to
ensure the compliance with all applicable ordinances and state law.
            2.   The conditional registration may be converted to a full
registration when 1) all land use approvals are obtained; 2) all conditions of
the land use approval process are met; 3) site work is complete; 4) the
building is constructed; and 5) a certificate of occupancy for the identified
location is issued. If the certificate of occupancy is not obtained within the
timeframe contained in the development agreement, the city will have the option
to rescind and revoke any conditional registration without recourse or
liability.
         (d)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
      (3)   Application approval.
         (a)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not
be approved if the cannabis retail business would exceed the maximum number of
registered cannabis retail businesses permitted under division (F).
         (b)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not
be approved or renewed if the applicant is unable to meet the requirements of
this chapter.
         (c)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application that meets
the requirements of this chapter shall be approved.
      (4)   Annual compliance checks.
         (a)   The City of La Crescent shall complete at minimum one compliance
check per calendar year of every cannabis business to assess if the business
meets age verification requirements, as required under M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 4
(b) and M.S. § 342.24 and this chapter.
         (b)   The City of La Crescent shall conduct at minimum one unannounced
age verification compliance check at least once per calendar year.
         (c)   Age verification compliance checks shall involve persons at
least 17 years of age but under the age of 21 who, with the prior written
consent of a parent or guardian if the person is under the age of 18, attempt
to purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-
potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products under the direct
supervision of a law enforcement officer or an employee of the local unit of
government.
         (d)   Any failures under this section must be reported to the Office
of Cannabis Management.
      (5)   Location change. A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be
required to submit a new application for registration under division (C)(2) if
it seeks to move to a new location still within the legal boundaries of City of
La Crescent.
   (D)   Renewal of registration.
      (1)   The City of La Crescent shall renew an annual registration of a
state-licensed cannabis retail business at the same time OCM renews the
cannabis retail business' license.
      (2)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall apply to renew
registration on a form established by City of La Crescent.
      (3)   A cannabis retail registration issued under this chapter shall not
be transferred.
      (4)   Renewal fees. The City of La Crescent may charge a renewal fee for
the registration starting at the second renewal, as established in City of La
Crescent's fee schedule.
      (5)   Renewal application. The application for renewal of a retail
registration shall include, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Items required under division (C)(2) of this section.
   (E)   Suspension of registration.
      (1)   When suspension is warranted. The City of La Crescent may suspend a
cannabis retail business's registration if it violates the ordinance of City of
La Crescent or poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public.
The City of La Crescent shall immediately notify the cannabis retail business
in writing the grounds for the suspension.
      (2)   Notification to OCM. The City of La Crescent shall immediately
notify the OCM in writing the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide City
of La Crescent and cannabis business retailer a response to the complaint
within seven calendar days and perform any necessary inspections within 30
calendar days.
      (3)   Length of suspension.
         (a)   The suspension of a cannabis retail business registration may be
for up to 30 calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license for a longer
period. The business may not make sales to customers if their registration is
suspended.
         (b)   The City of La Crescent may reinstate registration if it
determines that the violations have been resolved.
         (c)   The City of La Crescent shall reinstate the registration if OCM
determines that the violation(s) have been resolved.
      (4)   Civil penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 5(e) the City of
La Crescent may impose a civil penalty, as specified in the City of La
Crescent's fee schedule, for registration violations, not to exceed $2,000.
   (F)   Limiting of registrations. The City of La Crescent shall limit the
number of cannabis retail businesses to three.
(Ord. 587, passed 12-9-24)
§ 121.03 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Minimum buffer requirements.
      (1)   The City of La Crescent shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within 475 feet of a school.
      (2)   The City of La Crescent shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within 250 feet of a daycare.
      (3)   The City of La Crescent shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within 250 feet of a residential treatment facility.
      (4)   The City of La Crescent shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within 250 feet of an attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field.
      (5)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.367, Subd. 14, nothing in division (A) shall
prohibit an active cannabis business or a cannabis business seeking
registration from continuing operation at the same site if a school/daycare/
residential treatment facility/attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors moves within the minimum buffer zone.
   (B)   Limits on location. Distances shall be computed by direct measurement
from the nearest property line of the land use listed above to the nearest
portion of the building being used for the cannabis business. Distances shall
be verified by the applicant and confirmed by the person(s) responsible for
enforcing this chapter, via a method deemed acceptable by City of La Crescent.
   (C)   Zoning and land use.
      (1)   Cultivation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cultivation are permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning
districts:
         (a)   I, Industrial District.
      (2)   Cannabis manufacturer. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cannabis manufacturer are permitted as a conditional use in the following
zoning districts:
         (a)   I, Industrial District.
      (3)   Hemp manufacturer. Businesses licensed or endorsed for low-potency
hemp edible manufacturers permitted as a conditional use in the following
zoning districts:
         (a)   I, Industrial District.
      (4)   Wholesale. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for wholesale
are permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning districts:
         (a)   I, Industrial District.
      (5)   Cannabis retail. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cannabis retail are a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
         (a)   C-1, Commercial District;
         (b)   CBD-1 and CBD-2, Central Business District;
         (c)   Commercial-planned development overlay, if waiver is granted, or
as explicitly identified within the planned development agreement.
      (6)   Cannabis transportation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed
for transportation are permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning
districts:
         (a)   I, Industrial District.
      (7)   Cannabis delivery. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
delivery are permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning districts:
         (a)   C-1, Commercial District.
   (D)   Hours of operation. Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sale of
cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or
hemp-derived consumer products between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
seven days per week.
   (E)   Advertising. Cannabis businesses are permitted to erect signs in
compliance with City of La Crescent Ordinance No. 531, codified as city code
Ch. 152.
   (F)   No cannabis business shall be allowed in any residentially zoned
district.
(Ord. 587, passed 12-9-24)
§ 121.04 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   License or permit required for temporary cannabis events.
      (1)   Licensed required. A license or permit is required to be issued and
approved by City of La Crescent prior to holding a temporary cannabis event.
      (2)   Registration and application procedure. A registration fee, as
established in City of La Crescent's fee schedule, shall be charged to
applicants for temporary cannabis events.
      (3)   Application submittal and review. The City of La Crescent shall
require an application for temporary cannabis events.
         (a)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the City of La Crescent. Said form shall
include, but is not limited to:
            1.   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
            2.   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
            3.   Site plan of event space, including location and number of
access points;
            4.   Proposed capacity of event space; and
            5.   Other information as required by the city based on the type or
size of the event.
         (b)   The applicant shall include with the form:
            1.   The application fee as required in division (A)(2);
            2.   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application,
submitted pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, Subd. 2; and
            3.   The application shall be submitted to the City Clerk or
designee for review. If the designee determines that a submitted application is
incomplete, they shall return the application to the applicant with the notice
of deficiencies.
         (c)   The application shall be submitted to the City of La Crescent,
or other designee for review. If the designee determines that a submitted
application is incomplete, they shall return the application to the applicant
with the notice of deficiencies.
         (d)   Once an application is considered complete, the designee shall
inform the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the Building and Inspections Department for approval or denial.
         (e)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
         (f)   The application for a license for a temporary cannabis event
shall meet the following standards:
            1.   Liability insurance satisfactory to City of La Crescent;
            2.   Minimum buffer zone required. A temporary cannabis event shall
provide a minimum buffer zone from the following uses:
               a.   Four hundred seventy-five feet from a school;
               b.   Two hundred fifty feet of a daycare;
               c.   Two hundred fifty feet of a residential treatment facility;
               d.   Two hundred fifty feet of an attraction within a public
park that is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic
field.
            3.   Temporary cannabis events shall only occur between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless extended by the City Council with approval
of a special event permit.
            4.   Adequate security for the event is in place to ensure
compliance with the requirements of state law at applicant's sole expense.
         (g)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that meets the
requirements of this section shall be approved.
         (h)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that does not meet the
requirements of this section shall be denied. The City of La Crescent shall
notify the applicant of the standards not met and basis for denial.
   (B)   Temporary cannabis events shall only be held at locations approved by
La Crescent City Council.
(Ord. 587, passed 12-9-24)
§ 121.05 USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation unless the premises is an establishment or an event
licensed to permit on-site consumption of adult-use.
(Ord. 587, passed 12-9-24)
§ 121.06 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   Operation of a cannabis business of the types established by M.S. § 342.10
within the city shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and the
following:
   (A)   Building code. The cannabis business shall comply with Minnesota State
Building Code.
   (B)   Zoning ordinance. The cannabis business shall comply with the
provisions of zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Ventilation. A cannabis business shall be ventilated so that the odor
of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the
exterior of the cannabis business at the property line.
   (D)   Age limitations. No person under 21 years of age shall be within the
cannabis business premises.
   (E)   Public view.
      (1)   All activities of a cannabis business businesses, including,
without limitation, cultivating, growing, processing, displaying,
manufacturing, selling, and storage, shall be conducted out of public view.
      (2)   No cannabis or paraphernalia shall be displayed or kept in a
business so as to be visible from outside the licensed premises.
   (F)   Prohibited activities.
      (1)   Consumption or use of cannabis products onsite of a cannabis retail
business is prohibited unless an onsite license is first obtained.
      (2)   There shall be no outdoor events or sales associated with a
cannabis business; all such activities shall occur within a principal or
accessory building, including temporary structures in compliance.
      (3)   No cannabis business shall occupy a residential dwelling unit.
   (G)   Odor mitigation. All cannabis cultivation operations, production and
processing facilities, including but not limited to any: drying, aging,
trimming and packing facilities shall be equipped with the following odor
mitigation measures:
      (1)   Installation and maintenance of activated carbon filters on all
exhaust outlets to the building exteriors.
      (2)   Location of exhaust outlets a minimum of ten feet from the property
line and ten feet above finished grade.
      (3)   Maintenance of negative air pressure within the facility, or an
alternative odor control system approved by the person(s) responsible for
enforcing this chapter, based upon a mechanical engineer licensed in the State
of Minnesota, demonstrating the alternative system will control odor equally or
better than the required activated carbon filtration system.
      (4)   All cultivation sites shall utilize dust control measures on access
roads and all ground disturbing activities.
   (H)   Security/theft mitigation.
      (1)   A plan to prevent individuals from loitering on the premises of the
business if they are not engaging in activity expressly related to the cannabis
business.
      (2)   Twenty-four-hour emergency contact information for the owner or an
on-site employee which shall be provided to the La Crescent Police Department.
      (3)   A professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm system.
      (4)   Except for live cannabis plants being cultivated at a cannabis
cultivation facility, and limited amounts of cannabis for display purposes, all
cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a secured and locked
structure, and in a secured and locked safe room, safe, or vault, and in a
manner as to prevent diversion, theft or loss.
      (5)   Twenty-four-hour security cameras to monitor all entrances and
exits to the cannabis business, all interior spaces open and accessible to the
public, and all interior spaces where cannabis, cash, or currency is being
stored for any period of time on a regular basis. The holder of the cannabis
license shall be responsible for ensuring that the security cameras footage is
accessible. The footage shall be retained for a minimum of 90 days and shall be
made available to the person(s) responsible for enforcing this chapter, as well
as the La Crescent Police Department upon demand.
      (6)   Sensors shall be installed to detect entry/exit from all secure
areas.
      (7)   Any bars installed on the windows/doors of a cannabis business
shall be installed only on the interior of the building.
(Ord. 587, passed 12-9-24)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Curfew
   
130.02   Trespassing
   
130.03   Certain acts deemed to be trespass
   
130.04   Camping on city property and city right-of-way
Firearms
   
130.15   Definitions
   
130.16   Use of firearms prohibited
   
130.17   Possession while influenced by drugs
   
130.18   Possession prohibited in public places and gatherings
   
130.19   Ownership of certain weapons prohibited
   
130.20   Sales, gifts or delivery of weapons and ammunition
   
130.21   Permit for military-type and assault weapons
   
130.22   Permits for carrying firearms
   
130.23   Application for permit to carry firearms
   
130.24   Fees
   
130.25   Stopping of persons and searching for weapons
Cannabis
   
130.30   Prohibition of cannabis use in public places
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 CURFEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly, threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household.
Includes, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment,
seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department personnel,
and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility
company due to a natural or man-made calamity.
   OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by police dispatcher.
   PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT, OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
   PRIMARY CARE OR CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing food,
clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor. The person
providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another minor.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Curfew shall be imposed as follows.
      (1)   Tier one. Youths, 15 years old through 17 years old on weeknights,
Sunday through Thursday: 11:00 p.m., weekend nights, Fridays and Saturdays: 12:
30 a.m. During summer, June 1 through August 31 (same as weekend nights): 12:30
a.m. All times are official time.
      (2)   Tier two. Youths, 12 years old through 14 years old on weeknights,
Sunday through Thursday: 10:00 p.m., weekend nights, Fridays and Saturdays: 11:
00 p.m. During summer, June 1 through August 31 (same as weekend nights): 11:00
p.m. All times are official time.
      (3)   Tier three. Youths, 11 years old and under, all nights, weekdays
and weekends as well, 10:00 p.m., official time.
   The effective period of the curfew as it relates to any given day shall be
as hereinbefore prescribed from the initial effective time thereof until 5:00
a.m., official time, the following day.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent(s) or guardian, or
other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent(s), guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section,
if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful
business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to
or from the location of such business trade, profession, or occupation and the
minor's residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall
carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires
the minor's presence at work.
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a “school activity” by public
or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling
directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the
minor's parent(s), guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor.
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew.
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion. Minors who wish to exercise their
rights pursuant to this exception shall notify the city at least 24 hours in
advance of the start of the gathering or event where the rights are to be
exercised.
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's presence.
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian,
or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), guardian, or
other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one
of the exceptions to this section apply.
   (H)   Penalties.
      (1)   Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of this section shall be
sent a letter with a copy to his or her parents, indicating the nature of the
violation. For second and subsequent violations, any minor found to be in
violation of this section may be adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to
the dispositional alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as amended.
      (2)   Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced up to the maximum penalty
authorized by state law for a misdemeanor.
   (I)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city's designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Prior Code, §§ 3.20 - 3.22) (Ord. 278, passed 10-15-90; Am. Ord. 370, passed
5-8-00; Am. Ord. 433, passed 2-12-07)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02 TRESPASSING.
   (A)   The laws of the state defining trespassing and prescribing punishment
for convictions of violations of such regulations, as contained in M.S. §
609.605, as amended, are hereby incorporated herein by this reference as if set
out in full.
   (B)   In addition to the acts defined as trespassing under and pursuant to
the laws of the state and the acts and omissions elsewhere defined in the city
code as constituting trespassing, TRESPASS as here intended and defined is
extended to include and define as trespassers all persons who, without bona
fide purpose, infringe upon any public school property between the time from
one-half hour before until one-half hour after all scheduled school hours and
all supervised extra curricular activity, who have been directed by school
authority to leave such premises unless and until the presence thereon of any
such person is thereafter authorized in writing.
   (C)   The term SCHOOL AUTHORITY shall include all administrative faculty or
other personnel who the School Board, by resolution, shall designate as having
the authority to invoke the provisions of division (B) of this section.
(Prior Code, §§3.34 - 3.38) (Ord. 224, passed 2-20-84)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.03 CERTAIN ACTS DEEMED TO BE TRESPASS.
   (A)   Municipal swimming pool. Any person who enters the enclosure
surrounding the municipal swimming pool at a time other than when the pool
facility is open for use and is adequately staffed by regular guards and other
such employees, unless the person is a member of the maintenance department or
of the pool management team or other authorized person on the premises for
purposes of maintaining the same, making repairs or inspections thereon, shall
be deemed a trespasser.
   (B)   Municipal parks. Any person who shall enter upon the premises of a
municipal park or playing field between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise the
following day, unless he or she is found on a public street or thoroughfare
therein, shall be deemed a trespasser, except in cases where his or her
presence therein is by virtue of any existing emergency.
   (C)   City facilities. Any person who is found in or upon the maintenance
department premises, the wastewater treatment plant facilities, the city water
pumping and storage and other facilities, the city hall, the Fire Department
properties, unless he or she is a maintenance department employee or other
authorized agent of the city, or unless he or she is deemed a person performing
a legitimate service in connection with the maintenance of such facilities or
the utilities therein and thereon, shall be deemed a trespasser.
(Prior Code, §10.30(1) - (3))
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.04 CAMPING ON CITY PROPERTY AND CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Statement of purpose and intent.
      (1)   Settlements of unhoused individuals (also known as ENCAMPMENTS) in
public spaces are a growing social, public safety, and environmental concern
faced by cities of all sizes, including La Crescent. The dynamics of
homelessness, both short and longer term, are extremely complex reflecting a
wide range of contributing factors. It is recognized that, like many cities, La
Crescent's housing stock and price dynamics can create an affordability
challenge, causing unstable housing for some.
      (2)   In La Crescent and elsewhere, encampments have attracted and
involved people experiencing significant addiction and mental health
challenges, as well as individuals who seek to take advantage of those staying
in encampments. Among other problems, encampments tend to result in
accumulation of garbage and human waste, which creates a health hazard and can
contaminate the ground and water. Other typical hazards include drug
paraphernalia (i.e., needles) and unchecked fires associated with cooking,
often involving explosive fuels. Encampments are also prone to a heightened
physical safety and property risk for those in the encampments as well as those
who may be present in the same area. Encampments also tend to cause damage or
disruption to the soil and forested areas.
      (3)   Many in the community, including public and private entities, have
responded to the needs of those experiencing housing instability, providing
significant levels of resources and services.
      (4)   The city also has an obligation to make best efforts to provide a
safe and clean environment for other members of the community who want or need
to use public spaces. Access to parks, trails, schools, green spaces, public
transportation, and the protection of public utilities and infrastructure is a
community good for all.
      (5)   While many unhoused individuals are able to exist in a space that
does not cause public disruption, it is also true that encampments do create
significant harms, for both the unhoused individuals as well as members of the
public attempting to use the same spaces. Law enforcement personnel, who have
had primary responsibility for responding to encampment areas, need to be
supported with effective tools to address these complex situations. Encampments
and unsheltered individuals who create the most social harm cannot be ignored
or just moved from one space to the next.
   (B)   Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
      CITY. The City of La Crescent, Minnesota.
      CAMP OR CAMPING. To set up, or to remain in or at a campsite, including
the storage of personal belongings or camping materials.
      CAMPSITE. Any place where any tent, lean-to, shack, or other structure,
any vehicle or part thereof, or any bedding, sleeping bag, or other sleeping
matter, or any stove or fire is placed, established, or maintained for the
purpose of establishing or maintaining a temporary place to live.
      CAMPING MATERIALS. Includes, but is not limited to, tents, tarps,
umbrellas, metal sheeting, pallets, canopies, hammock, hunting blind, boxes,
huts, temporary shelters, or vehicles.
   (C)   Prohibition.
      (1)   No person may camp in or upon any city land or right-of-way, unless
otherwise specifically authorized by the La Crescent City Council, subject to
the enforcement requirements in §
130.99(C).
      (2)   Any camping or campsite materials or personal property associated
with a camping area that is in violation of this section may be removed or
cleaned up by the city or its designated contractors.
(Ord. 586, passed 10-14-24)
FIREARMS
§ 130.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMMUNITION. Any complete round prepared for insertion in and propulsion from
any firearm.
   DEALER. A person licensed to sell, manufacture or repair firearms.
   MILITARY-TYPE WEAPON USED IN OFFICIALLY RECOGNIZED COMPETITION. Includes its
ammunition and shall be weapons used in competition regulated and supervised by
a target shooting club, pistol club, or sportsmen's club, which is duly
authorized to purchase or receive firearms from the United States. Any such
weapon shall be kept in a secure place.
   PUBLIC GATHERINGS and PUBLIC PLACE. Any demonstration, picketing activity or
group protest of any location, whether out of doors or indoors, including
buildings not ordinarily public places, which on the occasion of the gathering
has present five or more unrelated persons; or any building or establishment,
where the business, social or governmental activity conducted is generally held
open to the public; specifically including such locations as governmental
buildings, meeting halls, centers, or art and culture, places of amusement,
liquor or beer establishments and restaurants. PUBLIC PLACES and PUBLIC
GATHERINGS shall not include sporting goods outlets or private residences, or
the regulated activities of target shooting clubs, sportsmen's clubs or the
regulated activities of military or veterans organizations, or when
specifically authorized by the city for gun training programs, gun show parades
or other public events.
   SECURED CONTAINER. A locked case having no mechanical features designed for
use and containing no other non-related objects.
(Prior Code, § 3.01)
§ 130.16 USE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate
limits of the city to own, possess, carry or have in his or her custody or
control any firearm or ammunition unless the person can meet the exceptions
listed in the following divisions of this section.
   (B)   Exceptions. No person shall be able to use firearms in conformance
with this subchapter unless the person meets the following stipulations:
      (1)   The person shall be at least 18 years of age and shall hold a
firearms safety certificate recognized by the State Department of Conservation
or be enrolled in a program to qualify for the certificate.
      (2)   The person shall not within the previous five years have been:
         (a)   Convicted of a felony or drug addiction under the laws of this
state or any other jurisdiction; or a violation of this chapter or any law
relating to weapons.
         (b)   Committed under the statutory procedures of this state or any
other jurisdiction to any institution for treatment of mental, drug or
alcoholic condition.
   (C)   Discharge of firearms prohibited. Discharge of any firearms within the
city limits is prohibited, including on lands designated by the federal
government as wildlife and game refuge within the city limits, and this
prohibition is additional to any regulations now in effect by the federal
government governing the discharge of firearms within a game refuge except such
use of a firearm is not prohibited by:
      (1)   a licensed law enforcement officer or his or her duly deputized
assistant in the performance of duties; or
      (2)   in self defense by a person duly licensed to carry the firearm.
(Prior Code, § 3.02)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.17 POSSESSION WHILE INFLUENCED BY DRUGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of, carry or
transport any firearm or ammunition while under the influence of any alcoholic
beverage, or hallucinatory chemical, or narcotics, or other drugs.
(Prior Code, § 3.03)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.18 POSSESSION PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACE AND GATHERINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except law enforcement or military
personnel while in the course of their duties, or any owner or agent while he
or she is present at a business place operated by him or her, or private person
with permits who are required by their occupation to be present, to possess or
control any firearms or ammunition while such person is present at any public
place or public gathering within the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.04)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.19 OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to own, keep,
carry or have in his or her custody or control any of the following:
      (1)   Military type or assault type weapons, unless the person in
possession of such weapon has in his or her possession the permit provided in §
130.21.
      (2)   Any firearm or ammunition which the transferee knows or has
reasonable cause to believe has been stolen or transferred in violation of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement or
military personnel while engaged in the course of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.20 SALES, GIFTS OR DELIVERY OF WEAPONS AND AMMUNITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell, give or deliver
to any person:
   (A)   Any weapon prohibited under §
130.16 unless the weapon to be received is a military-type weapon or assault
weapon and the person to receive the weapon has secured the permit provided in
§
130.21.
   (B)   Any firearm or ammunition if such person is:
      (1)   Under the age of 18 years if the firearm is a long gun or under 21
years of age if the firearm is a hand gun, except for a legitimate firearm
activities set forth in §
130.16(B).
      (2)   Under the influence of alcohol, hallucinatory chemicals, narcotics
or other drugs.
      (3)   Prohibited from ownership, possession, custody or control of
firearms under §
130.16, and seller or giver knew or had reasonable cause to believe such person
was prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 3.06)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.21 PERMIT FOR MILITARY-TYPE AND ASSAULT WEAPONS.
   (A)   The owner or purchaser of a military-type or assault weapon may be
issued a permit by the Chief of Police for possession of firearms either as a
collector's item or as a military-type weapon used in officially recognized
competition, or assault weapon; provided, such person is not prohibited from
owning or possessing firearms under this subchapter.
   (B)   The application for such permit shall include:
      (1)   Name and residence of the owner.
      (2)   Description of the owner as to date of birth, height, weight, color
of eyes and hair.
      (3)   A description of the weapon as to caliber, make, model, aerial
number or such other identifying data as may be appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 3.07)
§ 130.22 PERMITS FOR CARRYING FIREARMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to carry on his or
her person or transport in any vehicle any firearm or ammunition without a
permit for carrying, except:
      (1)   Any unloaded firearm being transported by a person not in a vehicle
directly to or from his or her home, place of business, gun dealer, gunsmith or
place of target practice, gun club assembly or hunting area, or to or from any
place or gathering set forth in §
130.18 in a secured container without ammunition in the container.
      (2)   Transportation of an unloaded firearm in the locked trunk of a
vehicle, or if such vehicle shall not have a trunk, secured in the farthest
rear portion of the vehicle in an area not normally occupied by driver or
passengers.
      (3)   An unloaded long gun dismantled or transported in the manner
required by state statutes.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the
transport of firearms by persons who are regularly engaged in the lawful
manufacture, distribution or sale at retail or wholesale of such guns, or the
agents of any of them or to law enforcement officers or to military personnel
while in the course of their duties. Nor shall such provisions apply to any
person who is a non-resident of the city who is the holder of a permit to carry
a firearm upon his or her person or in a vehicle; provided, that such permit
was duly and properly issued by the city of his or her residence, and provided
such city be situated in the state, and has an ordinance or regulation
identical or similar in nature to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.08)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.23 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO CARRY FIREARMS.
   (A)   Required. Any person desiring a permit for carrying firearms shall
make application therefor to the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Contents. Such application shall require:
      (1)   The name, residence, place of employment and description of the
applicant as to the date of birth, height, color of hair and eyes, and a
description of each and every firearm to be covered by such permit, including
caliber, make, model and serial number.
      (2)   The completion of fingerprints by the Police Department.
      (3)   The submission of a 3" by 5" photograph of the applicant taken
within the past 12 months.
      (4)   Stated reason the permit to carry a firearm is needed.
   (C)   Background investigation done. Upon receipt of the application, the
Chief of Police shall make a background investigation of the applicant.
   (D)   Conditions for grant of permit. The background investigation shall be
deemed satisfactorily completed if the applicant:
      (1)   Is over the age of 21 years.
      (2)   Has not been convicted of a felony or other crime of violence under
the laws of this state or any other jurisdiction.
      (3)   Has not been convicted of any offense, excluding traffic offenses,
involving the applicant's use of intoxicating beverages or drugs.
      (4)   Has not been hospitalized for attempted suicide or mental or
emotional conditions involving the use of alcohol, hallucinatory chemicals or
drugs.
      (5)   Has a regular occupation or personal hazard requiring the
possession of firearms.
   (E)   Council may grant permits. In the event any applicant shall be denied
a permit on the basis of the background investigation, such applicant may apply
to the City Council for the issuance of such permit provided that:
      (1)   Any conviction of a felony or crime of violence shall not have
occurred within five years.
      (2)   The applicant can demonstrate by medical or character testimony
that his or her possession of firearms will not constitute a hazard to public
safety.
      (3)   The applicant shall prove a hazard requiring his or her carrying of
firearms.
      (4)   The application shall be in writing and received by the City Clerk-
Administrator not later than three days before the regular scheduled Council
meeting time.
   (F)   Revocation of permit. A permit issued to any person shall be revoked
by the Chief of Police at any time if such person becomes ineligible for such
permit for any of the reasons set forth in this section. In the event a person
issued a permit for occupational purposes changes occupation, that occupational
designation shall be amended.
(Prior Code, § 3.09)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.24 FEES.
   The fee for a background investigation check before issuance of a permit to
carry firearms shall be in the sum of $25 and such permit shall be renewable
annually before December 31 of any given year. The permit fee shall be paid to
the City Clerk before the issuance of a permit.
(Prior Code, § 3.10) (Ord. 316, passed 3-7-94)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.25 STOPPING OF PERSONS AND SEARCHING FOR WEAPONS.
   A police officer may stop any person abroad in a public place whom he or she
reasonably suspects is committing, has committed or is about to commit a felony
or any crime or offense involving the use of a weapon of any kind, or may
demand his or her name, address and explanation of his or her actions. When a
police officer has stopped a person for questioning or pursuant to this section
and reasonably suspects that he, she or anyone else is in danger of life or
limb, he or she may search such person for a dangerous weapon. If a police
officer finds such a weapon, or any other thing, the possession of which may
constitute a crime or offense, he or she may take and keep it until the
completion of the questioning at which time he or she shall either return it,
if lawfully possessed, or arrest such person.
(Prior Code, §3.11)
CANNABIS
§ 130.30 PROHIBITION OF CANNABIS USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   (1)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms CANNABIS
FLOWER, CANNABIS PRODUCTS, LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLES, and HEMP-DERIVED
CONSUMER PRODUCTS shall have the definitions given to them in M.S. § 342.01, as
it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, PUBLIC PLACE is defined as any indoor
or outdoor area that is used or held out for use by the public whether owned or
operated by public or private interests. Pursuant to M.S. § 152.0263, subd. 5,
PUBLIC PLACE does not include the following:
         (a)   A private residence, including a person’s curtilage or yard;
         (b)   Private property not generally accessible by the public; and
         (c)   The premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit on-
site consumption of cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, and hemp-derived consumer products.
   (B)   Public use prohibited. No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a
public place. A violation of this section shall be considered a petty
misdemeanor notwithstanding any other penalty provision in the city code.
(Ord. 572, passed 8-14-23)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of the §
130.03 of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be adjudicated of the
misdemeanor crime of trespass and shall be fined a sum as set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 10.31)
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§
130.15 through
130.25 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (C)(1), the
firearm or firearms of any person convicted of violating any of the provisions
of §§
130.15 through
130.25 shall be confiscated if such firearm or firearms were in possession of
the person at the time of the violation.
      (3)   Any and all permits issued to any person pursuant to the provisions
of §§
130.15 through
130.25 shall be revoked upon the conviction of that person of the violation of
any of the provisions of §§
130.15 through
130.25.
(Prior Code, § 3.12)
   (C)   (1)   Any violation of §
130.04 is deemed a misdemeanor, as defined in M.S. § 609.02, Subd. 3, currently
a crime for which a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more
than $1,000, or both, may be imposed.
      (2)   No person may be prosecuted under §
130.04 unless:
         (a)   The person has been informed of the various community resources,
available to the person;
         (b)   The person has been warned that their conduct is a violation of
§
130.04, subject to criminal prosecution. An individual who has been warned and
then relocates to another space that a reasonable person would understand is
also covered by §
130.04 is not entitled to a new warning; and
         (c)   No person shall be cited for violating §
130.04 unless such person continues to camp more than one hour after receiving
warning to leave by a law enforcement officer.
(Am. Ord. 586, passed 10-14-24)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND SHORELAND MANAGEMENT
      
152.   SIGN REGULATIONS
      
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
154.   ZONING REGULATIONS
      
155.   STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL
      
156.   EXTRACTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   State Building Code adopted
   
150.02   Opt-out of M.S. § 462.3593
Heritage Preservation
   
150.15   Declaration of public policy and purpose
   
150.16   Heritage Preservation Commission
   
150.17   Additional powers and duties of Commission
   
150.18   Designation of heritage preservation sites
   
150.19   Review of permits
   
150.20   Maintaining previous designations of a heritage preservation site
   
150.21   Violations
Plumbing Permits
   
150.30   Fee schedule established
   
150.31   Permit applications
   
150.32   Required inspections
Drainage and Erosion Control
   
150.40   Development
   
150.41   Land alteration
   
150.42   Building demolition
   
150.43   Violations and enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Codes adopted by reference.  The Minnesota State Building Code, as
adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59 to
16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established,
adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of
Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division is hereby
adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless
specifically adopted in this section. The Minnesota State Building Code is
hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out herein.
   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement.
      (1)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the codeshall
be in accordance with Minn. Rule Chapter 1300. The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 16B.62, and Subdivision
1, when so established by this section.
      (2)   The code enforcement agency is called the City of La Crescent.
      (3)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building
Official designated by the city to administer the code (M.S. § 16B.65,
Subdivision 1).
   (C)   Permits and fees.
      (1)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, and Subdivision 1.
      (2)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in
accordance with the fee schedules adopted by the city. In addition, a surcharge
fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in
accordance with M.S. § 16B.70.
   (D)   Violations and penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor
pursuant to M.S. § 16B.69.
   (E)   Building Code optional chapters. The Minnesota State Building Code,
established pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59 to 16B.75, allows the city to adopt by
reference and enforce certain chapters of the most current edition of the
Minnesota State Building Bode.
(Prior Code, §§ 14A.01 - 14A.04) (Am. Res. 08-02-04, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord.
392, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. 438, passed 1-28-08)
§ 150.02 OPT-OUT OF M.S. § 462.3593.
   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593 Subd. 9, the city opts-out
of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary
family health care dwellings.
(Ord. 506, passed 8-8-16)
HERITAGE PRESERVATION
§ 150.15 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the
preservation, protection, perpetuation and use of areas, places, buildings,
structures and other objects having special historical interest or value is a
public necessity, and is required in the interest of the health, safety,
welfare and prosperity of the people.
   (B)   The purpose is this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving sites and
structures which reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic,
political, visual or architectural history;
      (2)   Protect and enhance the city's appeal to residents, visitors and
tourists, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry;
      (3)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the
past; and
      (4)   Promote the preservation and continued use of historic sites and
structures for the education and general welfare of the people of the city.
(Ord. 275, passed 7-16-90)
§ 150.16 HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   Established. The Heritage Preservation Commission is established for
the purpose of making recommendation, advising and thus assisting the City
Council in identifying and preserving buildings and lands within the city,
including the city limits as changed from time to time by lawful annexation or
lawful detachment.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   There shall be four members of the Commission. The initial members
shall be appointed two for one-year terms each and two for two-year terms each.
Thereafter, appointments to two-year terms shall be made annually to fill
expired terms. Members may serve for three successive terms. Nothing shall
prevent members of the Area Historical Society, Inc., from serving as members
of this Commission, but any such common membership shall not be in derogation
of the separate autonomy of the Area Historical Society, Inc. One member of
this Commission shall at all times be a member of the County Historical Society
as provided in M.S. § 471.193(5).
      (2)   The Heritage Preservation Commission membership shall be drawn from
persons with demonstrated interest or expertise in historic preservation. If
available in the community, at least two members of the Heritage Preservation
Commission shall be preservation related professionals including, but not
limited to, the professions of history, architecture, architectural history,
archaeology, planning, real estate, design, building trades, landscape
architecture or law. Commission appointments shall be made by the Mayor and
approved by simple majority vote of the City Council at any duly convened
meeting thereof.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Commission shall be as
enumerated under M.S. §471.193, as amended and as may be legally delegated or
assigned by the City Council amendments to this chapter.
   (D)   Organization. The Commission when formed shall elect from its members
such officers as it deems necessary. The Commission shall have the power to
designate and appoint from its members various committees with powers and
duties of the Commission. The Commission shall makes rules and regulations as
it deems advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, for the
purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, but are not inconsistent
with the city and the laws of the state. The Commission shall make an annual
report including a statement of its activities and plans to the Mayor, City
Council, City Administrator, Building Official and chairperson of the County
Historical Society and such other reports at such frequencies as directed by
the City Council resolution.
   (E)   Fiscal responsibility. The Commission shall incur no financial
obligation for which public funds are to be expended or which may result in
city obligations without the prior express authorization of the City Council.
(Ord. 275, passed 7-16-90)
§ 150.17 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties in addition to
those otherwise specified in this chapter:
   (A)   The Commission shall conduct a continuing survey of all areas, places,
buildings, structures or objects in the city which the Commission, on the basis
of information available or presented to it, has reason to believe are
significant to the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural
history of the city.
   (B)   The Commission shall conduct general preservation planning to
determine needed and desirable improvements of historical buildings through the
city, acting in a resource and advisory capacity to owners of such buildings
regarding their preservation, restoration and rehabilitation.
   (C)   The Commission shall work for the continuing education of the citizens
of the city with respect to the civic and architectural heritage of the city.
It shall keep current and public a register of all properties which have been
designated heritage preservation sites, along with the plans and program that
pertain to them. The Commission may also make recommendations as to additional
buildings or structures to be designated as heritage preservation sites.
   (D)   The Commission may accept, on a strictly gratis basis, the services of
technical experts and such persons as may be required for the Commission to
effectively perform its duties. In all cases where obligations or expenses are
to be incurred, such shall have the prior approval of the City Council.
   (E)   The Commission, consistent with express city policy, has the authority
to accept gifts and contributions and to assist city staff in the preparation
of applications for grant funds for the purpose of heritage preservation.
   (F)   The Commission shall on a continuing basis collect and review all city
planning and development records, documents, studies, models, maps, plans and
drawings to be entered in the Public Library Historical Archives as a permanent
record of the city history and development.
(Ord. 275, passed 7-16-90)
§ 150.18 DESIGNATION OF HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITES.
   (A)   Reports. The Council, upon request of the Heritage Preservation
Commission, may direct the Planning Commission in cooperation with other city
commissions having an interest in the matter to prepare studies which catalog
buildings, land, areas, districts and other objects to be considered for
designation as heritage preservation sites.
   (B)   Criteria. The Commission shall recommend to the City Council areas,
buildings, districts or objects to be designated heritage preservation sites.
In considering the designation of heritage preservation sites, the Commission
shall apply the following criteria:
      (1)   Its character, interest or value as part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state and the United States.
      (2)   Its location as a site or contributing element in proximity to a
site of a significant historic event or process.
      (3)   Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of architectural
style, period form or treatment.
      (4)   Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture and development of the city.
      (5)   Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail,
materials or craftsmanship which represents distinctive architectural
innovation.
      (6)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristics
representing an established and familiar aspect of a view, vista, site, area or
district in the city.
   (C)   Planning Commission review. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall
advise the Planning Commission of the proposed designation of a heritage
preservation site, including boundaries and a program for the preservation,
restoration or rehabilitation of the site, and secure from the Planning
Commission its recommendation with respect to the relationship of the heritage
preservation designation to the comprehensive plan of the city, its opinions as
to the effect of the proposed designation upon the surrounding neighborhood,
and its opinion and recommendation as to any other planning consideration which
may be relevant to the proposed designation, together with its recommendation
of approval, rejection or modification of the proposed designation. Such
recommendation shall become part of the official record concerning the proposed
designation and shall be submitted by the Heritage Preservation Commission
along with its recommendation concerning the proposed designation to the City
Council. The Heritage Preservation Commission may make such modifications,
changes and alterations concerning the proposed designation as it deems
necessary in consideration of the recommendations of the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Communication with State Historical Society. A copy of the Heritage
Preservation Commission's proposed designation of a heritage preservation site,
including boundaries, and a program for the preservation, restoration or
rehabilitation of the site, shall be sent to the State Historical Society in
accordance with M.S. § 471.193(6), as amended.
   (E)   Findings and recommendations. The Heritage Preservation Commission
shall determine if the proposed heritage preservation site is eligible for
preservation as determined by the criteria specified in division (A) of this
section, and if the Heritage Preservation Commission recommends to the City
Council that the site be designated for heritage preservation, the Commission
shall transmit to the City Council its recommendations and proposed program for
the heritage preservation site.
   (F)   Council designation; hearings. The City Council, upon the request of
the Heritage Preservation Commission, may by resolution designate a heritage
preservation site. Prior to such designation, the City Council shall hold a
public hearing, notice of which shall have been published in a newspaper of
general circulation at least 20 days prior to the date of the hearing, and
notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all owners of property which is
proposed to be designated a heritage preservation site and to all property
owners within 350 feet of the boundary of the area to be designated a heritage
preservation site.
   (G)   Acquisition. The Heritage Preservation Commission may recommend to the
City Council, after review and comment by the Planning Commission, that certain
property eligible for designation as a heritage preservation site be acquired
by gift, negotiation or other legal means as provided for in M.S. Chapter 117.
It shall be the City Council's decision as to whether or not a property is to
be acquired.
(Ord. 275, passed 7-16-90)
§ 150.19 REVIEW OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Generally. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall review and
advise the City Council upon the issuance of city permits. Every application
for a building permit in relation to property in the city which has been
designated as a heritage preservation site shall be accompanied by detailed
plans for the proposed work to be done, immediately referred by the Building
Official's office to the Commission.
   (B)   Type of building activity to be reviewed.
      (1)   Remodel or repair in any manner that will change the exterior
appearance of the building or site;
      (2)   Construction;
      (3)   Moving a building;
      (4)   Demolition in whole or part; or
      (5)   Repair, removal, replacement or erection of exterior signs.
   (C)   City activity. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall review and
make recommendations concerning all activity in the city to change the nature
or appearance of any building, structure or sign within any designated heritage
preservation site.
   (D)   Standards.  
      (1)   No building or structure, including signs shall be erected,
reconstructed, substantially altered, or restored, which have been designated a
heritage preservation site or a part thereof, unless the same is reviewed by
the City Council acting upon the advice of the Commission established in this
subchapter as being architecturally compatible with historical or architectural
aspects of the site. In reviewing any proposed erection, reconstruction,
alteration or restoration, the general purpose shall be to maintain the
integrity of the designated sites.
      (2)   The Secretary of the Interior's standards shall be utilized in
developing and implementing these standards of review.
      (3)   In reviewing any proposed erection, reconstruction, alteration or
restoration, the general purposes shall be to maintain the integrity of
designated properties as follows, as long as the general purposes are
consistent with the Secretary of Interior's standards:
         (a)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible
use for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure
or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended
purpose.
         (b)   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a
building, structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural
features shall be avoided when possible.
         (c)   All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as
products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which
seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
         (d)   Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or site and
its environment. These changes may have acquired significant in their own
right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
         (e)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
         (f)   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather
than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the
new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture and other visual qualities.
(Ord. 275, passed 7-16-90)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.20 MAINTAINING PREVIOUS DESIGNATIONS OF A HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITE.
   The status of the previously designated heritage preservation sites shall be
and hereby are continued and maintained.
(Ord. 275, passed 7-16-90)
§ 150.21 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violations of this subchapter are deemed misdemeanors and upon
conviction thereof are punishable according to the laws of the state
appertaining, together with the cost of prosecution.
   (B)   Upon any violation of any provisions of this subchapter, the city may
seek where indicated injunction to prevent further continued violation, and may
as well seek, by appropriate civil remedy, to compel the violator to rectify at
the violator's sole expense any damages resulting by virtue of such violation.
The cost of enforcing these provisions shall be chargeable and collected
against the violator.
(Ord. 275, passed 7-16-90)
PLUMBING PERMITS
§ 150.30 FEE SCHEDULE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)    The following fees for the specified permits and installations are
hereby established as follows:
For issuing each plumbing permit                                         $20
State surcharge on each permit                                           $1
For each plumbing fixture or trap set of fixtures on one trap, including $5
water, drainage, piping and backflow protection thereof
For each water heater                                                    $5
For each water softener                                                  $5
For each new or replacement water service line and/or sewer line         $5
For installation, alteration or repair of water piping                   $15
For installation, alteration or repair of drainage or vent piping        $15
 
   (B)   Whenever any work for which a plumbing and mechanical permit is
required has been commenced without first obtaining the permit, an
investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected, whether
or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be
equal to the amount of the permit fee as shown in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   The fee, independent of other prescribed fees, which may be charged
for inspections shall be as may be established by resolution of the City
Council, duly enacted.
   (D)   From and after July 1, 2010 and the due passage and enactment and
publication according to law, surcharge of $5 shall be payable and collected
with each application for any of the permits listed in division (A) above.
(Ord. 395, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. 461, passed 5-10-10; Am. Ord. 564, passed
12-19-22; Am. Ord. 579, passed 12-11-23)
§ 150.31 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Where permit applications are required, the permit shall, insofar as sewer
and water connections and related work and activities are concerned, be
subscribed by a master plumber with licensure and/or registration
identification noted on the application.
(Ord. 395, passed 4-28-03)
§ 150.32 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   The following are required inspections:
   (A)   Water service lines per city code;
   (B)   Sewer lines per city code;
   (C)   5# - 15 minute pressure test of all underground drain lines inside a
building before the floor is poured;
   (D)   5# - 15 minute pressure test of all drain and vent lines inside a
building before the wall materials are installed;
   (E)   Water lines for proper size and proven water tight;
   (F)   Final manometer test of all plumbing fixtures after fixtures are set
and their traps filled with water;
   (G)   Final plumbing inspection.
(Ord. 395, passed 4-28-03)
DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL
§ 150.40 DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Scaled site plan. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the Building
Official shall require the applicant to submit a scaled site plan including the
following information:
      (1)   Scale of drawing and north arrow;
      (2)   Legal description;
      (3)   Property boundaries;
      (4)   Existing structures:
      (5)   Proposed structures;
      (6)   Indication of direction of surface water drainage by arrows; and
      (7)   Erosion control measures.
   (B)   Sketch plan. The Building Official may waive the requirement of a
scaled site plan in favor of a sketch plan if the information by division (A)
(1) through (7) can be adequately determined on the sketch plan.
   (C)   Erosion control.
      (1)   Prior to the start of any excavation for the construction of any
structure, the owner or the builder must have in place and functional an
approved method of erosion control. All required erosion and siltation control
measures shall conform to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's "Best
Management Practices."
      (2)   No footing inspection will be conducted until the erosion control
is in place and functional.
      (3)   The erosion control must be maintained, to the satisfaction of the
Building Official, throughout the construction process and until new turf is
established. If the erosion control is not maintained, the city may withhold
additional inspections or the certificate of occupancy.
      (4)   It is unlawful, and a violation of these regulations to fail to
install or maintain erosion control.
      (5)   Driveways must be installed on all construction sites within 24
hours of back filling. Driveways shall be constructed with a minimum depth of
six inches of crushed rock and a minimum width of 18 feet. Driveways shall
extend from the curb to the structure. The Building Official may authorize
other materials that would provide the same access to the structure. If the
driveway is not installed within the time period provided, a stop work order
will be issued until the driveway is installed.
      (6)   That portion of a lot adjoining a street shall be sodded from the
back of the curb or the roadside edge to three feet from the curb or roadside
edge. Where the lot slope exceeds 8%, areas within 15 feet of the curb or
roadside edge shall be sodded. Any portion of a lot adjoining a drainage
easement shall be sodded in the same manner as is required for the portion of
the lot adjoining a street. The remaining area of the lot shall, at a minimum,
be seeded.
      (7)   All required silt fences must be maintained throughout the
construction period until new vegetation is established.
      (8)   Streets shall be cleared whenever the tracking of sediments occurs.
Streets must be cleaned before sites are left idle for the weekends or
holidays. Streets that are not cleaned are a nuisance subject to immediate
abatement. If the streets are not cleaned as required herein, the city will
arrange for a private contractor to clean streets. The costs of the cleaning
shall be payable first from the surety on file with the city, and then from the
contractors, subcontractors and owner(s), any or all of them to have equal
responsibility and obligation. The intervention by city where these provisions
are violated and the invocation of civil remedies to make corrections
occasioned thereby shall not preclude prosecution for the underlying violation
(s).
      (9)   A surety for compliance with the erosion control requirements is
required to be submitted with the building permit application or development
agreement. The amount of the surety shall be periodically set by resolution of
the City Council. If the requirements of this subdivision are not met, the
surety shall be used to remedy any defect and bring the parcel into compliance.
The surety shall be released upon issuance of the final certificate of
occupancy, less any amounts retained to reimburse the city for costs incurred
on behalf of the owner, contractor or subcontractor in completing, correcting
or obtaining compliance with required erosion control measures.
(Ord. 403, passed 3-8-04)
§ 150.41 LAND ALTERATION.
   (A)   Scaled site plan.  Prior to issuance of a land alteration (fill)
permit, the Building Official shall require the applicant to submit a scaled
site plan including the following information:
      (1)   Scale of drawing and north arrow;
      (2)   Legal description;
      (3)   Property boundaries;
      (4)   Existing structures;
      (5)   Proposed structures;
      (6)   Indication of direction of surface water drainage by arrows; and
      (7)   Erosion control measures.
   (B)   Sketch plan.  The Building Official may waive the requirement of a
scaled site plan in favor of a sketch plan if the information by division (A)
(1) through (7) can be adequately determined on the sketch plan.
   (C)   Erosion control.
      (1)   Prior to the start of any land alteration (fill) for any property
within the city, the owner or the trucking company must have in place and
functional an approved method of erosion control. All required erosion and
siltation control measures shall conform to the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency's "Best Management Practices."
      (2)   The erosion control must be maintained, to the satisfaction of the
Building Official, throughout the land alteration process and until new turf is
established. If the erosion control is not maintained, the city may withhold
additional inspections or the certificate of occupancy.
      (3)   It is unlawful and a violation of these regulations to fail to
install or maintain erosion control.
      (4)   Driveways must be installed on all land alteration sites within 24
hours of filling. Driveways shall be constructed with a minimum depth of six
inches of crushed rock and a minimum width of 18 feet. Driveways shall extend
from the curb or edge of roadway to the edge of the fill site. The Building
Official may authorize other materials that would provide the same access to
the structure. If the driveway is not installed within the time period
provided, a stop work order will be issued until the driveway is installed.
      (5)   That portion of a lot adjoining a street shall be sodded from the
back of the curb, roadside edge or shoreline to three feet from the curb,
roadside edge or shoreline. Where the lot slope exceeds 8%, areas within 15
feet of the curb, roadside edge or shoreline be sodded. Any portion of a lot
adjoining a drainage easement shall be sodded in the same manner as is required
for the portion of the lot adjoining a street. The remaining area of the lot
shall, at a minimum, be seeded.
      (6)   All required silt fences must be maintained throughout the
construction period until new vegetation is established.
      (7)   Streets shall be cleaned whenever the tracking of sediments occurs.
Streets must be cleaned before sites are left idle for the weekends or
holidays. Streets that are not cleaned are a nuisance subject to immediate
abatement. If the streets are not cleaned as required herein, the city will
arrange for a private contractor to clean streets. The costs of the cleaning
shall be payable first from the surety on file with the city, and then from the
contractors, subcontractors and owners.
      (8)   A surety for compliance with the erosion control requirements is
required to be submitted with the land alteration permit. The amount of the
surety shall be periodically set by resolution of the City Council. If the
requirements of this subdivision are not met, the surety shall be used to
remedy any defect and bring the parcel into compliance. The surety shall be
released upon issuance of the final certificate of compliance, less any amounts
retained to reimburse the city for costs incurred on behalf of the owner,
contractor or subcontractor in completing, correcting or obtaining compliance
with required erosion control measures.
(Ord. 403, passed 3-8-04)
§ 150.42 BUILDING DEMOLITION.
   (A)   Scaled site plan.  Prior to issuance of a demolition permit, the
Building Official shall require the applicant to submit a scaled site plan
including the following information:
      (1)   Scale of drawing and north arrow;
      (2)   Legal description;
      (3)   Property boundaries;
      (4)   Existing structures;
      (5)   Structures to be demolished;
      (6)   Indication of direction of surface water drainage by arrows; and
      (7)   Erosion control measures.
   (B)   Sketch plan.  The Building Official may waive the requirement of a
scaled site plan in favor of a sketch plan if the information by division (A)
(1) through (7) can be adequately determined on the sketch plan.
   (C)   Erosion control.
      (1)   Prior to the start of any demolition for any property within the
city, the owner or the demolition company must have in place and functional an
approved method of erosion control. All required erosion and siltation control
measures shall conform to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's "Best
Management Practices."
      (2)   The erosion control must be maintained, to the satisfaction of the
Building Official, throughout the demolition process and until new turf is
established. If the erosion control is not maintained, the city may stop all
work in process.
      (3)   It is unlawful to fail to install or maintain erosion control.
      (4)   That portion of a lot adjoining a street shall be sodded from the
back of the curb, roadside edge or shoreline to three feet from the curb,
roadside edge or shoreline. Where the lot slope exceeds 8%, areas within 15
feet of the curb, roadside edge or shoreline shall be sodded. Any portion of a
lot adjoining a drainage easement shall be sodded in the same manner as is
required for the portion of the lot adjoining a street. The remaining area of
the lot shall, at minimum, be seeded.
      (5)   All required silt fences must be maintained until new vegetation is
established.
      (6)   Streets shall be cleaned whenever the tracking of sediments occurs.
Streets must be cleaned before sites are left idle for the weekends or
holidays. Streets that are not cleaned are a nuisance subject to immediate
abatement. If the streets are not cleaned as required herein, the city will
arrange for a private contractor to clean streets. The costs of the cleaning
shall be payable first from the surety on file with the city, and then from the
contractors, subcontractors and owner(s).
      (7)   A surety for compliance with the erosion control requirements is
required to be submitted with the demolition permit. The amount of the surety
shall be periodically set by resolution of the City Council. If the
requirements of this Subdivision are not met, the surety shall be used to
remedy any defect and bring the parcel into compliance. The surety shall be
released upon issuance of the final certificate of compliance, less any amounts
retained to reimburse the City of La Crescent for costs incurred on behalf of
the owner, contractors or subcontractors in completing, correcting or obtaining
compliance with required erosion control measures.
(Ord. 403, passed 3-8-04)
§ 150.43 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations, misdemeanors and petty misdemeanors. Any violation of any
of the foregoing provision is a misdemeanor and punishable upon conviction in
accordance with the law of the state. In the discretion of the city, violations
may be charged petty misdemeanors in which case upon conviction thereof shall
be punishable as provided by applicable laws of the state for petty
misdemeanors.
   (B)   The city may institute actions at law and in equity to achieve the
civil remedies of abatement and injunction. The institution of proceedings to
seek an indicated civil remedy shall not preclude the subsequent prosecution
for the underlying misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor which a given violation may
constitute nor shall the prosecution initiated to enforce these regulations on
the criminal side of the court foreclose the subsequent commencement of an
action at law or in equity to achieve effective enforcement and to secure
remedy appropriate to the circumstances existing.
   (C)   In addition to the fines and other dispositional relief ordered in
cases venued on the criminal side of the court, the city shall be entitled to
the reasonable costs entailed in connection therewith including attorney's fees
and such other relief as may be dispositionally ordered by the court.
(Ord. 403, passed 3-8-04)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND SHORELAND MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Purpose
   
151.04   Definitions
   
151.05   Lands to which chapter applies
   
151.06   Establishment of official zoning map
   
151.07   Regulatory flood protection elevation
   
151.08   Interpretation
   
151.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.10   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Regulations
   
151.25   Establishment of zoning districts
   
151.26   Floodway District (FW)
   
151.27   Flood Fringe District (FF)
   
151.28   General Flood Plain District
   
151.29   Subdivisions
   
151.30   Public utilities, railroads, roads and bridges
   
151.31   Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks
   
151.32   Placement of travel trailers and travel vehicles
Shoreland Management
   
151.40   Definitions
   
151.41   Authorization and purpose
   
151.42   Shoreland classification and land use
   
151.43   Application of zoning standards
   
151.44   Placement, design and height structures
   
151.45   Design criteria for structures
   
151.46   Shoreland alterations
   
151.47   Conditional uses in shoreland areas
   
151.48   Water supply and sewage treatment
   
151.49   Planned unit development (PUD)
   
151.50   Nonconforming uses in shoreland areas
   
151.51   Subdivisions and administrations
   
151.52   Department of Natural Resources notification
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.65   Zoning Administrator
   
151.66   Permit requirements
   
151.67   Board of Appeals and Adjustment
   
151.68   Conditional uses
   
151.69   Nonconforming uses
   
151.70   Amendments
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has in M.S. Chapter 103F and M.S. §§ 412.191,
462.351 through 462.364 and 471.62 delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the city does ordain the following chapter.
(Prior Code, §15.13(1)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   This chapter is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(Prior Code, § 15.13(2)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.03 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize those losses described in §§
151.01 and
151.02.
(Prior Code, § 15.13(3)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that certain
conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist; and the structure or land
use conforms to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the Flood Insurance
Study for the city.
   FLOOD PLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood plain which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a reach.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. The term is synonymous with the term “base flood” used in
the Flood Insurance Study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than one foot
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on side utilities, including but not limited to buildings, factories,
sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel trailers or
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in §
151.32 and other similar items.
   VARIANCE. A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this chapter to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only
as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship,
practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a
community's respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.
(Prior Code, § 15.14(8)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.05 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city
shown on the official zoning map and the attachments thereto as being located
within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Flood Plain
Districts.
(Prior Code, § 15.14(1)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The official zoning map, together with all materials attached thereto, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study for the City of La
Crescent prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated November
2,1982, the Flood Insurance Study for Houston County prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency dated June 6, 2001, the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map and Flood Insurance Rate Map for the City of La Crescent dated May 2,1983,
and the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map Panel 270190.0005 and Flood Insurance
Rate Map Panel 270190.0005B dated January 6,1982 therein. The official zoning
map shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk-Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 15.14(2)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91; Am. Ord. 389, passed 11-12-
02)
§ 151.07 REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.
(Prior Code, § 15.14(3)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.08 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by the state statutes.
   (B)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the
decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Appeals and Adjustment shall
make the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on
the regional (100-year) flood profile and other available technical data.
Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board and to submit
technical evidence.
(Prior Code, § 15.14(4)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
(Prior Code, § 15.14(5)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.10 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or
land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 15.14(6)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
REGULATIONS
§ 151.25 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Districts.
      (1)   Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the flood boundary and floodway map adopted in §
151.06.
      (2)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include
those areas designated as floodway fringe on the flood boundary and floodway
map adopted in §
151.06.
      (3)   General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain District
shall include those areas designated as unnumbered A Zones on the flood
insurance rate map adopted in §
151.06.
   (B)   Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within the
Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Flood Plain Districts, all uses not listed
as permitted uses or conditional uses in §§
151.26 through
151.28 shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
      (1)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter and specifically §§
151.31 and
151.32;
      (2)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after
damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of
structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this chapter and
specifically § 151.54; and
      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be
certified by ground surveys and floodproofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in
the general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in §§
151.50 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 15.15) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.26 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and airport
landing strips.
      (3)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails.
      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
   (B)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.
      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in division (A) of this
section and the uses listed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(8) of this section.
      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel and other materials.
      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control
structures.
      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines.
      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials.
      (6)   Placement of fill.
      (7)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles either on individual lots of
record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of §
151.32.
      (8)   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency
flood event.
   (D)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.
      (1)   All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including
fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause
any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
      (2)   Procedures and standards. All floodway conditional uses shall be
subject to the procedures and standards contained in § 151.53.
      (3)   Underlying zoning district. The conditional use shall be
permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
      (4)   Fill.
         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         (b)   Dredge spoil sites, sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion and sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with division (D)(4)(b) of
this section, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow
temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused
an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the
governing body has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of
the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.
The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the
office of the County Recorder.
      (5)   Accessory structures.
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
         (b)   1.   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed
and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of flood waters.
            2.   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow, and so far as
practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow
lines as those of adjoining structures.
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification
in the State Building Code; provided, the accessory structure constitutes a
minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size, and for a detached
garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and
limited storage. All floodproofed accessory structures must meet the following
additional standards, as appropriate:
            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and
            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
floodproofed.
      (6)   Storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      (7)   Structural works. Structural works for flood control that will
change the course, current or cross-section of protected wetlands or public
waters shall be subject to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 103F. Community-wide
structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory
flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
      (8)   Levees, dikes or floodwalls. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed
in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood
and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both
sides of a stream.
(Prior Code, § 15.16) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.27 FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district. If
no pre-existing, underlying zoning use district exists, then any residential or
nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted use
in the flood fringe; provided, such use does not constitute a public nuisance.
All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for flood fringe “permitted
uses” listed in division (B) of this section and the standards for all flood
fringe “permitted and conditional uses” listed in division (E) of this section.
   (B)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.
      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15
feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet for the
outside dimension at ground level may be internally floodproofed in accordance
with §
151.26(D)(5)(c).
      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of
1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only as a
conditional use, unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a
structure in accordance with division (B)(1) of this section.
      (4)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (5)   The provisions of division (E) of this section shall apply.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or
floodproofed in accordance with division (B)(1) or (2) of this section, or any
use of land that does not comply with the standards in division (B)(3) or (4)
of this section, shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application
for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and
evaluation procedures specified in divisions (D) and (E) of this section and §
151.53.
   (D)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.
      (1)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure's lowest flood above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts,
pilings, parallel walls, and the like, or above-grade, enclosed areas such as
crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall
be considered above-grade and not a structures basement or lowest floor if the
enclosed area is above-grade or at least one side of the structure is designed
to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials and is
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The noted
alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional
standards:
         (a)   Design and certification. The structure's design and as-built
condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building
Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
         (b)   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed areas. Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be
designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
            1.   The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. When openings are placed
in a structure's walls to provide for entry of flood waters to equalize
pressures, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of flood waters.
            2.   The enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles
or storage.
      (2)   Basements, as defined by §
151.04, shall be subject to the following:
         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
         (b)   Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation; provided, the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with division (D)(3) of this section.
      (3)   All areas of nonresidential structures including basements to be
placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing classifications in the State
Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-
2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall
require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not
be permitted.
      (4)   When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion and sedimentation
control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state
approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state approved
shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to
stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or
regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City
Council. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the
material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
      (5)   Storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.
      (6)   The provisions of division (E) of this section shall also apply.
   (E)   Standards for all flood fringe uses.
      (1)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above
an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of Appeals
and Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of
the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
      (2)   Commercial uses and accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad
tracks and parking lots, may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to flood velocities
greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the regional flood.
      (3)   For manufacturing and industrial uses, measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
division (E)(2) of this section. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to the needs of an industry whose business
requires that it be located in flood plain areas.
      (4)   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      (5)   Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been
specified on the official zoning map.
      (6)   Standards for travel trailers and travel vehicles are contained in
§
151.32.
      (7)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(Prior Code, § 15.17) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.28 GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permissible uses.
      (1)   The uses listed in §
151.26(A) shall be permitted uses.
      (2)   All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe
evaluation criteria pursuant to division (B) of this section. The provisions of
§
151.26 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway District and division
(B) of this section shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe
District.
   (B)   Procedures for floodway and flood fringe determinations within the
General Flood Plain District.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for a
use within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to
furnish the following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe
District.
         (a)   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-
sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water
information.
         (b)   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site;
location and elevations of streets; photographs showing existing land uses and
vegetation upstream and downstream; and soil type.
         (c)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of
information listed in division (B)(1) of this section to a designated engineer
or other expert person or agency for technical assistance in determining
whether the proposed use is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to
determine the regulatory flood protection elevation. Procedures consistent with
Minnesota Regulations parts 6120.5000 through 6120.6200 shall be followed in
this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is strongly
encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology with the
respective Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist prior to
commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall:
         (a)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
         (b)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
         (c)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage
increase than one-half foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional
stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in
computing floodway boundaries.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the City Council. The City
Council must formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended
Floodway or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the permit application. The
City Council, prior to official action, may submit the application and all
supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the
Department of Natural Resources or the Planning Commission for review and
comment. Once the floodway and flood fringe boundaries have been determined,
the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Zoning Administrator who
shall process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions
of §
151.26 and §
151.27.
(Prior Code, § 15.18) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.29 SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Review criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for
the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. All lots within the flood plain districts shall contain a building
site at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions
shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the
provisions of this chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to
the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the floodway and
flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
   (B)   Floodway/flood fringe determinations in the General Flood Plain
District. In the General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide the
information required in §
151.28(B) to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for
the subdivision site.
   (C)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated
on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate
specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-
structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated
prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard
area designation will be requested.
(Prior Code, § 15.19) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.30 PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas,
electrical, sewer and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain
shall be floodproofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to
above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads and bridges
to be located within the flood plain shall comply with §§
151.26 and
151.27. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be
provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would
result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are
essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or
railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption
of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
   (C)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public
utilities are not provided, on-site water supply systems must be designated to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and new or
replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the state's current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 15.20) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.31 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   (A)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by §
151.29.
   (B)   (1)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in
existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are
located in flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be
placed only if elevated in compliance with § 
151.27. If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is
not provided in accordance with § 
151.27(E)(1), then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the
property owner develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the City
Council.
      (2)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(Prior Code, § 15.21(1),(2)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.32 PLACEMENT OF TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Generally. Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the
exemption criteria specified in division (B) of this section shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions
(D) and (E) of this section.
   (B)   Exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in
division (C) of this section and further they meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Have current licenses required for highway use.
      (2)   Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system
are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used
in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel trailer or travel vehicle has
no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
      (3)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be
permissible in any pre- existing, underlying zoning use district.
   (C)   Areas exempted for placement of travel or recreational vehicles.
      (1)   Individual lots or parcels of record.
      (2)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
      (3)   Existing condominium type associations.
   (D)   Loss of exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles exempted in
division (B) of this section lose this exemption when development occurs on the
parcel exceeding $500 for a structural addition to the travel trailer or travel
vehicle or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The
travel trailer or travel vehicle and all additions and accessory structures
will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation
and floodproofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §§
151.27 and
151.28.
   (E)   Additional regulations. New commercial travel trailer or travel
vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and
condominium associations and the expansion of any existing similar use
exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be
allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts; provided, the trailer or
vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood
protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in
accordance with §
151.29(A). No fill placed in a floodway to meet the requirements of this
section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood.
      (2)   All new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicles not
meeting the criteria of division (B) of this section may, as an alternative, be
allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and
the provisions of § 151.53. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the
safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. The plan
shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual and
shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
travel trailers or other recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed
so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance
with §
151.30(C).
(Prior Code, § 15.21(3)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
SHORELAND MANAGEMENT
§ 151.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLUFF.  A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having
the following characteristics:
      (1)   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
      (2)   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water
level of the waterbody;
      (3)   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet
or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater; and
      (4)   The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
   An area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance for 50 feet
or more shall not be considered part of the bluff.
   BLUFF-IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the top of a
bluff.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water
level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
   COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease,
rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.
   COMMISSIONER. The commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A land use or development as defined by ordinance that
would not be appropriate generally but may be allowed with appropriate
restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that certain
conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist, the use or development
conforms to the comprehensive land use plan, and the use is compatible with the
existing neighborhood.
   FEEDLOT. Any tract of land or structure, pen, or corral, wherein cattle,
horses, sheep, goats, and swine are maintained in close quarters for the
purpose of fattening such livestock for final shipment to market.
   FOREST LAND CONVERSION. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a
new land use other than re-establishment of a subsequent forest stand.
   HARDSHIP. As defined in M.S. Chapter 462.
   INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities,
or other wholesale items.
   INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a
contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL (OHWL). The boundary of public waters and
wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which
has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool. The ordinary high water level
for specific properties can be found on the river stage maps available from the
city.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A residential development characterized by a
unified site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a
parcel, whether for sale, rent, or lease, and also usually involving clustering
of these units or sites to provide areas of common open space, density
increases, and a mix of structure types.
   PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in M.S. § 103G.005(15).
   SEMI-PUBLIC USE. The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to
provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the
regular constituency of the organization.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  A septic tank and soil absorption system or other
individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated
in §
151.48 of this subchapter.
   SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all
other construction devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting
sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
   SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water level of a
public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the structure
setback.
   SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from public waters:
1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and
300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain
designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits
of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by
topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances
and when approved by the commissioner.
   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing structure, or
other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register
of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is
determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of M.S.
§ 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on
either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing
after review by the state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota
Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be
significant historic sites.
   STEEP SLOPE. Land where agricultural activity or development is either not
recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's
soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys
or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction
techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are
lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over horizontal distances of
50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
   SURFACE WATER ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for commercial
purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral
part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants
with transient docking facilities are examples of such uses.
   TOE OF THE BLUFF. The lower point of a 50-foot segment with an average slope
exceeding 18%.
   TOP OF THE BLUFF. The higher point of a 50-foot segment with an average
slope exceeding 18%.
   WATER ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. A small, above-ground
building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining
walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water
feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal
structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
decks.
   WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition).
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.41 AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This shoreland ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization and
policies contained in M.S. Chapter 105, Minnesota Regulations, parts 6120.2500
- 6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter
462.
   (B)   The uncontrolled use of shoreland in the city affects the public
health, safety, and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of
public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in
the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare to provide for the
wise development of the shoreland of public waters. The state legislature has
delegated responsibility to the municipalities of the state to regulate the
subdivision, use, and development of the shoreland of public waters and thus
preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, preserve the economic and
natural environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise
utilization of waters and related land resources. The responsibility is hereby
recognized by the city; all public waters in this municipality have been given
a shoreland management classification.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.42 SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION AND LAND USE.
   (A)   The shorelands of the city are hereby designated as a shoreland
overlay district.
   (B)   In order to guide the wise development and utilization of shorelands
of protected waters for the preservation of water quality, natural
characteristics, economic values and the general health, safety and welfare,
certain protected waters in the city have been given a shoreland management
classification. These protected waters of the city have been classified by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources as follows:
 
General Development Lakes    Protected Waters Inventory I.D. No.
U.S. Lock and Dam No. 8 Pool 28-0005 00
Blue Lake                    28-0005 03
Tributary Streams            Location
Pine Creek                   From city limits, Sec. 15, T104N, R4W To city
                             limits Sec. 15, T104N, R4W
 
   (C)   All other non-classified watercourses as shown on county protected
waters inventory map and list shall be considered tributary.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.43 APPLICATION OF ZONING STANDARDS.
   (A)   All permitted, conditional and accessory uses shall be regulated by
the applicable zoning districts underlying this shoreland overlay district.
   (B)   The lot area and width standards for residential, commercial and
industrial lots with the shoreland area shall be as found in the applicable
sections of the city zoning code. Only land above the ordinary high water level
of public waters can be used to meet lot area standards.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.44 PLACEMENT, DESIGN AND HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Structure placement. When more than one setback applies to a site,
structures and facilities shall be located to meet all setbacks. Where
structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building
site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the
adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed
building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone.
   (B)   Setbacks. Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks from the
ordinary high water level shall be as follows:
 
                          Structures
Public Water              Unsewered Sewered Sewage Treatment System
General development lakes 75 feet   50 feet 50 feet
Tributary rivers          100 feet  50 feet 75 feet
 
   One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with §
151.45(B) of this ordinance may be set back at a minimum distance of ten feet
from the ordinary high water level.
   (C)   Additional setbacks. The following additional structure setbacks
apply, regardless of the classification of waterbody:
 
Setback from:      Setback (feet)
Top of bluff       30
Unplatted cemetery 50
 
   (D)   Bluff impact zones.  Structures and accessory facilities, except
stairways and landings, are prohibited within bluff impact zones.
   (E)   Building height. Building height shall be regulated in conformance
with the applicable provisions of the city zoning code.
   (F)   Impervious cover. Impervious surface coverage of lots in the
residential zones shall not exceed 30% of the lot area. Impervious surface
coverage in the commercial and industrial zones shall not exceed 30% of the lot
area. In such zones, areas covered by an approved stormwater management plan
shall not have impervious surface coverage that exceeds 75% of the total lot
area.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.45 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   High water elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance with
floodplain regulations applicable to the site.
   (B)   Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have one water-
oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback if the
water-oriented accessory structure complies with all of the following:
      (1)   The structure or facility may not exceed ten feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square
feet. Detached decks may not exceed eight feet above grade at any point.
      (2)   The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high
water level must be at least ten feet.
      (3)   The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as
viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
      (4)   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be
enclosed or used as a storage area.
      (5)   The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human
habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
      (6)   As an alternative for the Blue Lake and U.S. Lock and Dam No. 8
Pool shoreland areas, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for
watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating and water-oriented
sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square feet provided the
maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured parallel to the
configuration of the shoreline.
   (C)   Use standards. Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial,
public or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of
public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters.
Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without
public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters
frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level
setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or
topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Those with water-oriented
needs must meet the following standards:
      (1)   Uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative
screening of parking areas and structures.
      (2)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must
centralize such facilities and design them to be of minimum size and in such a
manner to avoid obstructions of navigation.
      (3)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs
and lighting to convey needed information providing that no signs are placed in
or upon public waters. Signs may be placed within the shore impact zone if they
are of minimum size and convey the location and name of the establishment and
the general types of goods and services available. Such signs shall comply with
the city sign regulations. Lights shall be shielded or directed to prevent
illumination out across public waters.
   (D)   Stairways, lifts and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred
alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down
bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts on residential lots
shall not exceed four feet in width with landings not exceeding 32 square feet
in area. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties and public open
space recreational properties. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways,
lifts or landings. Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portion of the lot and shall be built in a manner that
ensures control of soil erosion.
   (E)   Historic sites. No structure may be placed on a significant historic
site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate
information about the site has been removed and documented in a public
depository.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.46 SHORELAND ALTERATIONS.
   The purpose of this section is to prevent erosion into public waters, fix
nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent
bank slumping and protect fish and wildlife habitat. Shoreland alterations are
allowed in accordance with the following standards:
   (A)   Permanent vegetation. Shore impact zones shall be maintained in
permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan consistent
with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation
district.
   (B)   Intensive vegetation clearing. Within shoreland bluff zones and/or
steep slopes, intensive vegetation clearing is not permitted. Intensive
clearing within shoreland areas but outside of bluff zones and steep slope
areas is permitted, subject to city approval of an erosion and sedimentation
control plan consistent with MPCA's best management practices for Minnesota.
   (C)   Limited clearing. Limited clearing of trees and shrubs and the
cutting, pruning and trimming of trees within bluff and shore impact zones or
steep slopes to accommodate picnic areas, trails and water access, and to
provide a view to the water from a principal dwelling site shall be permitted
provided the screening of structures, as viewed from the water, is not
substantially reduced. These provisions do not apply to the removal of tree
limbs or branches that are dead or pose a safety hazard.
   (D)   Grading and/or filling. Any grading or filling on steep slopes or
within shore or bluff impact zones involving the movement of ten or more cubic
yards of material or involving more than 50 cubic yards of material elsewhere
in a shoreland area shall require the submission of a shore impact plan and
issuance of a grading and filling permit. Approval of the plan shall be granted
only if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Any filling or grading in any Type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 wetland
shall be in conformance with the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 and shall
require consideration of how extensively the proposed activity will affect the
following functional qualities of a wetland.
         (a)   Sediment and pollution trapping and retention.
         (b)   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage.
         (c)   Fish and wildlife habitat and endangered plants and animals.
         (d)   Recreational use.
         (e)   Shoreline or bank stabilization.
         (f)   Historical significance.
      (2)   The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time
possible.
      (3)   Ground cover, such as mulch, is used for temporary bare soil
coverage and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is established.
      (4)   Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment during construction
are employed.
      (5)   Altered areas are stabilized to accepted erosion control standards.
      (6)   Fill is not placed so as to create unstable slopes.
      (7)   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes are
certified by qualified professionals as to slope stability.
      (8) Alterations below the OHWL require authorization from the
Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources per M.S. §
103G.245.
      (9)   Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of
the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished
slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical. Permits
granted by the DNR or other agencies with applicable jurisdiction shall control
both the extent and height of rip rap placement.
      (10)   Alterations of topography shall only be permitted if accessory to
a permitted or conditional use.
   (E)   Roads, driveways and parking areas. Roads, driveways and parking areas
should meet structure setbacks. Such facilities shall not be placed within
bluff and shore impact zones when other reasonable and feasible placement
alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these
areas and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
   (F)   Stormwater management. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
stormwater runoff before discharge into public waters.
      (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential,
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and
protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment
on the site.
      (3)   When development density, topographic features, soil and/or
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff
using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities
such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and
ponds may be used.
   (G)   Agricultural use standards. The following standards shall apply to
agricultural activities in shoreland areas:
      (1)   The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural uses
is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the OHWL.
      (2)   General cultivation, farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if
steep slopes and shore impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or
operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems)
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local Soil and Water
Conservation District or the United States Soil Conservation Service.
      (3)   Feedlots and manure storage are not permitted within 300 feet of an
OHWL.
      (4)   The use of pesticides, fertilizers, or animal wastes within
shoreland areas shall be done in such a way as to minimize impacts on shore
impact zones by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.47 CONDITIONAL USES IN SHORELAND AREAS.
   Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the
review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review of
conditional uses established in §
151.68 The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply within
shoreland areas:
   (A)   Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the
topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site must be made to
ensure:
      (1)   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction.
      (2)   The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from
public waters is limited.
      (3)   The site is adequate for water supply and public sewage treatment.
      (4)   The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will
generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to
safely accommodate these watercraft.
   (B)   Conditional use permit conditions. Upon the consideration of the
criteria listed above and the purposes of this subchapter, the city shall
attach such conditions to the issuance of a conditional use permit as it deems
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this subchapter. Such conditions may
include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level.
      (2)   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the
requirement that additional vegetation be planted.
      (3)   Special provisions for the location, design, and use of structures,
watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking areas.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.48 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE TREATMENT.
   (A)   Water supply. Any public or private supply of water, for domestic
purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota
Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   (B)   Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment as follows:
      (1)   Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where available.
      (2)   All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's standards for individual sewage treatment
systems contained in the document titled, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems
Standards, Chapter 7080 , a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this subchapter.
      (3)   On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back from the ordinary
high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in § 151.44(B) of
this subchapter.
      (4)   All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems shall be
evaluated in accordance with the criteria. If the determination of a site's
suitability cannot be made with publicly available existing information, it
shall then be the responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil
borings and percolation tests from on-site field investigations. Evaluation
criteria include:
         (a)   Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table or
bedrock.
         (b)    Soil conditions, properties and permeability.
         (c)   Slope.
         (d)   The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock
outcrops.
      (5)   Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and
upgraded in accordance with §
151.50(D) of this subchapter.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.49 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).
   Residential planned unit developments shall be permitted in shoreland areas
subject to the information and procedural requirements of the city zoning code
which is adopted by reference in
Chapter 154 of this code. Densities shall be calculated in accordance with this
section.
   (A)   Minimum size. All residential PUD's shall contain at least five
dwelling units.
   (B)   Establishment of tiers for density calculation. For the purpose of
calculating dwelling unit or site density, the following shoreland tiers are
established by locating one or more lines approximately parallel to a line that
represents the ordinary high water level:
      General Development Lakes - First Tier         200 feet
      General Development Lakes - Second and Third Tier    267 feet
      Tributary Streams                   300 feet
   (C)   Residential PUD density evaluation. The procedures for determining the
“base" density of a PUD and density increase multipliers are as follows.
Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further
from the waterbody, but must not be transferred to any other tier closer. The
suitable area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size
standard (8,400 sq. ft.). Suitable land shall exclude wetlands, bluffs, and
land lying below the ordinary high water level. Proposed locations and numbers
of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned unit developments are
then compared with the tier, density, and suitability analyses herein and the
design criteria in division (E) of this section.
   (D) Density increase multipliers. The following density increase multipliers
shal1 apply.
      (1)   Increases to the dwelling unit base densities previously determined
are allowable if the dimensional standards in §
151.45 are met or exceeded and the design criteria in division (E) of this
section are satisfied. The allowable density increases in division (D)(2) of
this section will only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high
water level are increased to at least 50% greater than the minimum setback, or
the impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative
management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the city and the
setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum setback.
      (2)   Allowable dwelling unit increases for residential planned
development areas:
         Density Evaluation Tiers    Maximum density increase
                     within each tier (percent)
            First            50
            Second          100
            Third             200
            Fourth             200
            Fifth             200
   (E)   Design criteria. The following criteria will be applied to planned
unit developments within the shoreland area.
      (1)   At least 50% of the total project area shall be preserved as open
space. The open space computation shall not include road rights-of-way, or land
covered by roads, structures or parking surfaces.
      (2)   Open space shall include areas having physical characteristics
which are unsuitable for development in their natural state and areas
containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries.
      (3)   Open space may contain outdoor recreational facilities for use by
the owners of residential units or the public.
      (4)   The appearance of open space areas, including topography,
vegetation and allowable uses, shall be preserved.
      (5)   Accessory structures and facilities, except water-oriented
accessory structures, must meet the required principal structure setback.
      (6)   Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed
if they meet or exceed the provisions identified in §
151.45(B).
      (7)   The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setback, must be
included as open space. At least 50% of the shore impact zone area of existing
developments or at least 70% of the shore impact zone area of new developments
must be preserved in its natural or existing state.
   (F)   Public utilities required. PUD's shall be connected to public water
supply and sanitary sewer systems.
   (G)   Maintenance and administration. Before final approval of a PUD is
granted, the developer/owner shall provide for the preservation and
maintenance, in perpetuity, of open space and the continuation of the
development as a community.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.50 NONCONFORMING USES IN SHORELAND AREAS.
   (A)   Compliance with zoning code. Nonconforming uses shall not be expanded,
changed, enlarged or altered in any way except as provided for in the city
zoning code.
   (B)   Structures. The expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming structure
shall meet the provisions of the city zoning code except as follows:
      (1)   The extension, enlargement or alteration of a nonconforming
structure or sanitary facility may be permitted without a variance on the side
of the structure or facility facing away from the OHWL.
      (2)   An improvement to a nonconforming structure or sanitary facility
may be allowed to extend laterally when the improvement is in compliance with
the other dimensional standards of this subchapter. In no case shall the
improvement extend closer to the ordinary high water level than the existing
structure.
      (3)   Decks may be allowed without a variance under the following
circumstances:
         (a)   A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no
reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing OHWL setback
of the structure;
         (b)   The deck encroachment toward the OHWL does not exceed 15% of the
existing shoreline setback of the structure from the OHWL or does not encroach
closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive, and
         (c)   The deck is constructed primarily of wood and is not roofed or
screened.
      (4)   If a nonconforming structure is demolished, replacement shall
comply with the dimensional standards of this subchapter.
   (C)   Lots. A lot of record shall be deemed a buildable lot if the following
conditions can be met:
      (1)   It has frontage on a public street,
      (2)   It has public sewer or it can be demonstrated that an acceptable
sewage disposal system (MPCA Chapter 7080) can be installed,
      (3)   The proposed structure will occupy no portion of the shore or bluff
impact zones,
      (4)   The proposed structure can meet the required side yard setbacks of
this ordinance, and
      (5)   The lot is a separate parcel with a separate property
identification number and the parcel was compliant with the official controls
in effect at the time that it was subdivided.
   (D)   On-site sewage treatment systems.
      (1)   A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of §
151.48(B) of this subchapter must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a
permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of,
the property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system
shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage
treatment system's setback from the ordinary high water level.
      (2)   The city will implement a notification or education program that is
oriented toward convincing property owners to evaluate their sewage systems and
voluntarily upgrade such systems if they are found to be nonconforming.
      (3)   Systems that are identified as part of the program described in
division (D)(2) shall be upgraded or replaced within two years of the
identification of their nonconforming status.
      (4)   Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local and
state standards may be considered conforming unless they are determined to be
failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or
other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil treatment area
separation above groundwater than required by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency's Chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be
considered nonconforming.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.51 SUBDIVISIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by the city for
the proposed use because of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock
formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential,
unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment
capabilities, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety,
or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
   (B)   Any proposed plat in shoreland areas which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this subchapter shall be reviewed by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources before approval by the city. Such review shall require that proposed
plats be received by the Commissioner of Natural Resources at least ten days
before a hearing is called by the municipality for consideration of approval of
a final plat. Copies of all plats within shoreland areas shall be submitted to
the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of final approval of the
municipality.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
§ 151.52 DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Notice of hearings. Copies of all notices of any public hearings to
consider variances, amendments or special use permits under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's
designated representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearings.
Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivision/plats must include copies
of the subdivision/plat.
   (B)   Final decisions. A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats,
and final decisions granting variances or special use permits under local
shoreland management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the
commissioner's designated representative and postmarked within ten days of the
final action. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural
Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the
notification of the approved variance shall also include the Board of
Adjustment's summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts
and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance.
(Ord. 321, passed 10-17-94)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.65 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   A Zoning Administrator designated by the City Council shall administer and
enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person
responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures stated in §
151.99.
(Prior Code, § 15.22(1)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.66 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured: prior to the
erection, addition or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof;
prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land; prior to
the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to the placement of
fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within
the flood plain.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
   (C)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator
shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal
permits.
   (D)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered or nonconforming
use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
   (E)   Construction and use to be provided on zoning applications, plans,
permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits, conditional
use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and
punishable as provided by §
151.99.
   (F)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification
by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Floodproofing measures shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
   (G)   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
flood plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
floodproofed.
(Prior Code, § 15.22(2)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.67 BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Rules. The Board of Appeals and Adjustment shall adopt rules for the
conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such boards
by state law.
   (B)   Administrative review. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where
it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Variances. The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such
relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to
the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship,
practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for
planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of
such variance, the Board of Appeals and Adjustment shall clearly identify in
writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria
specified in the respective enabling legislation which justified the granting
of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district
uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection
than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or
permit standards lower than those required by state law.
   (D)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Appeals and Adjustment of an
appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a
variance, the Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board shall submit
by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for
proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will
receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
   (E)   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on such appeal or
variance within 60 days. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as
such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or other public official. It shall
make its decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons
for its decisions. In granting a variance, the Board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards such as those specified in §
151.68 which are in conformity with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which this
chapter is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable
under §
151.99. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of such action.
   (F)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board may be made as
specified in this community's official controls and also the state statutes.
   (G)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that the issuance of a variance to
construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance; and such construction below the 100-year or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The community shall
maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their
issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report
submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Prior Code, §15.22(3)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.68 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Generally. The City Council shall hear and decide applications for
conditional uses permissible under this chapter. Applications shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall forward the application to
Planning Commission for consideration.
   (B)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Planning Commission an application for
a conditional use permit, the Building Official shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten days notice of the hearing.
   (C)   Decisions. The Planning Commission shall arrive at a decision on a
conditional use within 30 days. In granting a conditional use permit, the City
Council shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those specified in this section, which are in conformity with the purposes of
this chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter punishable under §151.99. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner
of Natural Resources within ten days of such action.
   (D)   Procedures to be followed by the city in passing on conditional use
permit applications within all Flood Plain Districts.
      (1)   Require the applicant to furnish the following information and
additional information as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission for
determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use:
         (a)   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above
to the location of the stream channel.
         (b)   Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
      (2)   Transmit one copy of the information described in division (D)(1)
(a) of this section to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency
for technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project
in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to
the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters.
      (3)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the Planning Commission shall determine the specific flood hazard at
the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the
flood hazard.
   (E)   Factors upon which the decision of the Planning Commission shall be
based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the Planning Commission
and the City Council shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this chapter and:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other
hydraulic structures.
      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
      (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
      (12)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
   (F)   Time for acting on application. The Planning Commission shall act on
an application in the manner described division (D) of this section within 30
days from receiving the application, except that where additional information
is required pursuant to division (E) of this section. The Planning Commission
shall render a written decision within 30 days from the receipt of such
additional information.
   (G)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. Upon consideration of
the factors listed in division (E) of this section and the purpose of this
chapter, the City Council shall attach such conditions to the granting of
conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
      (2)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation.
      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions.
      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees and other protective measures.
      (5)   Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code
and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures
are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area.
(Prior Code, § 15.22(4)) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
§ 151.69 NONCONFORMING USES.
   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
   (A)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity.
   (B)   Any alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection
elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing
techniques (such as, FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable
in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in division (C) of
this section.
   (C)   The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of
the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed
since the adoption of this chapter (these code provisions) must be calculated
into today's current cost which will include all costs such as construction
materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the current
cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions since the adoption
of this chapter exceeds 50% of the current market value of the structure, then
the structure must meet the standards of §§
151.27 and
151.28 for new structures depending upon whether the structure is in the
floodway or flood fringe, respectively.
   (D)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
   (E)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its market value at the time
of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses
or new structures in §§
151.27 and
151.28 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Flood Plain District, respectively.
Improvements nonconforming regardless of percentage of destruction thereof may
be reconstructed if the site whereon located is filled to the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
(Prior Code, § 15.23) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.70 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be
removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is
in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the
regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources if he or she determines that, through other measures, lands are
adequately protected for the intended use.
   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the Official
Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical conditions and criteria
and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of
Natural Resources must be given ten days written notice of all hearings to
consider an amendment to this chapter and the notice shall include a draft of
the ordinance amendment or technical study under consideration.
(Prior Code, § 15.25) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Such actions may include but are not limited to:
      (1)   In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
      (2)   When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to
the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with
the community's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature and
extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure or use is
under construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order the
construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either issue an order
identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time
period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official controls
or notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit or
development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30 days.
      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall
be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse
of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.24) (Ord. 282, passed 4-15-91)
CHAPTER 152: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Applicability
   
152.03   Definitions
Sign Regulations
   
152.20   General sign standards
   
152.21   Allowed signs—no permit required
   
152.22   Allowed signs—permit required
   
152.23   Prohibited signs
   
152.24   Nonconforming uses
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.40   Removal of signs
   
152.41   Permit process
   
152.42   Variances
   
152.43   Administration and enforcement
   
152.44   Conflicting regulation—severability
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public
health, safety, and welfare within the city by the establishment of
comprehensive standards, regulations and procedures governing the erection, use
or display of devises serving as visual communications media. Furthermore,
enactment of the chapter will serve to preserve the residential character of
residential neighborhoods, to preserve order and cleanliness, to avoid the
appearance of clutter, to provide for necessary visual communication, to
preserve and promote a pleasant physical environment, to ensure that the
constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is protected, to protect
public and private property, and to encourage safety upon the streets and
highways within the City of La Crescent by preserving the sight lines and
reducing distractions to motorists. Finally, these rules and regulations are
intended to support local businesses and to enhance the appeal of this area to
residents and visitors.
   (B)   The city is located at the center of three national scenic by-ways,
between bluffs, valleys and protected wetlands. These regulations are designed
to balance the need for signage with the impact of such signage on the
environment by establishing standards regarding the type, number, structure,
size, location, height, lighting and maintenance of all permitted outdoor signs
and sign structures.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531. passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.02 APPLICABILITY.
   These provisions shall apply to and be binding upon all persons, firms,
corporations, associations, partnerships, governmental units and other
entities, whether in the capacity of owner, tenant, proprietor, manager,
custodian, guardian or agent of lands lying and being within the corporate
limits of the city.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.03 DEFINITIONS.
   To the extent used in the administration and enforcement of this chapter,
the language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following definitions. Other words shall have their common
meaning. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used
in the singular shall include the plural and the plural includes the singular.
   AWNING. A structure attached to a permitted building, extending over and
designed to provide cover or shade for windows, entrances, exits or walkways.
Similar to an attached canopy.
   BANNER. A flexible material on which copy, or graphics may be displayed.
   BILLBOARD. See OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN.
   BUILDING. Any structure erected for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animal, chattels or movable property of any kind.
   BUSINESS. Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise wherein
merchandise is manufactured, exhibited or sold, or where services are offered
for compensation.
   CANOPY. A roof-like structure either attached to or detached from a
permitted building, open on all sides, other than where attached; which is
located over and designed to provide cover for entrances, exits, walkways, and
approved off-street vehicle service areas.
   COPY. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic elements
comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals identifying a
street address only.
   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used predominantly for
residential occupancy of a continued nature, including one-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, and multiple family dwellings; but not including hotels,
motels, commercial boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes and trailers.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following definitions shall apply:
      (1)   A distinct business entity situated in a single building;
      (2)   A distinct business entity located in a structure attached to other
similar structures by common walls and ceilings or floors, or attached by means
of an enclosed arcade;
      (3)   A distinct business entity contained within a single structure and
not separated by walls other physical barriers but made distinct due to its
existence as a single lease space and operation by separate entrepreneurs or by
its singularity of purpose (such as clothing sales, furniture sales, and so on)
carried on by a single or separate proprietor.
   FASCIA. A horizontal piece covering the joint between the top of a wall and
the projecting eaves.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or enterprise conducted in a dwelling unit
that is located within a residential district. Such uses include professional
offices, photo or art studios, or similar uses.
   INDUSTRY. An enterprise that involves the production, assembly, processing
or storage of materials, goods or products.
   LOT. A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land separated
from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of
survey map or by metes and bounds for the purpose of sale or lease or separate
use thereof.
   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership.
   OFF-PREMISE ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign structure advertising an establishment,
merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured
or furnished at the property on which the said sign is located, e.g.,
billboards or outdoor advertising.
   PENNANT. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. See also SIGN, ANIMATED. 
   ROOF LINE. The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the uppermost point of said facade or parapet.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance from a building, hedge, fence, wall
or structure to the street or lot line.
   SIGN. Any device visible from a public place that displays either commercial
or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or
pictorial symbols or representations. Noncommercial flags or any flags
displayed from flagpoles or staffs will not be considered to be signs.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. A sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion, or
light and/or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical, or
electronic means. Animated signs, which are differentiated from Electronic
Message Center or Dynamic signs as defined and regulated by this Code, include
the following types:
      (1)   ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs or devices motivated by
wind, thermal changes, or other natural environmental input. Includes spinners,
pinwheels, pennant strings, streamers and/or other devices or displays that
respond to naturally occurring external motivation.
      (2)   MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric
motors or other mechanically induced means.
      (3)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electromechanical input and/or
illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
         (a)   FLASHING. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of
illumination is either the same as or less than the period of non-illumination.
For the purposes of this chapter, flashing will not be defined as occurring if
the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds four (4)
seconds.
         (b)   PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT. Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement
through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for
the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some
form of constant motion.
   SIGN, CAMPAIGN. A temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person running
for a governmental office or promoting a position on an issue to be voted on at
a governmental election.
   SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING. An identification sign affixed to or printed upon
the visible surfaces of an attached or freestanding canopy, awning or marquee.
Such identification signage shall be considered a type of wall sign provided
the canopy, awning or marquee and the sign upon it meet the requirements set
forth in §
152.20.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign on which copy is changed manually in the
field. Such signs may be portable or permanently installed.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign, the primary function of which is to provide
locational directions.
   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC). An electrically activated changeable
sign whose variable message and/or graphic presentation capability can be
electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. Also known as a
"dynamic sign". EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting
source.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign which is not affixed to any part of any building
and which is rather supported by upright braces or posts placed in the ground.
   SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF. The area of a sign face or element (which is
also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be
defined as the area of the smallest square or rectangle that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display,
together with any material or color forming an integral section of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop
or structure against which it is placed. GROSS SURFACE AREA OF THE SIGN does
not include any supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence or wall when
such supporting device otherwise meets the regulations of this chapter and is
clearly incidental to the display itself. Where the sign faces of a double-
faced sign are parallel or the interior angle formed by the faces is 45 degrees
or less, only one display face shall be counted in computing the sign area. If
the two faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the
larger sign face shall be counted as the sign's area. In all other cases, the
areas of all faces of a multi-faced sign shall be added together to compute the
area of the sign.
   SIGN, HEIGHT OF. The height of a freestanding sign shall be calculated from
the point at which the signpost or posts meets or enters the ground, to the top
of the uppermost component of the sign structure.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign, the primary function of which is to identify
an establishment located upon the premises where such sign is located, or to
which such sign is affixed. Signs identifying industrial establishments may
secondarily call attention to the products, goods or materials, which are
produced, processed, assembled, or stored, upon the premises.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign upon which artificial light is directed or which
has an interior light source.
   SIGN, INCIDENTAL. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located. Examples: "Entrance",
"Exit", "No Parking", "No Trespassing", "ATM", etc. No sign with a commercial
message that is legible from a position off of the lot will be considered as
incidental.
   SIGN, NONCOMMERCIAL OPINION OR EXPRESSION. A sign which does not advertise
products, goods, businesses or services and which expresses an opinion,
statement or point of view.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign mounted on a frame or chassis, designed to be easily
relocated, and not meant to be permanently affixed to buildings, poles or the
ground.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign which is affixed to the wall of a building and
which extends outward from the building wall.
   SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected or attached in whole or in part upon the roof of
a building, or a non-freestanding sign which projects above the roof line of
the building to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, SNIPE. A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, utility
pole or other vertical surface which is not intended to be a signboard.
   SIGN, STRUCTURE. The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for a sign
including the sign surface itself. In the case of a wall sign, the sign surface
constitutes the sign structure. In the case of a sign structure consisting of
two or more sides, where the interior angle formed between any of the sides
exceeds 45 degrees each side shall be considered a separate sign structure.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign or advertising display that is not embedded in the
ground or permanently mounted to a building or sign structure that is
permanently embedded in the ground. Rummage/garage sale signs and retailers'
signs temporarily displayed for the purpose of informing the public of a
special event, grand opening, sale or special offer are examples of temporary
signs.
   SIGN, WALL OR FASCIA. A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior
wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than 18 inches from
the building or structure wall, including signs affixed to architectural
projections from a building provided the copy area of such signs remains on a
parallel plane to the face of the building facade or to the face or faces of
the architectural projections to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed
from the outside. Window graphics are to be considered window signs and are
subject to the applicable standards. Signs propped in, or taped to, windows and
not permanently mounted, are considered to be temporary signs.
   SPINNER. Any device consisting of lightweight vanes that are designed to
revolve or attract attention in general. Also referred to as a pinwheel. See
SIGNS, ANIMATED.
   STREAMER. Any fluttering or flexible material designed to move in the wind
and to attract attention. Usually made of a lightweight plastic, fabric or
other material and suspended in serial fashion from a rope, wire or string. See
also SIGNS, ANIMATED.
   STREET LINE. The common boundary line of a street right-of-way and abutting
property.
   USE. The purpose or activity, for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   WALL AREA. The square footage of the side of a building, including doors and
windows, taking into account only the first two stories. The fascia is
considered to be part of the wall. Each street frontage is considered
separately when determining whether or not size limitations are being met.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 152.20 GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS.
   General sign standards apply to all permitted and legal nonconforming signs.
   (A)   Construction and attachment. All signs in the city shall be designed
and constructed or affixed to buildings in such a manner as to comply with the
most current State of Minnesota building codes as they pertain to signage. All
electrical aspects thereof are to be consistent with and as required by the
State of Minnesota Electrical Code.
   (B)   Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained and repaired, as necessary,
to keep them in good repair. Any sign or sign structure which may be, or may
hereafter become rotted, unsafe or unsightly shall be repaired or removed by
the licensee, owner, or agent of the owner of the property upon which the sign
stands upon written notice of the Building Official. Window graphics must not
become unsightly or illegible. Chipped or peeling areas must be removed,
repaired or replaced.
   (C)   Sign area. The gross surface area of signs shall be no greater than as
specified herein (see §§
152.21 and
152.22).
   (D)   Sign height. The height of the top edge of a freestanding sign shall
not exceed the limits as specified herein (see §§
152.21 and
152.22). Furthermore, the height of the lowest edge of a projecting sign shall
be no lower than as specified herein (see §§
152.21 and
152.22).
   (E)   Setbacks. All signs shall be setback on the front, rear and side yards
as stated in §
152.22. At the discretion of the Building Official, setbacks in any district
may be increased at intersections or other areas where signs may obstruct
vehicular sight lines.
   (F)   Illumination. All illuminated signs shall have a shielded light source
and concealed wiring and conduit and shall not interfere with traffic
signalization. The beam of light shall not shine directly upon any part of a
residence or into the street. No revolving beams or beacons shall be used.
Signs with light sources or reflective qualities of such brightness that
constitute a hazard or nuisance as determined by the building official are
prohibited.
   (G)   Electronic message centers. All EMC signs shall comply with the
following special requirements:
      (1)   Such signs may be used only to advertise activities and events
conducted on the premises or activities and events off premises if the off
premises activities and events being advertised are taking place on a
contiguous lot. The signs may also be used to present time, date, temperature,
or information concerning civic events.
      (2)   Signs may have multiple static displays or segmented messages,
subject to all of the following restrictions:
         (a)   Each change of message shall be accomplished in one second or
less.
         (b)   Each message shall remain in a fixed position for at least eight
seconds.
         (c)   Fade or dissolve techniques employed during transition may not
have the appearance of moving text or images.
      (3)   Brightness not to exceed .3 foot-candles above ambient light. Such
measurements are to be taken using a foot-candle meter at an appropriate
distance, depending on sign area, from the sign (see table below.) Signs shall
be equipped with automatic dimmer controls to automatically adjust brightness
in correlation with ambient light conditions.
      (4)   The following display features and functions are prohibited:
continuous scrolling and/or traveling, flashing, spinning, rotating, and
similar moving effects, and all dynamic frame effects or patterns of illusory
movement or simulating movement. Full motion video or film display via an
electronic file imported into the EMC software or streamed in real time into
the EMC is also prohibited.
      (5)   Signs must be equipped with a feature that will turn off the
display if the sign malfunctions.
      (6)   EMC signage must be placed at least 50 feet from a residential lot
line.
      (7)   Brightness Measurement Table:
Sign Area     Measurement Distance Sign Area     Measurement Distance
(square feet) (feet)               (square feet) (feet)
Sign Area     Measurement Distance Sign Area     Measurement Distance
(square feet) (feet)               (square feet) (feet)
10            32                   55            74
15            39                   60            77
20            45                   65            81
25            50                   70            84
30            55                   75            87
35            59                   80            89
40            63                   85            92
45            67                   90            95
50            71                   95            97
55            74                   100           100
 
   (H)   Placement of signs. No sign shall obscure any traffic-control signal
from the vision of any motorist in a moving traffic lane or be placed within
150 feet of such signal. Signs shall not be attached to public utility poles,
fences or other vertical surfaces, which are not intended to be signboards. No
signs shall be placed within the public right-of-way, nor shall any sign
obstruct access to fire escapes of required windows, doors, exits or
standpipes. Signs erected or affixed on roofs are prohibited, as are wall signs
that project more than 12 inches above the building soffit or eave height.
Signs and/or logos shall not be painted directly upon any natural surface such
as rocks or trees, nor shall any signs be painted directly on the roof or walls
of a building.
   (I)   Content of signs. Except for traffic signs and legal notices, no sign
visible from the street shall use words, phrases, symbols or characters with
the intent of simulating a public safety warning or traffic sign. No signs
shall contain images, profanity or other language that is considered to be
obscene or offensive to the general public.
   (J)   Sign labeling. Every freestanding on- or off-premises sign structure
erected in the city shall have noted, in a conspicuous place thereon, the name
of the firm that manufactured the sign and the permit number. Wall, window and
awning or fascia signs are exempt from this requirement.
   (K)   MNDOT compliance. If approval from MNDOT (Minnesota Department of
Transportation) is required, evidence of such approval must be submitted as
part of the city sign permit application. MNDOT approval does not supersede or
in any way replace city approval that in all cases will still be required.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.21 ALLOWED SIGNS—NO PERMIT REQUIRED.
   The following types of signs do not require a permit as long as they comply
with the general sign standards set forth in §
152.20. Some additional restrictions may apply and are herein described.
   (A)   Governmental signs. Signs erected by the city or other governmental
agency (school district) identifying and/or informing residents and visitors of
the location of municipal and other public buildings, as well as signs
advertising the city. The square footage and height of any such sign shall not
exceed the dimensions outlined for signage in the Central Business District,
and all relevant setback requirements for the district shall be followed.
   (B)   House/name/address signs. Identification signs, clearly displaying
street addresses of properties, not to exceed two square feet in area for each
dwelling unit. For the benefit of emergency and delivery personnel, house
numbers must be written in numeric symbols of at least four inches in height.
The numbers must be placed in such a way as to be clearly visible from the
street. The best location is on the home itself.
   (C)   Legal notices. Legal notices, danger and other such temporary,
emergency or non-advertising signs as may be approved by the City Building
Official.
   (D)   Noncommercial opinion or expression signs. One sign is allowed on any
property, with the consent of the property owner; provided that it is not an
illuminated sign, it does not exceed four square feet, it is erected and
maintained in accordance with §
152.20, and it is not otherwise prohibited by city ordinances.
   (E)   Religious/patriotic signs. Decorations connected with civic, patriotic
or religious holidays.
   (F)   Incidental signs. Incidental signs, provided that they are limited to
less than four square feet in area.
   (G)   Outdoor product price signs. Such signs are allowed provided that they
are contained in a freestanding low profile (less than four feet in height)
display, and each sign is no larger than one square foot in area. This applies
only to products displayed for sale or dispensed outdoors.
   (H)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs are allowed as follows:
      (1)   Garage or rummage sale signs. Garage or rummage sale signs are
allowed on the day of the sale only and must be removed within 24 hours of the
conclusion of the sale. The signs may be placed on the premises of the sale or
on other privately-owned property with the permission of the property owner. No
signs shall be affixed to utility poles, traffic signs or other vertical
surfaces in the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Construction signs. Contractor signs are allowed on any property
where a building permit has been issued. The sign area of such signs shall not
exceed 16 square feet in the aggregate for single residential lots and 30
square feet in the aggregate for multiple residential lots or a residential
subdivision. Signs shall be removed upon building completion.
      (3)   Political signs. Portable and freestanding campaign signs of any
size are allowed pursuant to M.S. § 211B.045 from the period August 1 through
ten days after the election. Freestanding campaign signs may be installed only
upon private property with the permission of the property owner who shall be
responsible for removal thereof. The candidate or his agents shall be held
responsible for any improperly placed or otherwise illegal campaign signs.
      (4)   Portable signs. Portable signs are allowed for up to 20 days in one
location provided they: are less than 36 square feet on each face; are placed
on private property; do not obstruct the view of motorists; are either not
externally illuminated or, if internally illuminated, are not operated between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and comply with all other parameters of
the sign chapter.
      (5)   Real Estate signs. Temporary freestanding or wall signs for the
purpose of selling or leasing individual lots or entire buildings; provided
that such signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area for single
residential lots and 32 square feet in area for multiple residential lots,
residential subdivisions or commercial and industrial property. Only one such
freestanding or wall sign is permitted for each property. The sign must be
removed within ten days following the lease or sale. Temporary freestanding
off-site real estate signs announcing an "open house" or similar activity for
the purpose of showing or displaying a home for sale are permitted provided
that: the off-site sign is located on privately-owned residential property and
there is no objection to the display of the sign on the part of that property
owner, the off-site sign is displayed only during the time of the "open house"
or showing, and the size of the off-site sign does not exceed six square feet
in area.
      (6)   Sidewalk signs. One sidewalk sign per business location is allowed
in all but residential districts. Sidewalk signs must not exceed six square
feet in area, may not take up more than one quarter of the sidewalk area and
must be made of weatherproof material. A sidewalk sign may only be displayed
during normal working hours of the business being advertised.
      (7)   Special promotion, event and grand opening signs. Signs, streamers,
pennants or banners temporarily displayed to advertise special promotions,
sales, events and grand openings shall be permitted for nonresidential uses in
a residential district, and in all commercial and industrial districts subject
to the following limitations:
         (a)   Such signs shall be permitted only on the premises of the event,
sale or grand opening;
         (b)   Any sign remaining for an uninterrupted period of more than 60
days, or erected more than two times per year, shall be considered a permanent
sign, and will require a permit. Businesses with frequent promotions are
encouraged to use permanently installed changeable copy signs;
         (c)   The total area of all such signs shall not exceed four square
feet in any residential district, and 20 square feet in the central business,
commercial or industrial districts;
         (d)   All such signs or banners shall be securely fastened to walls,
to the ground or to other fixed surfaces so that they remain in place, in good
repair, for the duration of the event, sale or promotion. Temporary window
signs are permitted if they are fastened to, or set against, the interior of
the window.
      (8)   Seasonal lighting and/or displays.
   (I)   Traffic signs. All official traffic signs legally erected by, pursuant
to and consistent with Federal Highway regulations and the laws and regulations
of the State of Minnesota and/or the City of La Crescent.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.22 ALLOWED SIGNS—PERMIT REQUIRED.
   The following types of signs must comply with the General Sign Standards
outlined above as well as the restrictions outlined below and require a permit
from the city (See §
152.41, Permit Process). Electronic message center (dynamic) signage is allowed
only in the Commercial/Industrial District.
   (A)   Central Business District.
      (1)   Freestanding signs. One on-premise freestanding sign per building,
provided that said sign does not exceed 48 square feet in area for a single
tenant building or 60 square feet in area for a multiple tenant building. Signs
shall not exceed 15 feet in height. Posts or anchoring mechanisms for the sign
shall not be located on public property. Front, rear and side back setback
requirements for the district must be followed when positioning sign. Posts or
anchoring mechanisms for the sign shall not be located on public property.
      (2)   Wall or fascia signs. Wall signs are permitted on each street
frontage provided that the area of all signage on each street or alley frontage
does not exceed 25% of the wall area. This limitation is to be applied
individually to each street frontage. Additionally, wall signs not exceeding
10% of said wall are permitted on each building frontage abutting a public
parking lot accommodating 25 or more cars providing that all land abutting all
sides of the parking lot is either public right-of-way or commercially zoned
property.
      (3)   Projecting signs. A projecting sign may not exceed 20 square feet
in area, nor may it project more than six feet out from the wall to which it is
affixed. No projecting sign shall extend beyond the curb line of any public
street or right-of-way. Projecting signs must maintain a minimum clearance
between the bottom of the sign and the finished grade of eight and a half feet.
      (4)   Window signs. Window signs are permitted provided that the area of
the signage does not exceed 25% of the window area; and that the total area of
all window, wall and fascia signage on the same street frontage does not exceed
25% of the wall area, Windowpanes on entrance doors may not have more than 25%
of the gross surface area of the glass pane covered by signage in order to
avoid obstructing the view of persons entering and exiting the building.
      (5)   Canopy or awning signs. Canopy or awning signs shall not exceed 75%
of the exterior, viewable surfaces of the canopy or awning. In the case of a
canopy or awning that is attached to the building, the area of canopy/awning
signage, together with the area of all wall, window and fascia signage on the
same street frontage, shall not exceed 25% of the wall area.
      (6)   Off-premises signs. Off premise or billboard signs shall only be
allowed in the Central Business District on a modified "cap and replace" basis
as defined in §
152.22(B)(6).
   (B)   Commercial and Industrial Districts.
      (1)   Freestanding signs. One on-premises freestanding sign per building
is permitted provided said sign does not exceed 150 square feet in area, 25
feet in height, and is not placed closer than ten feet from any street right-
of-way. The freestanding sign described herein may contain off-premises
advertising if the freestanding sign complies with the requirements of this
provision and the off premises establishment advertised is located on a lot
that is immediately adjacent to the lot on which the freestanding sign is
located. Front, rear and side back setback requirements for the district must
be followed when positioning sign. Posts or anchoring mechanisms for the sign
shall not be located on public property.
      (2)   Projecting signs. Projecting signs are allowed when the sign is to
be attached to a building that has a setback of ten feet or less from the
street right-of-way. Such projecting signs shall not overhang the right-of-way.
A projecting sign may not exceed 24 square feet in area and must maintain a
minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the finished grade of
eight and a half feet.
      (3)   Wall or fascia signs. Wall signs are permitted on each street or
alley frontage provided said signs do not exceed 25% of the wall area. This
limitation is to be applied individually to each street frontage. Additionally,
wall signs not exceeding 10% of said wall area are permitted on each building
frontage abutting a public parking lot accommodating 25 or more cars providing
that all land abutting all sides of the parking lot is either public right-of-
way or commercially zoned property.
      (4)   Window signs. Window signs are permitted provided that the area of
the signage does not exceed 25% of the window area; and that the total area of
all window, wall and fascia signage on the same street frontage does not exceed
25% of the wall area. Windowpanes on entrance doors may not have more than 25%
of the gross surface area of the glass pane covered by signage in order to
avoid obstructing the view of persons entering and exiting the building.
      (5)   Canopy or awning signs. Canopy or awning signs shall not exceed 75%
of the exterior, viewable surfaces of the canopy or awning. In the case of a
canopy or awning that is attached to the building, the area of canopy/awning
signage, together with the area of all wall, window and fascia signage on the
same street frontage, shall not exceed 25% of the wall area.
      (6)   Off-premises signs. Other than division (B)(1) of this section,
off-premises or billboard signs shall only be allowed on a modified "cap and
replace" basis.
         (a)   Capitation. As of the date of the adoption of this chapter, a
complete inventory of existing off-premise signs shall be prepared. The
inventory shall contain information pertaining to the size, height, location,
ownership and permit number of the sign. All inventoried signs may remain in
place, as legal nonconforming signs, for as long as they are properly
maintained and utilized (see §
152.24). No additional signs are allowed. The inventoried signs may not be
altered in such a manner as to enhance their size, to raise their height or to
change their location.
         (b)   Replacement. Inventoried signs may be replaced at the end of
their useful lives, or earlier if destroyed by circumstances out of the control
of the owner of the sign. All replacement signs must meet the sign requirements
outlined in division (B)(6)(c) below. Any signs which are allowed to fall into
disrepair, or which carry no commercial or public service message for more than
six continuous months will be considered abandoned. Abandoned signs are a
nuisance, must be removed pursuant to §
152.40 and will not be eligible for replacement.
         (c)   Requirements for replacement signs. All replacement signs must
meet the following requirements, as well as any requirements set forth in
regulations promulgated by state or federal governmental agencies.
            1.   Location.
               a.   Highway 14/61 (the Pike) from 1,400 feet west of Twilite
Street east to the city limits, on the south side of the roadway.
               b.   Highway 14/61 from Houston County 6 north to the city
limits.
            2.   Height. Maximum height is 20 feet above the centerline of the
adjacent roadway.
            3.   Size. Maximum sign area is 300 square feet per facing, not to
exceed two facings. Double-sided signs shall be attached back to back. Signs
connected at one edge, with the two faces forming an interior angle of 30
degrees or less shall be considered to be back to back.
            4.   Spacing. Three hundred linear feet from any other such sign on
either side of the street or roadway. Not closer than 300 linear feet from the
intersection of two or more streets or highways as measured from the
centerlines of the roadway intersection.
            5.   Identification. All billboard signs shall have noted on their
face the name of the firm, which manufactured the sign, and the sign permit
number.
   (C)   Residential.
         (1)   Home occupations and special home occupations. One wall sign per
dwelling, the maximum size to be two square feet. Standard house numbers used
to identify the property are not considered to be home occupation signs.
         (2)   Multiple family dwellings. One wall or freestanding
identification sign per building not to exceed ten square feet in area.
Freestanding sign must not exceed five feet in height nor be placed within ten
feet of any right-of-way.
         (3)   Churches or other conditional use buildings. One wall or
freestanding sign per building. Height and size restrictions shall be as
outlined for signs in the Central Business District.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.23 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following types of signs are prohibited within the city.
   (A)   Animated signs. Such signage is prohibited except as allowed for under
§
152.21(H).
   (B)   Portable signs. Such signage is prohibited except as allowed for under
§
152.21(H). Signs painted on a commercial vehicle, if that vehicle is parked at
a commercial premise or utilized in such a manner as to obviously and primarily
constitute a static display advertising a business, product or service to the
public, shall also be considered to be portable signs.
   (C)   Signs that violate general sign standards with regard to construction,
maintenance, size, setbacks, illumination, obsolescence, placement, content and
labeling (See §
152.20).
   (D)   All other signs not expressly permitted by this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.24 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Any sign legally existing and covered by a proper sign permit at the
time of the enactment of these code provisions, but not conforming to the
provisions hereof, is eligible for characterization as a legal nonconforming
sign. It may remain, provided it is maintained according to the requirements
set forth in the general sign standards, except for the following: it may not
be expanded, raised in height or replaced, it may not be repaired or rebuilt if
more than 50% of the structure is destroyed, and it may not again be used if
use thereof is discontinued or abandoned for a continuous period of six months.
   (B)   If a legal nonconforming sign is not maintained in good repair, the
Building Official shall notify the owner thereof and order him to repair the
sign within a specified time, not less than 30 calendar days. If the necessary
repairs are not completed within the time specified, the Building Official
shall notify the owner of the sign and the owner of the real property on which
said sign is located that the sign must be removed from the property (See §
152.40).
   (C)   If the Building Official finds that the sign has deteriorated to a
point where it is valued at less than 50% of its replacement value, the
Building Official shall notify the owner of the sign and the owner of the real
property on which said sign is located that the sign must be removed from the
property (See §
152.40).
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.40 REMOVAL OF SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs that do not conform to the sign chapter, and which lack a
regular or conditional sign permit, may be ordered to be removed. Any sign in
the city which must be removed pursuant to any of the foregoing provisions,
shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the
beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon which such sign is
located. Such removal shall be effected within 30 days after written
notification is received from the Building Official ordering such removal. Upon
failure by any such owner, agent or person to comply with such notice within
the timed specified in such removal order, the Building Official with the prior
authorization and direction of the City Council shall cause the removal of such
sign. Any expense incident to such sign removal together with all expenses
incident thereto including legal expense incurred by the city shall be paid by
the owner of the land whereon the building, structure or property to which the
sign is attached. The total expenses thereof, if not paid upon due demand,
shall be certified by the City Clerk to the Houston County Auditor for payment
as a special assessment against the land whereon such sign or structure was
located. The owner of the property from which the sign is removed shall be
presumed to be the owner of all signs thereon for purpose of implementation of
the foregoing assessment procedure.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the earlier or
immediate removal, under the same provisions, of nonconforming signs which by
reason of their lack of appropriate maintenance, hazardous location or some
other reason are deemed by the Building Official of the city to be dilapidated,
dangerous or in violation of the herein incorporated rules and regulations of
some other authority having appropriate jurisdiction other than the city.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.41 PERMIT PROCESS.
   If a sign requiring a sign permit under this chapter is to be placed,
constructed or modified on a site, the owner or agent of the site shall secure
a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection or structural
modification of such sign. The process is outlined as follows.
   (A)   Permit application and fee. Permits shall be applied for on forms
approved by the City Council, obtainable at the office of the city Building
Official. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by the required
sign permit fee and must provide the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number and status of the applicant. The
applicant must be the owner or agent of the building, structure or land to
which or upon which the sign is to be placed or installed.
      (2)   Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the
sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected.
      (3)   Dimensions of the proposed signage: area, height, and clearance
over sidewalks. Dimensions of the building to which the sign will be attached,
if applicable.
      (4)   Information relative to illumination of signage.
      (5)   (a)   Details about the placement of the sign in relation to nearby
structures or roadways.
         (b)   Evidence of MNDOT approval if required.
      (6)   Construction details to the extent requested by the City Building
Official.
         (a)   Two blueprints or ink drawings of the plans or specifications
and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.
         (b)   A copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure
is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this and all other laws and code provisions of the city.
      (7)   Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the sign.
      (8)   Such other additional information as the Building Official shall
require in order to determine compliance with this chapter and other applicable
code provisions of the city.
   (B)   Review and approval. Upon receipt of a complete application and fee,
the Building Official shall review same and within ten days shall either
approve the application and issue the permit or shall deny the permit if the
sign fails to comply in any respect to applicable standards of this chapter. In
the case of a rejection, the Building Official shall identify those sections of
this chapter with which the sign is inconsistent.
   (C)   Lapse of approval. If an approved sign has not been erected or put
into place within six months of the issuance of the permit, the permit shall
lapse and be of no further effect.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.42 VARIANCES.
   A variance is a modification or relaxation of the provisions of this chapter
and may be granted in instances where it is determined that by reason of
special and unusual circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration, strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship,
or that strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter would be
unreasonable and granting a variance would be in keeping with the spirit and
intent of the chapter. "Undue hardship" in connection with the granting of a
variance means that the property in question cannot be reasonably used unless
regulations otherwise applicable are modified and that the hardship is due to
circumstances unique to the property and not created by the landowner. The
variance, if granted, shall not alter the essential character of the locality,
nor shall it be materially detrimental to the property owners in the vicinity.
Economic considerations alone shall not constitute an undue hardship if
reasonable use for the property exists. Applications for variances under the
chapter shall be made in a manner consistent with the rules for applying for
variances under the Zoning Ordinances.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.43 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter are misdemeanors and upon
conviction thereof are punishable in accordance with the laws of the State of
Minnesota. The city may, at its discretion, charge violations of this chapter
as petty misdemeanors in which case punishment upon conviction shall be in
accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota for petty misdemeanors. The
city may institute actions in equity or at law to enjoin or abate violations
and each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. All violations
of this chapter are nuisances and prosecutable as such and/or subject to
injunction or abatement in an appropriate civil action.
   (B)   The Building Official or any such other official as may be designated
by City Council resolution is vested with the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Institution of enforcement as misdemeanor or petty
misdemeanor shall not preclude subsequent actions at law or in equity.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
§ 152.44 CONFLICTING REGULATION—SEVERABILITY.
   Any other regulation of the City of La Crescent, conflicting with the
regulations hereinbefore contained, are hereby, to that extent, repealed. In
the event other regulations are consistent herewith, but one or the other more
restrictive, the more restrictive shall control. In the event any provision
hereof is declared invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, all other
provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 497, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 531, passed 3-25-19)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
153.01   Subdivision regulations adopted by reference.
§ 153.01 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The subdivision regulations for the City of La Crescent, Minnesota, set
forth in Ord. 421, passed 6-27-05, as may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and these subdivision
regulations shall be treated as if set forth in full herein. Copies of the
subdivision regulations shall be available for public inspection at the office
of the City Administrator.
(Ord. 421, passed 6-27-05; Am. Ord. 423, passed 9--05; Am. Ord. 450, passed 2-
9-09)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
   
154.01   Zoning regulations adopted by reference.
§ 154.01 ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The zoning regulations for the City of La Crescent, Minnesota, as may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference,
and these zoning regulations shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
Copies of the zoning regulations shall be available for public inspection at
the office of the City Administrator.
(Am. Ord. 375, passed 11-27-00; Am. Ord. 376, passed 2-26-01; Am. Ord. 377,
passed 3-13-01; Am. Ord. 378, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord. 379, passed 3-26-01; Am.
Ord. 380, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord. 387, passed 6-24-02; Am. Ord. 390, passed
12-30-02; Am. Ord. 391, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. 399, passed 9-8-03; Am. Ord.
423, passed 9- -05; Am. Ord. 432, passed 10-23-06; Am. Ord. 462, passed 6-14-
10; Am. Ord. 463, passed 7-26-10; Am. Ord. 464, passed 9-13-10; Am. Ord. 465,
passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-11; Am. Ord. 474, passed 2-27-12;
Am Ord. 477, passed 10-8-12; Am. Ord. 480, passed 12-26-12; Am. Ord. 494,
passed 5-11-15; Am. Ord. 502, passed 2-22-16; Am. Ord. 528, passed 11-13-18;
Am. Ord. 537, passed 12-9-19; Am. Ord. 558, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. 560,
passed 7-11-22; Am. Ord. 563, passed 11-28-22; Am. Ord. 588, passed 12-9-24)
CHAPTER 155: STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL
Section
   
155.01   Stormwater and erosion control regulations adopted by reference
§ 155.01 STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The stormwater and erosion control regulations for the City of La Crescent,
Minnesota, as may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and these regulations shall be treated as if
set forth in full herein. Copies of the regulations shall be available for
public inspection at the office of the City Administrator.
(Am. Ord. 451, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. 452, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. 454, passed
4-13-09; Am. Ord. 551, passed 5-24-21)
CHAPTER 156: EXTRACTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
Section
   
156.01   Purpose
   
156.02   Considerations for interim use permits
   
156.03   Hours of operation
   
156.04   Water quality/stormwater drainage
   
156.05   Air quality/dust control
   
156.06   Site security
   
156.07   Noise levels
   
156.08   Setbacks
   
156.09   Blasting
   
156.10   Reclamation plan
   
156.11   Public interest
   
156.12   Compliance
§ 156.01 PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of this chapter, NATURAL RESOURCE EXTRACTION is the removal
and any related on site processing of sand, fill dirt, clay, or topsoil (but
not including sod production and/or removal) in quantities greater than 500
cubic yards. Such removal may be permitted by interim use permit provided the
removal is pursuant to a development agreement, an approved planned unit
development or other end use preparation for residential or commercial
development. This regulation is not intended to apply to excavations for
basements or footings nor where the Subdivision and Stormwater Pollution and
Erosion Control ordinances are sufficient in the opinion of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.02 CONSIDERATIONS FOR INTERIM USE PERMITS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may examine the following factors in addition
to general considerations for interim use permits prior to recommending to the
City Council the granting of an interim use permit:
   (B)   The relationship of extraction and associated activities with existing
land use(s) already taking place on the property:
      (1)   The use must be reasonably related to existing or future land use
plans; and
      (2)   A natural resources protection map and approved sketch plan may be
required in advance of granting a permit and shall be considered in both the
removal and reclamation plans.
   (C)   The impact on existing land uses in the vicinity of the property:
      (1)   The use must not create an excessive burden on existing parks,
schools, streets and other public facilities and utilities that serve or are
proposed to serve the area; and
      (2)   Existing land uses nearby must not be adversely affected
unreasonably by intrusion of noise, vibrations, glare or general unsightliness.
   (D)   Adverse impact on the properties in the vicinity of the property and
along the proposed hauling route serving the property (based on credible
evidence):
      (1)   The use must be sufficiently compatible or separated by distance or
screening from adjacent agricultural or residentially zoned or used land so
that existing homes will not be depreciated in value and there will be no
deterrence to development of vacant land; and
      (2)   The structure and site must have an appearance that will not
unreasonably create an adverse effect upon adjacent residential properties.
   (E)   The impact on pedestrian and traffic safety in the vicinity of the
property and along the proposed hauling route serving the property:
      (1)   The use must not cause traffic hazard or congestion;
      (2)   The location and number of vehicle access points; and
      (3)   The natural resource extraction site shall have direct access to
designated truck routes. The city shall set minimum roadway improvements and
maintenance obligations as a condition of the permit.
   (F)   Considerations will include, but not be limited to, topography,
safety, traffic, number of vehicle trips per hour and day and existing land
use. Trips, quantity and methods for obtaining and delivering backfill material
(if any) shall also be considered and regulated as appropriate.
   (G)   The impact on other identifiable health, safety, and welfare interests
in the city are described in further detail in §§
156.03 through
156.12.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.03 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Hours of operation. Natural resource extraction shall occur only
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. No weekend
or holiday operations will be allowed. Holidays are New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas. When New Year's Day, July
4, Easter or Christmas fall on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be
considered the holiday. When New Year's Day, July 4 or Christmas fall on a
Saturday the previous Friday shall be considered the holiday.
   (B)   Operators are allowed extensions to the hours of operation for
emergencies only. Operators must notify the city Building Official and receive
approval in advance of the proposed exception.
   (C)   The City Council must approve other exceptions to the hours of
operation, such as weekend operation and other evening work.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.04 WATER QUALITY/STORMWATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The use must not cause significant adverse impact to surface or ground
water resources.
   (B)   Dewatering to obtain materials intersecting the groundwater shall not
be allowed. The use of equipment such as draglines, trackhoes and backhoes to
obtain materials intersecting groundwater shall not be allowed.
   (C)   Increased stormwater run-off must be retained on-site with retention
or detention ponds.
   (D)   All activities on the subject property with the potential to impact
water quality will be conducted in a manner consistent with required permits
issued by state and federal agencies. The Planning Commission may require other
standards it deems reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.05 AIR QUALITY/DUST CONTROL.
   (A)   Owner/operators will be responsible for dust control on all gravel
roads utilized by trucks hauling to or from the permitted mineral extraction
facility. Dust control will be required when conditions warrant it and the
number of one-way truck trips from the natural resource extraction site exceed
three per hour. The city reserves the right to require dust control on any haul
route within the city or those bordering the city.
   (B)   An owner/operator shall sufficiently prevent or clean up carryout and
trackout on paved public roads or the paved shoulders of a paved public road.
The use of blower devices, or dry rotary brushes or brooms for removal of
carryout and trackout on public roads is expressly prohibited. Flushing with
water may be utilized if curbs or gutters are not present and where the use of
water will not result as a source of trackout material or result in adverse
impacts on storm water drainage systems or violate any National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit program. Trackout-control devices are
highly encouraged and may be required as a condition of receiving a permit.
   (C)   The city shall require dust control on the extraction site when it is
determined that airborne dust from extraction areas, stockpiles or internal
roadways creates a public nuisance or otherwise adversely impacts surrounding
lands. Remedies to dust control may include watering, berming, landscaping and
enclosures for processing equipment, and any other means deemed necessary by
the city.
   (D)   All activities on the subject property with the potential to impact
air quality will be conducted in a manner consistent with operating permits
issued by state and federal agencies. The Planning Commission may require other
standards it deems reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.06 SITE SECURITY.
   Regular fencing or a gate in good repair may be required around the entire
permitted area of operation.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.07 NOISE LEVELS.
   (A)   A 24-hour baseline audiogram collected at the property line may be
required in areas adjacent to a residential zone or within 2,500 feet of a
residence.
   (B)   Permissible maximum noise levels at the property line will be
consistent with, and at no time exceed, the most current occupational noise
exposure standards established by the Occupation Safety Hazard and Health
Administration (OSHA).
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.08 SETBACKS.
   (A)   No extraction activity may occur within 1,000 feet of any dwelling and
within 50 feet of any adjacent property line, road right-of-way or public
utility except by adoption of specific conditions (see division (B)). Screeners
or other processing equipment must be specified in the application and must be
specifically approved. If approved, such equipment may not be located closer
than 1,000 feet from a dwelling nor closer than 100 feet from any adjacent
property line, road right-of-way or public utility. Setbacks from existing
dwellings shall take precedence over setbacks for road right-of-way, adjacent
property line and public utility. If the processing equipment is placed within
an enclosed structure, the Planning Commission may consider shorter setback
distances. Grading plans affecting pipelines or power line corridors will be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The city may waive setback requirements when
the common boundary is not within 1,000 feet of a residence, and both property
owners have agreed to a common reclamation plan and have a written agreement
with the city establishing responsibility for reclamation.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the setback requirements set forth above, at the time
of permit review and issuance, the city may impose lesser setback requirements
if the Planning Commission finds the following:
      (1)   Practical difficulties exist in complying with the setback
requirements set forth above; and
      (2)   The protections afforded surrounding lands are not significantly
lessened by the reduced setbacks when taking into account the following:
         (a)   The scope and size of the natural resource extraction;
         (b)   The time of day and duration that the extraction will occur in
proximity to surrounding lands;
         (c)   Reduced operating hours, limitations on consecutive days, or
restricted seasons of operation or additional berming, screening, special
fencing, type of equipment used, or other measures can be imposed to ameliorate
the impact of mining in closer proximity to the surrounding lands than would be
allowed by the setbacks stated above;
         (d)   The lesser setbacks are reasonable in light of all
circumstances; and
         (e)   There is a substantial volume of minerals or the nature of the
materials varies in the more restrictive setback areas and it is reasonable to
extract the substantial volume of natural resource in the more restrictive
setback areas in light of the relatively small volume of natural resource that
can be extracted on the remainder of the subject property.
   (C)   If the city receives a request for lessened setbacks, then
consideration of such request shall be referred to the Planning Commission for
a recommendation unless such consideration was approved as part of the initial
review.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.09 BLASTING.
   No blasting is permitted.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.10 RECLAMATION PLAN.
   (A)   A reclamation plan must include the grading plans, on-site topsoil
replacement, seeding, mulching, erosion control and sedimentation control
specifications for each phase and the final site restoration. The operator and
owner must follow the reclamation plan approved in the interim use permit. The
following minimum standards and conditions apply:
      (1)   The peaks and depressions of the area shall be reduced to a surface
which will result in a gently rolling topography in substantial conformity with
an accepted end land use plan or to the land area immediately surrounding, and
which will minimize erosion due to rainfall. No graded slope shall exceed a 4:
1 ratio (25%). The final grade slope shall commence at the property boundary.
Berms will be removed to the original elevation of the land, unless the
Planning Commission has approved a different elevation as part of the end use
plan.
      (2)   Excavations made to a water producing depth must meet the following
requirements:
         (a)   The depth of the excavation for lake end-use must not be less
than ten feet nor more than 30 feet below the natural low water mark, as
determined by the Planning Commission after consultation by the City Engineer
and/or the Department of Natural Resources.
         (b)   The depth of the excavation for a wetland end-use shall be from
one foot above the natural low water mark to a depth not to exceed one foot
below the natural low water mark, as determined by the Planning Commission
after consultation by the City Engineer and/or the Department of Natural
Resources.
         (c)   A combination of the requirements of divisions (1) and (2) as
approved by the city.
         (d)   All banks shall be sloped to the water line at a slope that
shall not be steeper than ten feet horizontal to one foot vertical (10:1) for a
lake end-use, and ten feet horizontal to one foot vertical (10:1) for a wetland
end-use.
         (e)   All banks shall be sodded or surfaced with soil of a quality at
least equal to the topsoil of land areas immediately surrounding and to a depth
of at least six inches.
         (f)   Such topsoil as required by the preceding division shall be
planted with trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses.
         (g)   All materials used for back-filling in any area of the
reclamation shall be tested and be free of all contaminants, and shall be non-
noxious, non-flammable and non-combustible.
      (3)   Excavating not made to a water producing depth, but which must be
graded or back-filled, shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   All materials used for back-filling in any area of the
reclamation shall be tested and be free of all contaminants, and shall be non-
noxious, non-flammable and non-combustible.
         (b)   The graded or back-filled area shall not collect or permit
stagnant water to remain therein.
         (c)   Such graded or back-filled area shall be sodded or surfaced with
soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas immediately
surrounding, and to a depth of at least six inches.
         (d)   Such topsoil as required by the preceding division shall be
planted with trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses.
      (4)   Seeding and mulching shall be consistent with Minnesota Department
of Transportation specifications for rights-of-way. Exceptions to seeding and
mulching include areas returned to agricultural production.
      (5)   Soil restoration including any necessary soil compaction, seeding
and mulching must occur within each phase as soon as final grades, or interim
grades identified in the phasing plans, have been reached. Exceptions to
seeding and mulching include the processing, storage and staging areas within
each phase.
      (6)   Unless otherwise amended or approved by the city, all final grades
and site restoration efforts shall be consistent with the reclamation plan.
      (7)   When the end-use is some form of open space, the type of vegetative
re-growth must provide appropriate habitat for wildlife consistent with the
form of end-use.
      (8)   The end-use plan shall consider the safe use of the property. The
end-use plan shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning
Ordinance.
      (9)   Within nine months after the completion of natural resource
extraction or after termination of the interim use permit, or any other
required permit, all equipment, vehicles, machinery, materials, stock piles of
extracted materials, and debris shall be removed from the subject property.
      (10)   For any phase of a phased removal plan, within three months after
completion of natural resource extraction for that phase, reclamation must be
completed. If the permit is terminated earlier, reclamation must be completed
within three months after termination. If reclamation is not completed within
three months, the city shall have the right to obtain a court order permitting
the completion and shall have with court permission the right to enter the
property and cause the reclamation plan to be completed and place any and all
reasonable costs onto the tax role for such property.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.11 PUBLIC INTEREST.
   The overall public interest in the extraction of the specific natural
resources on the property shall be considered. Compliance with the city's
Comprehensive Plan and general community benefit are material considerations.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
§ 156.12 COMPLIANCE.
   The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with applicable sections of §
155.01, which adopts by reference Storm Water and Erosion Control regulations.
The purpose of the regulations are to use the fullest current understanding of
good design, architecture, landscape architecture and civil engineering to
control or eliminate storm water pollution along with soil erosion and
sedimentation within the city. They establish standards and specifications for
conservation practices, planning activities, and construction activities which
minimize storm water pollution, soil erosion, and sedimentation. They protect
public health and property while encouraging retention of natural topographic
features and existing vegetation and encouraging alternative approaches to
conventional flatland development practices on steep slopes, including
imaginative and innovative techniques suited to the natural surroundings to
enhance the existing and future appearances of hillsides.
(Ord. 508, passed 9-12-16)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   ANNEXATIONS
   
II.   FRANCHISES
   
III.   STREET NAME CHANGES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
221  1-16-  Annexation of territory being part of the Northeast Quarter of Section 16,
     84     Township 104 North, Range 4 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian.
274  6-4-90 Annexation of territory being part of the north half of the Northwest Quarter
            of Section 15, Township 104 North, Range 4 of the Fifth Meridian.
     11-18- Annexation of territory being part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest
289  91     Quarter of Section 15, Township 104 North of Range 4 West of the Fifth
            Principal Meridian.
296  12-21- Annexation of territory being part of the Northwest Quarter of Section 3,
     92     Township 104, Range 4.
297  12-21- Annexation of territory being part of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest
     92     Quarter of Section 3, Township 104, Range 4.
            Annexation of territory being part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast
299  3-1-93 Quarter and of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 16,
            Township 104, Range 4.
300  3-1-93 Annexation of territory being part of the east half of the Southeast Quarter
            of Section 4, Township 104, Range 4.
     12-6-  Annexation of territory being a tract of land in the south half of the
311  93     Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter, Section 4, Township 104 North,
            Range 4 West.
314  3-21-  Annexation of territory being a part of the east half of the Northwest
     94     Quarter of Section 15, Township 104 North, Range 4 West.
315  3-21-  Annexation of territory being a part of the Northwest Quarter of the
     94     Northeast Quarter of Section 16, Township 104 North, Range 4 West.
322  12-12- Annexation of an .58-acre of land being Lot 20 Crescent Heights First
     94     Addition.
323  2-21-  Annexation of territory being part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest
     95     Quarter of Section 15, Township 104 North, Range 4 West.
324  2-21-  Annexation of territory being part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast
     95     Quarter of Section 16, Township 104 North, Range 4 West.
327  5-1-95 Annexation of territory being part of the south half of the Northwest Quarter
            of Section 3, Township 104, Range 4.
     10-9-  Annexation of an .42-acre of land being the west 90 feet of the East 289.6
331  95     feet of the North 203 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter
            of Section 16, Township 104 North, Range 4 West.
     5-13-  Annexation of approximately .071 of an acre of land being that part of the
335  96     Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 3, Township 104, Range
            4.
336  5-13-  Annexation of approximately 32.4 acres of land being that part of the
     96     Northwest Quarter of Section 3, Township 104, Range 4.
            Annexation of approximately 133 acres of land being those parts of the North
     3-10-  half of the Southwest Quarter and the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest
339  97     Quarter of Section 2; and of the Northeast Quarter and that part of the North
            half of the Southeast Quarter of Section 3, all in Township 104 North of
            Range 4 West.
     4-13-  Annexation of approximately 6.88 acres of land being legally described as
349  98     Howarth, Welch, Dawson, Ratigan, Hill, Henderson, Steffes, Lind, Gagne and
            Bjorge descriptions.
     5-11-  Annexation of approximately 2.4 acres of land located in part of the
350  98     Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 15, Township 104 North,
            Range 4 West.
            Annexation of approximately 53.8 acres of land being part of the Northwest
351  6-8-98 Quarter of Section 3 and of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of
            Section 4, all in Township 104, Range 4.
     7-13-  Annexation of two parcels of approximately 0.59 acres of land being in the
353  98     Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 16, Township 104 North,
            Range 4 West.
     9-28-  Annexation of approximately 55.5 acres of land being part of the east half of
358  98     the Southwest Quarter and of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter,
            all in Section 33, Township 105, Range 4.
362  5-10-  Annexation of approximately 32.4 acres of land being the south ½ of the NE ¼
     99     of the SW ¼ lying westerly of County State Aid Highway No. 1.
369  5-8-00 Annexation of approximately .07 acres of land being Lot 16, Crescent Heights
            Addition.
371  6-29-  Annexation of four parcels of land approximately 14.9 acres.
     00
     6-29-  Annexation of approximately 9.5 acres of land lying and being in the NW ¼ of
372  00     Section 15, Township 104 North of Range 4 West of the Fifth Principal
            Meridian.
385  6-10-  Annexation of territory being part of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest
     02     Quarter, Section 3, Township 104, Range 4.
397  6-23-  Annexation of approximately 12.8 acres of territory being part of the
     03     Southeast Quarter of Section 33, Township 105, North of Range 4 West.
     6-14-  Annexation of approximately 13.8 acres of territory being part of the
410  04     Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 9, Township 104, North
            of Range 4 West.
     8-23-  Annexation of approximately 5 acres of territory being part of the Northwest
412  04     Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 33, Township 105, North of Range
            4 West.
     11-8-  Annexation of approximately 32.6 acres of territory being parts of the
413  04     Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter and the Northeast Quarter of the
            Southwest Quarter of Section 33, Township 105, North of Range 4 West.
415  12-13- Annexation of approximately 1.72 acres, being part of Lot 2, Block 1,
     05     Crescent Hills First Addition.
            Annexation of approximately 4.7 acres, being parts of the Southeast Quarter
416  12-13- of Section 9, Township 104, North of Range 4 West and Block K of Auditors
     05     Subdivision of Section 9, Township 104, North of Range 4 West, Crescent
            Valley First Addition to La Crescent Township.
419  4-11-  Annexation of approximately 2.4 acres, being part of Lots 8, 9, and 10 of
     05     Block 2, Crescent Valley First Addition.
425  10-11- Annexation of approximately 1.5 acres, being parts of Lot 1, Block 1,
     05     Walter’s First Addition and Lot 1, Block 1, Walter’s Second Addition.
            Annexation of approximately 4.25 acres, commencing at a point in the center
427  11-28- of the South Ridge Road in the Southeast Quarter of Section 9, Township 104,
     05     North of Range 4 West and a tract in the Southwest Quarter of Section 9,
            Township 104, North of Range 4 West.
466  12-13- Annexation of approximately 120 acres, being part of Lot 7 of Block 2 of
     10     Crescent Valley First Addition.
     1-24-  Annexation of approximately one acre of land described as Lot Two in Block
468  11     Two of Crescent Valley First Addition, La Crescent Township, and Lot Eight,
            Block Two, Crescent Valley Subdivision to the Township of La Crescent.
470  6-13-  Annexation of four parcels of land, approximately two acres total, of the
     11     Crescent Valley Subdivision, Township of La Crescent.
472  9-26-  Annexation of less than one acre of land, described as Lot Seven, Block One,
     11     Crescent Valley Subdivision, Township of La Crescent.
475  3-12-  Amending annexation Ord. 466.
     12
476  3-12-  Amending annexation Ord. 468.
     12
488  10-13- Annexation of two parcels of land, described as Lot 2 of Block 1 of McInery
     14     and Lot 19 of Crescent Heights, totaling approximately 1.45 acres.
489  10-27- Annexation of Lot 5, Block 2, Crescent Valley, consisting of approximately
     14     0.43 acres.
     1-12-  Annexation of Lot 1, Block 1 of Crescent Valley Subdivision to La Crescent,
491  15     Houston County, and part of the southeast quarter corner of Section 9,
            Township 104 north, Range 4 west, Houston County.
496  7-27-  Annexation part of the southeast quarter of Section 9 in Township 104 north
     15     of Range 4 west of the fifth principal meridian as described in Ord. 496.
     2-22-  Annexation of part of Lot 9, Block H, of Auditors Subdivision of Section 9,
501  16     Township 104 North, Range 4 West, located in the northeast quarter of the
            southeast quarter.
504  7-25-  Annexation of the west half of Lot 25, Block 1, Crescent Valley Subdivision
     16     in the Township of La Crescent.
505  8-8-16 Annexation of part of the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 9,
            Township 104 North, Range 4 West, Houston County, as described in Ord. 505.
507  9-12-  Annexation of Lot 3, Block 2, Crescent Valley Subdivision.
     16
     10-10- Annexation of part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter, Section
509  16     9, Township 104 North, Range 4 West, Houston County, as described in Ord.
            509.
510  10-10- Annexation of Lot 5, Block 1, Crescent Valley First Addition.
     16
511  2-27-  Annexation of Lot 13, Block 2, Crescent Valley First Addition.
     17
514  7-10-  Annexation of Lot 14, Block 2, Crescent Valley First Addition.
     17
516  7-24-  Annexation of Lot 2, Block 1, Crescent Valley Subdivision.
     17
517  10-9-  Annexation of Lot 5, Block 2, Crescent Valley Subdivision.
     17
     4-23-  Annexation of part of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of
519  18     Section 9, Township 104 North, Range 4 West, Houston County, as described in
            Ord. 519.
520  5-14-  Annexation of Lot 3, Block 1, Crescent Valley Subdivision.
     18
522  6-25-  Annexation of Lot 7, Block 2, Crescent Valley Subdivision.
     18
523  8-27-  Annexation of Lot 12, Block 2, Crescent Valley Subdivision.
     18
524  10-8-  Annexation of part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
     18     Section 9, Township 104, Range 4, Houston County, as described in Ord. 524.
529  1-14-  Annexation of Lot 2, Block 1, Crescent Valley First Addition.
     19
533  5-13-  Annexation of land in the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of
     19     section 9, Township 104 North, Range 4, as described in Ord. 533
535  8-26-  Annexation of land in the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 104 North,
     19     Range 4 west of the fifth principal meridian as described in Ord. 535.
     1-13-  Annexation of land in the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
539  20     Section 9, Township 104 North, Range 4 West of the fifth principal meridian
            as described in Ord. 539.
541  4-13-  Annexation of two parcels of land in the northeast quarter of the southwest
     20     quarter, Section 9, Township 104, Range 4 West as described in Ord. 541.
     7-13-  Annexation of two parcels of land in the northeast quarter of the southwest
546  20     quarter, Section 9, Township 104 North, Range 4 West as described in Ord.
            546.
547  8-24-  Annexation of Lot 14, Block 1, Crescent Valley Subdivision.
     20
549  1-25-  Annexation of parcel of land in the southeast quarter of the northwest
     21     quarter, Section 9, Township 104, Range 4 as described in Ord. 549.
     2-22-  Annexation of parcel of land in the southwest quarter of the northwest
550  21     quarter, Section 9, Township 104, north of Range 4, west of fifth principal
            meridian as described in Ord. 550.
     8-23-  Annexation of 6 parcels of land of Crescent Valley subdivision. Parcels
553  21     08.0452.000; 08.0480.000; 08.0454.000; 08.0482.011; 08.0482.016; 08.0457.000
            as described in Ord. 553.
580  12-18- Annexation of a parcel of land in the southeast quarter of the northwest
     23     quarter, Section 9, Township 104, Range 4 as described in Ord. 580.
           
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting a franchise to Peoples Natural Gas Company a non-
                     exclusive authority for a period of 10 years to erect,
                     maintain and operate a gas distribution system and any and
227      6-18-84     all necessary mains, pipes, services and other
                     appurtenances thereunto appertaining in, upon, over,
                     across and along the streets, alleys, bridges and public
                     places of the city.
                     Authorizing transfer of a franchise from Peoples Natural
242      11-4-85     Gas Company, Division of InterNorth, Inc. to Peoples
                     Natural Gas Company, Division of UtilCorporated United,
                     Inc.
243      2-18-86     Authorizing transfer of a franchise from Group W Cable,
                     Inc. to Marcus Communications, Inc.
                     Granting a franchise to Peoples Natural Gas Company a non-
                     exclusive authority for a period of 15 years to erect,
                     maintain and operate a gas distribution system and any and
309      11-1-93     all necessary mains, pipes, services and other
                     appurtenances thereunto appertaining in, upon, over,
                     across and along the streets, alleys, bridges, and public
                     places of the city.
                     Granting a franchise to TCI of Blufflands, Inc. to
                     construct, operate and maintain a cable television system
312      1-18-93     in the city setting forth conditions providing for a line
                     extension formula and providing for city regulations and
                     use of the cable television system.
                     Granting Northern States Power Company permission to
342      6-9-97      operate, repair and maintain an electric distribution
                     system and transmission lines, for transmitting electric
                     energy to the city.
                     Granting permission to Tri-County Electric Corp. to
352      6-22-98     construct, operate, repair and maintain an electric
                     distribution system and transmission lines, for
                     transmitting electric energy into the city.
                     Granting a franchise to Ace Telephone Association, doing
                     business as Ace Communications Group, to construct,
388      7-8-02      operate and maintain a cable television system in the city
                     and providing for city regulations and use of the cable
                     television system.
                     Granting Minnesota Energy Resources, a subsidiary of
                     Integrys Energy Group, a natural gas franchise and the
                     authority to construct, operate, maintain, and extend a
458      11-23-09    natural gas distribution plant and system, and granting
                     the right to use the streets, alleys, and other public
                     places within the present or future corporate limits of
                     the city.
                     Granting Northern States Power Company permission to
515      7-10-17     construct, operate, repair and maintain an electric
                     distribution system and transmission lines, for furnishing
                     electric energy to the city.
                     Granting an extension of the nonexclusive franchise to Ace
                     Telephone Association, DBA AcenTex to operate a cable
525      10-8-18     system within the city pursuant to Ord. 388, retroactive
                     from July 2017 through January 31, 2019 or until the
                     adoption and effective date of a new nonexclusive
                     franchise agreement, whichever shall occur first.
538      12-23-19    Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Charter
                     Communications to operate a cable system within the city.
                     Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Ace Telephone
562      9-9-22      Association, DBA Acentek to construct, operate, upgrade,
                     maintain and reconstruct cable systems within the city
                     through January 30, 2030.
                    
 
TABLE III: STREET NAME CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     The private street, alley or way located west of Sycamore
                     Street, between North 1st Street and North 2nd Street,
401      1-12-04     generally coinciding with the location of the now vacated
                     alley, Manton Plat, according to the official recorded
                     plat thereof, is hereby named Depot Lane.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code of Ordinances
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cite Code Section
M.S. Cite                  Code Section
Ch. 12                     34.01
14.57 - 14.70              110.31,
                           110.99
16B.59 - 16B.75            150.01
16B.62                     150.01
16B.65, Subd. 1            150.01
16B.69                     150.01
16B.70                     150.01
18G.07                     96.09
65B.48                     70.11
84.872                     70.49
89.001                     96.01,
                           96.03
89.01                      96.01
89.51 - 89.64              96.01
97B.021                    120.06
97B.045                    120.06
Ch. 103F                   151.01,
                           151.26
103G.005                   151.40
103G.245                   151.46
Ch. 105                    151.41
115.01                     51.20
115.07                     51.20
115A.46                    50.21
115A.46, Subd. 5           50.20
Ch. 117                    150.18
120A.05                    121.01
120A.24                    121.01
144.391                    113.01
Ch. 146A                   114.02
Ch. 146A                   114.02
152.01 - 152.027           120.06
152.0263, Subd. 5          121.01,
                           130.30
152.027, Subd. 4           120.06
157.16                     110.03
157.16, Subd. 3(d)         110.03
160.22                     96.07
Ch. 169                    70.01,
                           70.06
169.35                     71.04
169.121                    70.47
169.346                    71.13
169.522                    70.11
176.011                    30.03
211B.045                   152.21
237.162                    94.10
237.163                    94.10
245.462, Subd. 23          120.01
260.185                    130.01
297A.61                    120.04
300.06                     94.04
307.08                     151.40
Ch. 325J                   111.06
325J.01                    111.02
325J.03                    111.03
325J.05                    111.05
325J.10                    111.03
Ch. 329                    116.03
                           110.01,
                           110.02,
Ch. 340A                   110.18,
                           110.31,
                           110.99
340A.101                   110.03,
                           110.17
340A.301, Subd. 6(d)       110.17
340A.301, Subd. 6(d), 7(b) 110.17
340A.301, Subd. 7          110.17
340A.401                   120.06
340A.408, Subd. 5          110.18
340A.409                   110.20
340A.413                   110.15
340A.414                   110.30
340A.414, Subd. 6          110.17
340A.503                   120.06
340A.504, Subd. 3(c)       110.17
340A.509                   110.02
340A.707                   110.05
340A.801                   110.20
Ch. 342                    121.01,
                           121.02
342.01                     121.01,
                           130.30
342.01, Subd. 50           121.01
342.10                     121.06
342.11                     121.02
342.13                     121.02
342.13(c)                  121.01
342.17                     121.01
342.22                     121.01,
                           121.02
342.22, Subd. 4(b)         121.02
342.22, Subd. 5(e)         121.02
342.24                     121.02
342.39, Subd. 2            121.04
Ch. 363A                   91.01
412.191                    151.01
412.231                    10.99
Ch. 429                    52.05,
                           93.06
429.061                    96.14
429.101                    96.14
443.29                     50.01
444.075                    51.02
Ch. 462                    151.40,
                           151.41
462.351 - 462.364          151.01
462.357                    121.01
462.3593                   150.02
462.3593, Subd. 9          150.02
462.367, Subd. 14          121.03
469.190                    119.02,
                           119.13
471.193                    150.16,
                           150.18
471.62                     151.01
609.02, Subd. 3            130.99
609.034                    10.99
609.66                     120.06
609.67                     120.06
609.72                     120.06
609.75                     120.06
609.76                     120.06
609.321- 609.324           120.06
609.595                    120.06
609.605                    130.02
618.01                     114.23,
                           114.42
624.20                     120.06
624.21                     120.06
624.712 - 624.716          120.06
                           
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE OF ORDINANCES
Prior Code Section 1999 Code Section
Prior Code Section 1999 Code Section
2.08               30.01
2.15(1)            31.01
2.15(3)            31.02
2.15(4)            31.03
2.15(5)            31.04
2.15(8)            31.05
2.15(10)           31.06
2.16(1)            31.20
2.16(4)            31.21
2.16(7)            31.22
2.16(11)           31.23
2.34               33.01
2.35               33.02
3.01               130.15
3.02               130.16
3.03               130.17
3.04               130.18
3.05               130.19
3.06               130.20
3.07               130.21
3.08               130.22
3.09               130.23
3.10               130.24
3.11               130.25
3.12               130.99
3.20 - 3.22        130.01
3.32               93.01
3.34 - 3.38        130.02
5.01               90.01
5.02               90.02
5.03               90.03
5.04               90.05
5.05               90.07
5.06               90.06
5.07               90.08
5.08               90.09
5.09               90.10
5.10               90.11
5.11               90.12
5.12               90.04
5.13               90.04
5.14               90.30
6.12               92.99
7.01               70.01
7.02               70.02
7.03               70.03
7.04               70.04
7.05               70.99
7.06               70.20
7.07               70.21
7.08               70.22
7.10               70.23
7.11               71.03
7.12               71.04
7.13               71.05
7.14               71.06
7.15               71.07
7.16               71.08
7.17               71.09
7.18               71.10
7.19               71.11
7.20               71.12
7.201              71.01
7.202              71.02
7.203              71.99
7.204              71.99
7.205              71.99
7.206              71.99
7.21               Ch. 72 Sch. I
7.22               70.05
7.23               70.05
7.24               70.05
7.25               70.40
7.26               70.41
7.27               70.42
7.28               70.43
7.29               70.44
7.30               70.45
7.31               70.46
7.32               70.47
7.33               70.48
7.34               70.49
7.35               70.50
7.36               70.06
7.37               70.06
7.38               70.06
7.39               70.07
7.40               70.07
7.41               70.07
7.42               70.07
7.43               70.08
7.44               70.08
7.45               70.08
7.46               70.08
7.47               70.08
7.48               70.09
7.50               70.10
Ch. 7, App. C      Ch. 73
8.37               91.01
8.38               91.02
8.39               91.03
8.40               91.99
8.37(a)            111.01
8.37(b)            111.02
8.38               111.03
8.39               111.04
8.40               111.05
8.41               111.06
8.43               111.99
9.04               50.01
9.05               50.02
9.06               50.03
10.30(1) - (3)     130.03
10.30(4)           50.04
10.31              130.99
11.01              52.01
11.02              52.02
11.03              52.03
11.04              52.04
11.041             51.01
11.05              52.08
11.16 - 11.20      52.05
11.16              51.20
11.17              51.21
11.18              51.22
11.19              51.23
11.20              51.24
11.21              51.25
11.22              51.26
11.23              51.27
15.22(4)           151.68
15.23              151.69
15.24              151.99
15.25              151.70
11.24              51.28
11.26              51.99
14A.01 - 14A.04    150.01
14.50              93.02
15.13(1)           151.01
15.13(2)           151.02
15.13(3)           151.03
15.14(1)           151.05
15.14(2)           151.06
15.14(3)           151.07
15.14(4)           151.08
15.14(5)           151.09
15.14(6)           151.10
15.14(8)           151.04
15.15              151.25
15.16              151.26
15.17              151.27
15.18              151.28
15.19              151.29
15.20              151.30
15.21(1), (2)      151.31
15.21(3)           151.32
15.22(1)           151.65
15.22(2)           151.66
15.22(3)           151.67
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.     Date Passed Code Section
                         93.50 -
106          11-4-70     93.53,
                         93.99
148          4-5-76      94.23
219          8-15-83     Ch. 73, Sch. I
221          1-16-84     T.S.O. I
223          2-21-84     Ch. 72, Sch. I
224          2-20-84     130.02
225          2-21-84     Ch. 73, Sch. I
227          6-18-84     T.S.O. II
229          9-17-84     Ch. 73, Sch. I
235          5-20-85     Ch. 73, Sch. I
236          6-3-85      Ch. 73, Sch. I
237          7-1-85      50.04
241          10-21-85    Ch. 73, Sch. I
242          11-4-85     T.S.O. II
243          2-18-86     T.S.O. II
247          10-6-86     Ch. 73, Sch. I
248          11-3-86     Ch. 73, Sch. I
249          4-6-87      Ch. 73, Sch. I
250          7-20-87     93.01
252          11-16-87    30.01
255          7-18-88     52.20 -
                         52.25
256          7-18-88     Ch. 73, Schs. I &
                         II
258          11-7-88     71.13
260          11-21-88    90.30
                         91.01 -
265          8-7-89      91.03,
                         91.99
266          8-7-89      93.02
268          9-18-89     Ch. 73, Sch. I
269          10-16-89    93.03,
                         93.99
                         31.01 -
270          2-5-90      31.06,
                         31.20 -
                         31.23
                         92.15 -
271          2-5-90      92.23,
                         92.99
274          6-4-90      T.S.O. I
275          7-16-90     150.15 -
                         150.21
                         51.20 -
277          8-27-90     51.28,
                         51.99
278          10-15-90    130.010
279          2-4-91      95.01 -
                         95.08
281          2-4-91      71.12;
                         Ch. 73, Sch. I
                         151.01 -
                         151.10,
                         151.25 -
282          4-15-91     151.32,
                         151.65 -
                         151.70,
                         151.99
                         51.40 -
283          5-6-91      51.44,
                         51.55 -
                         51.57
284          7-1-91      52.03
289          11-18-91    T.S.O. I
292          4-6-92      34.01 -
                         34.06
293          7-20-92     Ch. 73, Sch. I
294          10-19-92    Ch. 73, Sch. I
296          12-21-92    T.S.O. I
297          12-21-92    T.S.O. I
299          3-1-93      T.S.O. I
300          3-1-93      T.S.O. I
303          4-5-93      Ch. 73, Sch. I
                         111.01 -
304          6-7-93      111.06,
                         111.99
305          8-16-93     52.05
308          9-20-93     Ch. 73, Sch. I
309          11-1-93     T.S.O. II
311          12-6-93     T.S.O. I
312          1-18-93     T.S.O. II
314          3-21-94     T.S.O. I
315          3-21-94     T.S.O. I
316          3-7-94      130.21
317          7-18-94     Ch. 73, Sch. I
318          8-1-94      Ch. 73, Sch. I
321          10-17-94    151.40 -
                         151.52
322          12-12-94    T.S.O. I
323          2-21-95     T.S.O. I
324          2-21-95     T.S.O. I
326          3-20-95     31.22
327          5-1-95      T.S.O. I
329          9-11-95     50.03
330          9-25-95     Ch. 73, Sch. I
331          10-9-95     T.S.O. I
332          11-13-95    Ch. 72, Sch. I
333          2-12-96     32.01 -
                         32.07
334          2-12-96     31.22
335          5-13-96     T.S.O. I
336          5-13-96     T.S.O. I
337          6-10-96     90.05
339          3-10-97     T.S.O. I
                         112.01 -
340          4-14-97     112.09,
                         112.99
342          6-9-97      T.S.O. II
343          6-23-97     52.06
                         90.10,
344          7-28-97     90.12 -
                         90.14,
                         90.31
                         113.01 -
345          10-27-97    113.12,
                         113.99
346          1-12-98     30.03
347          1-26-98     30.04
348          3-23-98     Ch. 72, Sch. I
349          4-13-98     T.S.O. I
350          5-11-98     T.S.O. I
351          6-8-98      T.S.O. I
352          6-22-98     T.S.O. II
353          7-13-98     T.S.O. I
357          8-24-98     Ch. 73, Sch. I
358          9-28-98     T.S.O. I
360          3-8-99      70.22
362          5-10-99     T.S.O. I
363          7-12-99     Ch. 73, Sch. I
364          7-26-99     52.07
365          10-25-99    52.06
                         115.01 -
366          2-14-00     115.05,
                         115.99
367          2-14-00     32.05
369          5-8-00      T.S.O. I
371          6-29-00     T.S.O. I
372          6-29-00     T.S.O. I
373          6- -00      93.04 -
                         93.07
374          8-14-00     Ch. 73, Sch. I
375          11-27-00    154.01
376          2-26-01     154.01
377          3-13-01     154.01
378          3-26-01     154.01
379          3-26-01     154.01
380          3-26-01     154.01
381          7-23-01     117.01 -
                         117.04
382          9-10-01     Ch. 73, Sch. I
383          6-11-01     Ch. 73, Sch. I
384          11-13-01    70.05,
                         70.22
385          6-10-02     T.S.O. I
Res. 8-02-04 8-12-02     150.01
                         118.01 -
386          8-12-02     118.04,
                         118.10 -
                         118.22
387          6-24-02     154.01
388          7-8-02      T.S.O. II
389          11-12-02    151.06
390          12-30-02    154.01
391          4-14-03     154.01
392          4-14-03     150.01
                         112.01 -
                         112.04,
394          4-28-03     112.07,
                         112.10,
                         112.99
395          4-28-03     150.30 -
                         150.32
396          6-9-03      93.06
397          6-23-03     T.S.O. I
398          9-8-03      Ch. 73, Sch. I
399          9-8-03      154.01
401          1-12-04     T.S.O. III
402          1-12-04     52.06
403          3-8-04      150.40 -
                         150.43
405          3-29-04     92.16
407          4-26-04     Ch. 73, Sch. I
410          6-14-04     T.S.O. I
411          6-28-04     52.06
412          8-23-04     T.S.O. I
413          11-8-04     T.S.O. I
414          11-22-04    70.12
415          12-13-04    T.S.O. I
416          12-13-04    T.S.O. I
419          4-11-05     T.S.O. I
421          6-21-05     153.01
423          9- -05      153.01,
                         154.01
424          10-11-05    Ch. 73, Sch. I
425          10-11-05    T.S.O. I
426          10-24-05    Ch. 73, Sch. I
427          11-28-05    T.S.O. I
                         92.40 -
428          12-28-05    92.42,
                         92.99
429          12-28-05    Ch. 73, Sch. I
430          2-13-06     94.01 -
                         94.22
                         116.25 -
431          6-12-06     116.30,
                         116.99
432          10-23-06    154.01
433          2-12-07     130.01
                         93.60 -
434          6-25-07     93.63,
                         93.99
435          10-8-07     Ch. 73, Sch. I
436          10-8-07     Ch. 73, Sch. I
437          12-17-07    30.04
438          1-28-08     150.01
                         90.13 -
440          5-12-08     90.17,
                         90.31
441          5-12-08     92.02
442          6-9-08      10.98
443          6-9-08      Ch. 73, Sch. I
444          6-23-08     93.08
446          9-22-08     Ch. 73, Sch. I
449          1-26-09     30.01
450          2-9-09      153.01
452          2-9-09      155.01
454          4-13-09     155.01
455          4-13-09     Ch. 73, Sch. I
458          11-23-09    T.S.O. II
                         114.01 -
                         114.08,
                         114.15 -
460          4-12-10     114.24,
                         114.35 -
                         114.43,
                         114.98,
                         114.99
461          5-10-10     150.30
462          6-14-10     154.01
463          7-26-10     154.01
464          9-13-10     154.01
465          10-11-10    154.01
466          12-13-10    T.S.O. I
467          1-24-11     Ch. 73, Sch. I
468          1-24-11     T.S.O. I
469          3-14-11     51.02
470          6-13-11     T.S.O. I
472          9-26-11     T.S.O. I
473          12-12-11    154.01
474          2-27-12     154.01
475          3-12-12     T.S.O. I
476          3-12-12     T.S.O. I
477          10-8-12     154.01
                         110.01 -
                         110.05,
478          11-26-12    110.15 -
                         110.30,
                         110.99
                         53.01 -
                         53.05,
479          11-26-12    53.15 -
                         53.21,
                         53.30 -
                         53.38
480          12-26-12    154.01
                         50.20 -
                         50.26,
                         50.40 -
484          1-27-14     50.44,
                         50.55,
                         50.56,
                         50.99
485          4-28-14     Ch. 73, Sch. II
486          4-28-14     Ch. 73, Sch. II
                         119.01 -
487          5-27-14     119.14,
                         119.99
488          10-13-14    T.S.O. I
489          10-27-14    T.S.O. I
                         96.01 -
490          12-8-14     96.14,
                         96.99,
                         Ch. 96, App. A
491          1-12-15     T.S.O. I
494          5-11-15     154.01
496          7-27-15     T.S.O. I
                         152.01 -
                         152.03,
497          8-10-15     152.20 -
                         152.24,
                         152.40 -
                         152.44
498          9-14-15     Ch. 73, Sch. I
499          2-8-16      Ch. 73, Sch. I
501          2-22-16     T.S.O. I
502          2-22-16     154.01
504          7-25-16     T.S.O. I
505          8-8-16      T.S.O. I
506          8-8-16      150.02
507          9-12-16     T.S.O. I
508          9-12-16     156.01 -
                         156.12
509          10-10-16    T.S.O. I
510          10-10-16    T.S.O. I
511          2-27-17     T.S.O. I
512          4-10-17     110.28
514          7-10-17     T.S.O. I
515          7-10-17     T.S.O. II
516          7-24-17     T.S.O. I
517          10-9-17     T.S.O. I
518          3-12-18     Ch. 73, Sch. I,
                         II
519          4-23-18     T.S.O. I
520          5-14-18     T.S.O. I
521          5-29-18     70.11
522          6-25-18     T.S.O. I
523          8-27-18     T.S.O. I
524          10-8-18     T.S.O. I
525          10-8-18     T.S.O. II
527          10-22-18    50.26
528          11-13-18    154.01
529          1-14-19     T.S.O. I
                         114.07,
530          1-14-19     114.38,
                         114.98
                         152.01 -
                         152.03,
531          3-25-19     152.20 -
                         152.24,
                         152.40 -
                         152.44
                         110.01 -
                         110.05,
532          3-25-19     110.15 -
                         110.31,
                         110.99
533          5-13-19     T.S.O. I
                         119.01 -
534          6-10-19     119.14,
                         119.99
535          8-26-19     T.S.O. I
537          12-9-19     154.01
538          12-23-19    T.S.O. II
539          1-13-20     T.S.O. I
541          4-13-20     T.S.O. I
543          4-27-20     110.17
546          7-13-20     T.S.O. I
547          8-24-20     T.S.O. I
549          1-25-21     T.S.O. I
550          2-22-21     T.S.O. I
551          5-24-21     155.01
553          8-23-21     T.S.O. I
555          1-10-22     Ch. 73, Sch. I
556          1-10-22     Ch. 73, Sch. I
558          4-25-22     154.01
559          7-11-22     94.35 -
                         94.40
560          7-11-22     154.01
561          9-12-22     30.04
562          9-9-22      T.S.O. II
563          11-18-22    154.01
564          12-19-22    113.04,
                         150.30
                         120.01 -
567          5-22-23     120.10,
                         120.99
568          6-12-23     90.18
570          7-24-23     90.19
572          8-14-23     130.30
                         119.01 -
573          9-11-23     119.14,
                         119.99
                         120.01 -
574          9-11-23     120.10,
                         120.99
575          9-25-23     Ch. 73, Sch. I
576          10-23-23    Ch. 73, Sch. I
                         97.01 -
577          11-13-23    97.03,
                         97.99
578          12-11-23    90.18
579          12-11-23    150.30
580          12-18-23    T.S.O. I
581          3-25-24     90.19
582          6-10-24     93.09,
                         93.99
586          10-14-24    130.04,
                         130.99
587          12-9-24     121.01 -
                         121.06
588          12-9-24     154.01
589          12-16-24    112.04
                         96.30 -
591          8-11-25     96.41,
                         96.99
592          4-28-25     Ch. 73, Sch. II
593          8-11-25     94.50 -
                         94.54
594          9-8-25      90.30
                        
 
 
