LINDSTROM, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-34 Supplement contains
Local legislation current through Ordinance 20251015-01, passed 10-15-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 04-01
CITY OF LINDSTROM
COUNTY OF CHISAGO
STATE OF MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF LINDSTROM,
MINNESOTA, AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING
CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city to
cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book,
NOW THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Lindstrom, Minnesota, ordains:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the city as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Lindstrom." This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules
of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles:
      TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Section 3. Except for Ordinance 03-03, all prior ordinances, pertaining to the
subjects treated in the Code of Ordinances, including the 1987 Code of
Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part in
the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
this repeal affect any other ordinance of temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of Ordinances.
All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this Code shall remain in
effect unless amended by Chapter 35 or other section in this Code or until an
ordinance adopting a fee schedule is adopted or amended.
Section 4. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be sufficient
publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously published in the
city's official newspaper. The Clerk of the city shall cause a substantial
quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general distribution to
the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code of Ordinances to
the County Law Library or its designated depository. The official copy of this
Code of Ordinances shall be marked and be kept in the office of the City Clerk.
Section 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of the
law of the city and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.
Section 6. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the
city's official newspaper.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LINDSTROM, CHISAGO COUNTY, MINNESOTA,
THIS 15TH DAY OF APRIL, 2004.
APPROVED:
                        Keith V. Carlson /s/
                        Keith V. Carlson
                        MAYOR
ATTEST:
Lowell C. Enerson /s/
Lowell C. Enerson
CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CITY CLERK
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
   
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
 
   
10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty
   
Appendix A:   Resolution to adopt a schedule of offenses and voluntary
administrative penalties
   
Appendix B:   Notice of code violation
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances”
or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance:
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently
established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a
future time. The term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to
the City Council and its authorized representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. The county or counties in which the city is located.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator for public inspection. The City Administrator shall provide a
copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this Minnesota
Basic Code, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any Licensed Peace Officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Administrator shall have the authority to administer and enforce
this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals
designated within the code have the authority to administer and enforce the
provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated by the City
Administrator may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to
enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Administrator and any city official or employee designated by
this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with
the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident
of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise
enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Administrator, Peace Officer, or any employee or official charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting
the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only
to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Administrator or any other authorized city officer or
employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection
of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all
permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given
to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property,
stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Administrator to object to the termination before it occurs,
subject to appeal of the City Administrator’s decision to the City Council at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the City to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code
and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a
majority of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
The resolution may be in the form established in Appendix A of this chapter.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on
the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by resolution of
a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Administrator, or other
person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, in a
written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to the person
who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request
the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to
the City Administrator within 14 days of the notice of the violation. A sample
notice is contained in Appendix B of this chapter. In the sole discretion of
the person giving the notice of the alleged violation, the time for payment may
be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not requested by the person to
whom the notice has been given. In addition to the administrative penalty, the
person giving notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt
a compliance plan to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation
and may provide that if the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting
in the alleged violation within the time specified in the notice, that the
payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due,
the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may request to
appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the
penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to
withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because
the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no
appeal from the decision of the Council.
   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating
the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its Attorney, may
bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance,
rather than requesting the payment of an administrative penalty, even if a
penalty for the particular violation has been established by Council
resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested
correction of the situation resulting in the violation is completed, no
criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of
this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
APPENDIX A
RESOLUTION TO ADOPT A SCHEDULE OF OFFENSES AND VOLUNTARY ADMINISTRATIVE
PENALTIES
   WHEREAS, the City Council has adopted the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code
§
10.98, establishing a procedure for requesting the voluntary payment of
administrative penalties for certain violations of the code; and
   WHEREAS, the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code §
10.98 authorize the City Council, by a resolution adopted by a majority of its
members, to identify administrative offenses and establish penalties for these
offenses;
   NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by the City Council as follows:
 
Offense                           Code Section Amount of Administrative Penalty
All offenses for which an
administrative penalty may be                  $75
established under this code,
other than those specified below:
 
   EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of the resolution is the date of its
passage by a majority of the members of the City Council. Passage of this
resolution implements the provisions of City Code §
10.98.
Mayor:                                                          
Attest:                                                           
      City Administrator
APPENDIX B
NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re: Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title of
section)
Date: (Date of notice)
   I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §                 
of the City Code relating
to                                                                                 
.
   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in
the amount of $        for this violation.
   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay
it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.
   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due
date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the
administrative penalty.
   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by
                        (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.
   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to
institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to
contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the
Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to
renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.
   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal
proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any city
official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at
equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money
order to the City Administrator.
Signed:                                                               
   (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
   
30.   CITY COUNCIL
   
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
   
32.   COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
   
33.   TAXING DISTRICTS
   
34.   CITY POLICIES
   
35.   FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Meetings
   
30.02   Presiding officer
   
30.03   Minutes
   
30.04   Reserved
   
30.05   Voting
   
30.06   Ordinances, resolutions and the like
   
30.07   Suspension of amendment of rules
   
30.08   Salaries and compensation
   
30.09   Workers compensation
   
30.10   Term of office for Mayor and Council members
§ 30.01 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the third Wednesday
of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday
shall be held on the next following business day at the same time and place.
All meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, shall be held in the
City Hall unless the Council decides otherwise at a prior meeting or meeting in
the City Hall is impossible.
   (B)   The Mayor or any two members of the Council may call a special meeting
of the Council upon at least 24 hours written notice to each member of the
Council. This notice shall be delivered personally to each member or shall be
left at his or her usual place of residence with some responsible person.
Similar notice shall be given to the county press, posted at the City Hall and
sent to persons requesting notice of special meetings.
   (C)   At the first regular Council meeting in January of each year, the
Council shall:
      (1)   Designate the depositories of city funds;
      (2)   Designate the official newspaper;
      (3)   Choose one of the Council members as Acting Mayor, who shall
perform the duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor
from the city or, in case of a vacancy in the Office of Mayor, until a
successor has been appointed and qualifies;
      (4)   Appoint officers and employees and members of boards, commissions
and committees as may be necessary; and
      (5)   Establish and appoint Council members to the Council committees as
are deemed appropriate for the efficient and orderly management of the city.
   (D)   All Council meetings, including special and adjourned meetings and
meetings of Council committees, shall be conducted in accordance with the State
Open Meeting Law.
(`87 Code, § 201.01) (Am. Ord. 20231221-03, passed 12-21-23)
§ 30.02 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In the absence
of the Mayor, the Acting Mayor shall preside. In the absence of both, the City
Administrator shall call the meeting to order and shall preside until the
Council members present at the meeting choose one of their number to act
temporarily as presiding officer.
   (B)   (1)   The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules of
procedure herein prescribed and determine without debate, subject to the final
decision of the Council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by statute or by these rules, the
proceedings of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert’s Rules
of Order, Revised.
   (C)   Any member may appeal to the Council from a ruling of the presiding
officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once solely on the
question involved and the presiding officer may explain his or her ruling, but
no other Council member shall participate in the discussion. The appeal shall
be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members present including
the presiding officer.
(`87 Code, § 201.02)
§ 30.03 MINUTES.
   (A)   Minutes of each Council meeting shall be kept by the City
Administrator or, in his or her absence, by the Deputy Clerk. In the absence of
both, the presiding officer shall appoint a secretary pro tem. Ordinances,
resolutions and claims need not be recorded in full in the minutes if they
appear in other permanent records of the City Administrator and can be
accurately identified from the description given in the minutes.
   (B)   (1)   The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten
form, shall be signed by the City Administrator and copies thereof shall be
delivered to each Council member as soon as practicable after the meeting. At
the next regular Council meeting following the delivery, approval of the
minutes shall be considered by the Council. The minutes need not be read aloud,
but the presiding officer shall call for any additions or corrections.
      (2)   If there is no objection to a proposed addition or correction, it
may be made without a vote of the Council. If there is an objection, the
Council shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there are no additions
or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved.
(`87 Code, § 201.03)
§ 30.04 RESERVED.
§ 30.05 VOTING.
   (A)   The votes of members on any question may be taken in any manner which
signifies the intention of individual members and votes of the members on any
action taken shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (B)   The vote of each member shall be recorded on each appropriation of
money, except for payments of judgments, claims and amounts fixed by statute.
If any member is present but does not vote, the minutes, as to his or her name,
shall be marked “Present - Not Voting.”
(`87 Code, § 201.05)
§ 30.06 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Every ordinance and resolution passed by the Council shall be signed
by the Mayor, attested by the City Administrator and filed by him or her in the
ordinance or resolution book. Proof of publication of every ordinance shall be
attached and filed with the ordinance.
   (B)   Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous ordinance or
resolution or a section or subdivision thereof shall give the number, if any,
and the title of the ordinance or code number of the ordinance or resolution to
be repealed in whole or in part. Each ordinance or resolution amending an
existing ordinance or resolution or part thereof shall set forth in full each
amended section or subdivision as it will read with the amendment.
(`87 Code, § 201.06)
§ 30.07 SUSPENSION OR AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   These rules may be suspended only by a two-thirds vote of the members
present and voting.
(`87 Code, § 201.07)
§ 30.08 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Salary schedule.
      (1)   The salary for Council members shall be $1,600.00 per year until
January 1, 2007, at which time it shall be $2,200.00 per year.
      (2)   The salary for the Mayor shall be $2,400.00 per year until January
1, 2007, at which time it shall be $3,300.00 per year.
   (B)   Additional compensation.
      (1)   The salary schedule in division (A) above is established on the
basis that the offices of Mayor and Council member in this city are part-time
positions.
      (2)   The Mayor and/or Council members are sometimes required to attend
municipal functions or to take time from their regular employment to perform
services beneficial to the city. Additional compensation is paid to the Mayor
or Council members in those cases, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The activity and number of days for which the Mayor and/or
Council member is to be engaged must be approved by the City Council prior to
their participation.
         (b)   The Mayor and/or Council member will be paid $35.00 per day as
supplemental compensation for each day approved, and for which each is in
attendance at the approved activity.
(Am. Ord. 06-07-01, passed 7-20-06)
§ 30.09 WORKERS COMPENSATION.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 176.011(9)(5), as it may be amended from time to time,
the elected officials of the city and officers appointed for a regular term of
office are hereby included in the coverage of the State Workers Compensation
Act.
§ 30.10 TERM OF OFFICE FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The Mayor shall hold office for a term of two years, and each Council member
shall hold office for a term of four years, commencing on the first business
day of January of the year following their election and until a successor is
elected and qualifies.
(Ord. 06-07-01, passed 7-20-06)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   City Administrator
§ 31.01 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of City Administrator.
(`87 Code, § 207.01)
   (B)   The duties of the City Administrator shall include those duties
prescribed by law for statutory city clerks and treasurers. The Administrator
may employ the title of clerk, treasurer, administrator or hyphenated
combinations of these titles as deemed necessary or convenient.
(`87 Code, § 207.02)
   (C)   (1)   The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer
of the city and shall be responsible to the Council for the proper
administration of the duties set forth in this section and all affairs of the
city.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall supervise the administration of all
departments and offices of the city, including but not limited to police,
public works, utilities, fire and liquor store, and may delegate duties and
responsibilities to city department supervisors.
      (3)   The City Administrator shall develop and issue all administrative
rules, regulations and procedures necessary to insure the proper functioning of
all departments and offices of the city consistent with federal and state laws
and city ordinances, including but not limited to department practices or
procedures, and performance of department responsibilities. The rules,
regulations and procedures shall be effective upon issuance and shall continue
to be in effect until rescinded by the City Administrator or by the express
action of the Council.
      (4)   (a)   The City Administrator shall be the personnel officer of the
city with the following duties:
            1.   Implementation of all adopted personnel policies;
            2.   Periodic evaluation of all city employees; and
            3.   The negotiation of the terms and conditions of employee
compensation for presentation to the Council.
         (b)   The City Administrator may delegate these responsibilities.
      (5)   The City Administrator shall develop and issue all administrative
rules, regulations and procedures necessary for effective personnel management
consistent with federal and state laws and city ordinances, including but not
limited to:
         (a)   Scheduling of work, including overtime;
         (b)   Payroll practices, including determination of work periods and
payroll check issuance;
         (c)   Hiring, discipline and termination practices;
         (d)   Grievance resolution; and
         (e)   Compensation negotiations.
      (6)   The City Administrator, or respective department heads as delegated
by the City Administrator, shall interview and screen prospective city
employees as permitted by law and shall make recommendations to the Council
before the Council makes any appointment. The City Administrator shall have the
power, as provided in the city personnel policy, to discipline or to discharge
with the approval of the Council any city employee.
      (7)   The City Administrator shall prepare and submit a proposed annual
budget to the Council and keep the Council advised of the financial condition
of the city and make recommendations as may from time to time be determined
desirable and/or necessary.
      (8)   The City Administrator attend and participate in discussions at all
meetings of the Council and other official bodies as directed by the Council.
      (9)   The City Administrator shall monitor all consultant and contract
work performed for the city. The City Administrator shall coordinate the
activities of the city attorneys.
      (10)   The City Administrator shall recommend from time to time the
adoption of measures as the Administrator deems necessary or expedient for the
health, safety and welfare of the community or for the improvement of the
administration.
(`87 Code, § 207.03)
   (D)   The City Administrator shall have the same general qualifications for
municipal service as other city employees pursuant to the city personnel
policy. Appointment shall be made by the Council solely on the basis of
executive, administrative, educational and experiential qualifications. Unless
expressly indicated otherwise by this section, the Administrator shall be
subject to the city personnel policy.
(`87 Code, § 207.04)
CHAPTER 32: COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
   
32.01   Park Commission
   
32.02   Planning Commission
   
32.03   Board of Adjustment
   
32.04   Fire Department
   
32.05   Police Department
§ 32.01 PARK COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Park Commission for the city is hereby established. The Commission
shall advise the City Council as to acquisition, construction, contracts,
purchase of supplies, equipment and services, maintenance and funding of all
city parks. As an advisory commission, the Park Commission shall not have the
powers enumerated in M.S. § 412.521, as it may be amended from time to time.
(`87 Code, § 205.01)
   (B)   (1)   The City Council shall appoint seven citizens to serve on the
Park Board. Those appointments shall be for three-year staggered terms.
Thereafter, the appropriate number of citizens to maintain the number of Board
members shall be appointed each year for a term of three years. Vacancies shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired terms by appointment of the Mayor
with the consent of the Council. One member of the Board shall be appointed
from the members of the City Council, whose term on the Board shall be
concurrent with their term on the City Council.
      (2)   Any member may be removed by the City Council for cause after a
hearing. The Council shall have cause to remove any member who is absent from
three consecutive duly scheduled Park Commission meetings without notifying or
obtaining the consent of the Commission Chair or is otherwise absent from five
of any 12 consecutive Park Commission meetings without notifying or obtaining
the consent of the Commission Chair.
      (3)   The Commission shall normally meet once per month. The Commission
shall schedule additional special meetings and/or cancel regularly scheduled
meetings as the Commission deems appropriate.
(`87 Code, § 205.02)
   (C)   (1)   The Park Commission shall choose one of its members as the
Chair. The Park Commission may also select the Vice-Chair and/or Secretary from
among its own members.
      (2)   The Commission may adopt rules of procedure governing its operation
which shall take effect only if approved by a majority vote of the City Council
at a duly called City Council meeting.
      (3)   Written minutes of meetings of the Park Commission shall be kept by
the Park Commission. A copy of the minutes shall also filed with the City
Administrator prior to the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, but
shall be subject to approval of the Commission at the next Park Commission
meeting. The City Administrator shall include the minutes along with other
pertinent reports from the Park Commission in the City Council meeting packets.
(`87 Code, § 205.03)
   (D)   (1)   The Park Commission shall serve as an advisory body to the City
Council. In particular, the Park Commission shall make recommendations to the
Council regarding:
         (a)   The construction of roadways, buildings and other necessary
structures and improvements in parks;
         (b)   Contracts and leases for the construction and operation of park
facilities;
         (c)   The purchases of all necessary materials, supplies, equipment
and services pertaining to parks;
         (d)   The maintenance of park property so that it is adequately
maintained and cared for;
         (e)   Entertainment for the general public on park grounds;
         (f)   The review of proposed subdivisions to assure compliance with
the park provisions of Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances; (The review may
include, but not may not be limited to comments on whether the city should
pursue payment of a park dedication fee in lieu of dedication of an area within
the subdivision for use as park property.)
         (g)   The review of the city’s comprehensive plan as it relates to the
development and acquisition of park property; and
         (h)   Other duties and powers as the City Council may delegate to the
Commission.
      (2)   In addition to reviewing and commenting on the park needs as they
relate to the city, the Park Commission shall endeavor to meet on an annual
basis with the park boards and park commissions of surrounding jurisdictions to
evaluate the longer term park needs of the area.
(`87 Code, § 205.04)
   (E)   (1)   For the purpose of maintaining the city parks, there shall be
established a special fund called the “Park Fund”.
      (2)   The City Council may transfer to the Park Fund the monies as the
Council considers necessary for park purposes.
      (3)   The Park Commission may conduct benefit events for the purpose of
raising monies, soliciting donations and running concessions provided that all
activities are approved by the City Council and not in conflict with the duly
adopted ordinances of the city or state law.
      (4)   The Park Commission shall have no authority whatsoever to expend
city funds. The Commission may make recommendations to the City Council
regarding expenditures, but no expenditures for park purposes shall be made
unless and until authorized by the City Council.
      (5)   No later than September 1 of each year, the Park Commission shall
present, in detail, to the City Council its estimate of the financial needs for
operation of the city park system for the ensuing fiscal year.
(`87 Code, § 205.05) (Am. Ord. 20251015-01, passed 10-15-25)
§ 32.02 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission for the city is hereby continued. The
Commission shall be the city planning agency authorized by M.S. § 462.354(1),
as it may be amended from time to time.
(`87 Code, § 204.01)
   (B)   (1)   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members from the
resident population of the city to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the Council. The appointees shall be appointed to serve staggered terms of
three years, except as noted below, commencing on the first day of January in
the year of appointment. Upon expiration of a term, the appointee shall
continue until reappointed or a successor is appointed. Absence from any three
meetings in a year, unless excused in advance by the Chair, constitutes a
vacancy. In the event of any vacancy, the Mayor, with the approval of the
Council, shall appoint a person to complete the unexpired term.
      (2)   One member may be a Council member to be appointed by the Mayor
with Council approval for a one year term to expire on December 31 of each
year.
      (3)   Other persons may serve in an ex officio capacity as the Council
may, in its discretion, deem appropriate.
      (4)   Each of the seven regular Planning Commission members shall have
equal voting privileges. Any member may be removed for cause by majority vote
of the City Council upon written charge and opportunity for a hearing.
(`87 Code, § 204.02)
   (C)   (1)   At the first regular meeting in January, the Commission shall
elect the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson from among its appointed
members, each for a term of one year and the Commission may create and fill
other offices as it may determine. The Commission shall hold the meeting each
month at the time and place as they may fix by resolution. Special meetings may
be called at any time by the Chairperson, or in case of his or her absence, by
the Vice-Chairperson. Written minutes of meetings shall be kept and filed with
the City Administrator prior to the next regularly scheduled Council meeting,
but shall be subject to approval at the next Planning Commission meeting.
      (2)   No expenditures by the Commission shall be made unless and until
authorized for the purpose by the Council.
(`87 Code, § 204.03)
   (D)   (1)   The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties given
city planning agencies generally by law. The Commission shall also exercise the
duties conferred upon it by this code. It shall be the purpose of the Planning
Commission to prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan for the physical
development of the city, including proposed public buildings, street
arrangements and improvements, efficient design of major thoroughfares for
moving of traffic, parking facilities, public utilities services, parks and
playgrounds, a general land use plan and other matters relating to the physical
development of the city. The plan may be prepared in sections, each of which
shall relate to the comprehensive plan program.
      (2)   Upon the adoption of a comprehensive plan or any section thereof,
it shall be the concern of the Planning Commission to recommend to the Council
reasonable and practicable means for putting into effect the plan or section
thereof in order that the same will serve as a pattern and guide for the
orderly physical development of the city and as a basis for judging the timely
disbursements of funds to implement the objective. Means of effectuating the
plan shall, among other things, consist of a zoning ordinance, subdivision
regulations, capital improvement programming and technical review and
recommendations of matters referred to the Planning Commission by the Council.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall review all proposed amendments to the
zoning ordinance, take part in public hearings and make recommendations to the
Council as may be prescribed by
Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances.
      (4)   The Planning Commission may make recommendations on all requests
for a conditional use permit under the terms of
Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances. The Commission shall report its
recommendations to the Council for action.
      (5)   The Planning Commission may make recommendations in relation to the
subdividing of land as prescribed by the ordinance. The Commission shall report
its recommendations to the Council for action.
      (6)   The Planning Commission shall endeavor to obtain from city officers
a descriptive list of proposed improvements for the ensuing five-year period.
The Planning Commission shall also request from the local school district a
similar list of its proposed public works.
      (7)   The Planning Commission shall list and classify all proposed public
works and shall prepare a coordinated program of proposed public works for the
ensuing year and for a projected five-year period. The program shall be
recommended by the Planning Commission to the Council and to other officers,
departments, boards or public bodies as have jurisdiction over the recommended
planning or construction of the public works.
(`87 Code, § 204.04) (Am. Ord. 08-02-01, passed 2-6-08; Am. Ord. 20160218-04,
passed 2-18-2016)
§ 32.03 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of the members of the Planning
Commission, and shall hold its meetings concurrently with the Planning
Commission meeting on an as-needed basis at the discretion of the Chairperson.
The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Planning Commission shall have the
same duties on the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   To consider appeals from the action of the Zoning Administrator
wherein the Board will take the authority of the Administrator.
      (2)   To hold hearings on variances after proper public notice in the
official newspaper and individual notice by regular mail to any property owners
within a minimum of 350 feet distance of any variance in question. Such notice
shall be given at least ten days before the hearing date.
      (3)   To recommend that the City Council approve or deny variances within
the required time frame and develop findings to justify the action.
(Ord. 20160218-04, passed 2-18-2016)
§ 32.04 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby continued in the city the Volunteer Fire Department,
which Department shall have the following officers: the Chief, Assistant Chief
and the Fire Marshal.
(`87 Code, § 203.01)
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed annually by the
Council. Members of the Department may recommend to the Council a nominee or
nominees for appointment by submitting same in writing to the Council prior to
February 1 of each year. The Chief of the Fire Department shall appoint each
year the Assistant Chief and Fire Marshal, subject to confirmation by the
Council. The Chief of the Fire Department, the Assistant Chief and the Fire
Marshal each shall hold office for one year and until his or her successor has
been duly appointed or qualified. The above named officer may be removed by the
Council for cause and after a public hearing. Firefighters and probationary
firefighters shall be appointed by the members of the Department, subject to
confirmation by the Council. Firefighters shall continue as members of the
Department during good behavior and may be removed by the Council only for
cause and after a public hearing.
(`87 Code, § 203.02)
   (C)   The Office of Fire Marshal may be held by the Chief or by the
Assistant Chief, if the Council approves. The Fire Marshal shall be charged
with the enforcement of all ordinances aimed at fire prevention. He or she
shall have full authority to inspect all premises and to cause the removal or
abatement of all fire hazards.
(`87 Code, § 203.03)
   (D)   The Chief shall have control over all of the firefighting apparatus
and shall be solely responsible for its care and condition. He or she shall
make a report, semi-annually, to the Council at its meeting in March and
September, as to the condition of the equipment and needs of the Fire
Department. He or she may submit additional reports and recommendations at any
meeting of the Council and he or she shall report each suspension by him or her
of a member of the Fire Department at the first meeting of the Council
following each suspension. He or she shall be responsible for the proper
training and discipline of the members of the Fire Department and may suspend
any member for refusal or neglect to obey orders pending final action by the
Council on his or her discharge or retention.
(`87 Code, § 203.04)
   (E)   The Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all
fires. The record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause
of fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for
which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the Department
responding to the alarm and other information as he or she may deem advisable
or as may be required from time to time by the Council or a state department.
(`87 Code, § 203.05)
   (F)   It shall be the duty of the Chief, when the weather permits, to hold a
monthly practice drill of at least one hour’s duration for the Fire Department
and to give the firefighters instruction in approved methods of firefighting
and fire prevention.
(`87 Code, § 203.06)
   (G)   In the absence or disability of the Chief, the Assistant Chief shall
perform all the functions and exercise all of the authority of the Chief.
(`87 Code, § 203.07)
   (H)   The Chief, the Assistant Chief, the Fire Marshal and all firefighters
and probationary firefighters shall be not less than 18 years of age and able-
bodied. They shall become members of the Fire Department only after a 12-month
probationary period. The Council may require that each candidate, before he or
she may become a probationary firefighter, must satisfy certain minimum
requirements of height, weight and any other qualifications which may be
specified by the Council and he or she must pass a satisfactory physical
examination.
(`87 Code, § 203.08)
   (I)   Firefighters absent from three consecutive drills or calls, unless
excused by the Chief, shall forfeit membership in the Department.
(`87 Code, § 203.09)
   (J)   Compensation shall be established by the Council.
(`87 Code, § 203.10)
   (K)   Persons who have been members of the Fire Department for at least one
year at the time of the adoption of this section shall not be required to serve
a probationary period before receiving firefighters’ rating.
(`87 Code, § 203.11)
   (L)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be
given or made, an alarm of fire without probable cause, or to neglect or refuse
to obey any reasonable order of the Chief at a fire, or to interfere with the
Fire Department in the discharge of its duties. Unlawful interference shall
include the following of a fire truck when its siren and emergency lights are
in operation, closer than 500 feet, by persons not on official city business.
(`87 Code, § 203.12)
§ 32.05 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   A Police Department is hereby continued. The head of the Department
shall be known as the Chief of Police and the number of additional members of
the Department, together with their ranks and titles, shall be determined by
the Council by resolution. The compensation to be paid members of the Police
Department shall be fixed by the Council. Members of the Department shall be
appointed by the Council.
(`87 Code, § 202.01)
   (B)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall have supervision and control of the
Police Department and its members. He or she shall be responsible to the
Council for law enforcement and for property of the city used by the
Department. He or she shall be responsible for the proper training and
discipline of the members of the Department. He or she shall be responsible for
the keeping of adequate records and he or she shall report to the Council on
the needs of the Department and its work. Every member of the Department
subordinate to the Chief shall obey the instructions of the Chief and any
superior officer.
      (2)   The Council may designate one of the police officers as Acting
Chief, who shall have all the powers and duties of the Chief during his or her
absence or disability.
(`87 Code, § 202.02)
   (C)   Members of the Police Department are authorized to enforce the
ordinances and laws applicable to the city, bring violators before the county
court, and make complaints for offenses coming to their knowledge. Members of
the Police Department shall serve processes on behalf of the city and shall
serve notices as may be required by the Council or other authority. When the
city is not a party to the proceedings involved in the process or notice, the
officer shall collect the same fees as provided by law for town constables. All
fees shall be paid into the city treasury.
(`87 Code, § 202.03)
   (D)   (1)   Each member of the Department shall, while on duty, wear a
suitable badge and uniform furnished by the city, except that the Chief may
authorize the performance of specific duties while not in uniform.
      (2)   When a member terminates his or her membership in the Department,
he or she shall immediately deliver to the city his or her badge, uniform and
all other property of the city in his or her possession.
(`87 Code, § 202.04)
   (E)   In case of riot or other law enforcement emergency, the Chief of
Police may appoint for a specified time as many special police officer as may
be necessary for the maintenance of law and order. During the term of
appointment, the special police officer shall have only those powers and
perform only those duties as shall be specifically assigned by the Chief of
Police.
(`87 Code, § 202.05)
CHAPTER 33: TAXING DISTRICTS
Section
   
33.01   Establishment of taxing districts
   
33.02   Urban Service District
   
33.03   Rural Service District
   
33.04   Benefits tax ratio
   
33.05   Modification of districts and benefits ratio
   
33.06   Termination of district
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF TAXING DISTRICTS.
   The city is hereby divided into an Urban Service District and Rural Service
District, pursuant to M.S. § 272.67, as it may be amended from time to time,
for the purpose of all municipal property taxes, except those levied for the
payment of bonds and judgements and interest thereon.
(`87 Code, § 208.01)
§ 33.02 URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT.
   The Urban Service District shall include all property within the limits of
the city, except those set forth by ordinance as the Rural Service District.
(`87 Code, § 208.02)
§ 33.03 RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.
   The Rural Service District shall include the following unplatted lands,
currently used as a golf course and not developed for commercial, industrial or
urban residential purposes, and for the reasons are not benefitted to the same
degree as other lands by municipal services financed by general taxation:
   (A)   Parcel #15-00010-88; and
   (B)   Parcel #15-00010-89.
(`87 Code, § 208.03)
§ 33.04 BENEFITS TAX RATIO.
   The city hereby determines that the ratio between the benefits resulting
from tax supported municipal services to parcels of land of like market value,
situated in the Rural Service District and in the Urban Service District,
respectively is 40 to 100.
(`87 Code, § 208.04)
§ 33.05 MODIFICATION OF DISTRICTS AND BENEFITS RATIO.
   By amendment of this chapter, land may be added to or removed from the Rural
Service Taxing District and the benefit ratio may be changed.
(`87 Code, § 208.05)
§ 33.06 TERMINATION OF DISTRICT.
   Whenever any parcel of land, owned by one person or by two or more persons
jointly or in common at the time of its inclusion in the Rural Service
District, is platted, in whole or in part, and whenever application is made for
a permit for the construction of a commercial, industrial or residential
development or improvement to be situated on the parcel or any part thereof,
the Commission or officer approving the plat or building permit shall report
this to the City Council, which shall make an enter an order transferring the
parcel(s) from the Rural Service District to the Urban Service District.
(`87 Code, § 208.06)
CHAPTER 34: CITY POLICIES
Section
Abandoned Property
   
34.01   Abandoned property
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see
Chapter 91
ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 34.01 ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   (A)   All other property lawfully coming into the possession of the city
shall be disposed of as provided in this section.
   (B)   The Department of the city acquiring possession of the property shall
arrange for its storage. If city facilities for storage are unavailable or
inadequate, the Department may arrange for storage at privately-owned
facilities.
   (C)   The owner may claim the property by exhibiting satisfactory proof of
ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance costs incurred by it.
A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon release to the owner.
   (D)   If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the city for 60
days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction
conducted by the Chief of Police of the city after two weeks’ published notice
setting forth the time and place of the sale and the property to be sold.
   (E)   The proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the general fund of the
city. If the former owner makes application and furnishes satisfactory proof of
ownership within six months of the sale, he or she shall be paid the proceeds
of the sale of his or her property less the costs of storage and the
proportionate part of the cost of published notice and other costs of the sale.
(`87 Code, § 206.02)
CHAPTER 35: FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
35.01   Fee schedule
§ 35.01 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Staff hourly rates. To be charged for building/development
applications and outside services.
 Fees
                        Fees
City Administrator       $71.00
Public Works Supervisor  $56.00
Building/Zoning Official $62.00
Finance Director         $62.00
Other Employees          $42.00
City Attorney            Actual Cost
City Planner             Actual Cost
City Engineer            Actual Cost
   
   (B)   Building/Zoning Department.
      (1)   The City of Lindstrom requires building permits for most
construction or alteration of buildings and their components within the city
limits. These permits include building, plumbing, mechanical, fireplace,
grading and excavating, impervious surface, fences, roofing, sign, pool,
manufactured homes installation, demolition, siding, windows, etc.
      (2)   Apply for the following permits at the Lindstrom City Hall:
irrigation meters, fences, signs, bees, chickens, impervious surface, grading/
excavation/fill, ROW, building moving, dumpsters, zoning compliance,
conditional use permits, interim use permits, variances, re-zoning.
      (3)   Applications for all other permits should be made at Chisago County
Environmental Services: 651-213-8371. Call Chisago County for fee information.
      (4)   If permit has not been applied for, and work has begun, the
penalties will be up to double the following permit fees.
Fence Permit                          $25.00
Sign - General Permit                 $25.00
Sign - Other - Permit                 $25.00
TEMPORARY
Keeping of Bees                       $25.00
Keeping of Chickens                   $25.00 for first year
                                      $25.00 for renewal for 2 years
Building Moving Review                $100.00 + expenses
Impervious Surface Permit             $40.00
Grading/Excavation/Fill Permit        $40.00
Conditional Use Permit (CUP)          $500.00 + actual costs
Interim Use Permit (IUP)              $200.00 + actual costs
Street Vacation                       $200.00 + actual costs
Minor Subdivision Fee                 $250.00 ($200.00 + $50.00 per lot) +
(Lot Split, Administrative Lot Split) actual costs
Ordinance Amendment                   $200.00 + actual costs
Planned Unit Development (PUD)        $750.00 + subdivision fee + actual costs
Re-Zoning Request                     $200.00 + actual costs
Subdivision Fee                       $750.00 + $50.00 per lot + actual costs
Park Dedication Fees                  $2,250.00 per lot/unit
Variance                              $200.00 + actual costs
                                      $100.00 + filing and recording fees
Annexation Fees                       (Developments $5.00 per acre: minimum of
                                      $100.00, maximum of $600.00)
Site Plan Review                      $500.00 multi-family, industrial,
                                      commercial + actual costs
Preliminary Plat                      $350.00 + actual costs
ROW Permit                            $25.00
Final Plat                            $100.00 + $10.00 per lot + actual costs
Parking Fees in Lieu of Space         $1,000.00 per space
Escrow                                $500.00 to $3,000.00, depending on
                                      project
 
      (5)   Actual costs identified in the fees will be based on rates
identified in subdivision (4) above. The actual costs shall be paid by the
applicant for building/development application expenses which the city incurs
in regard to the review and processing of that application, and which exceeds
the application fee. The city will use the escrow, when required, for the
payment of actual costs. The city may request additional escrow when the escrow
falls under $500.00. Such fees shall come due immediately upon notification by
the city. The city may withhold any final action on a development application
and/or rescind prior actions until all fees are paid in full.
   (C)   Sewer/water rates.  All rates are subject to change.
Water Base Fee                         $10.00 per quarter residential
Sewer Base Fee                         $32.00 per quarter residential
State Test Fee                         $1.59 per quarter
Storm Water Fee                         
   Residential                      $8.49 per quarter
   Manufactured Home                $4.26 per quarter
   Commercial                       $17.01 to $187.11 per quarter (based on
                                       square footage)
                                       0 - 5,000 gallons - $2.25 per 1,000
                                       gallons
                                       5,001 - 10,000 gallons - $2.45 per 1,000
                                       gallons
                                       10,001 - 15,000 gallons - $2.65 per
                                       1,000 gallons
Water Usage                            15,001 - 20,000 gallons - $2.85 per
                                       1,000 gallons
                                       20,001 - 25,000 gallons - $3.10 per
                                       1,000 gallons
                                       25,001 - 30,000 gallons - $3.30 per
                                       1,000 gallons
                                       Over 30,000 gallons - $3.50 per 1,000
                                       gallons
                                       0 - 5,000 gallons - $8.80 per 1,000
                                       gallons
Sewer Usage                            Over 5,000 gallons - $9.73 per 1,000
                                       gallons
                                       Metering INSIDE only - $11.77 per 1,000
                                       gallons
Late Fee                               10% of outstanding balance
Certification Fee (Admin)              8% of amount certified to taxes
Meter - Irrigation (over 3/4-inch)     (Cost dependent on size of meter)
Meter - Standard Only                  $340.00
Meter - Standard Irrigation            $340.00
Water Access Fee (WAC)                 $3,401.00 (+$340.00 for meter)
Multi-family developments with 4 units $2,478.00 per unit
or more
Sewer Access Fee (SAC)                 $3,700.00
Multi-family developments with 4 units $2,928.00 per unit
or more
Fee in Lieu of Assessment:              
   Stubbed Water                    $4,212.87
   Stubbed Sewer                    $5,005.22
   *Unstubbed Water                 $5,072.73
   *Unstubbed Sewer                 $6,158.42
 
   (D)   License fees.
Dog/Cat                           $5.00 per year
Cigarette/Tobacco                 $100.00 per year
Garbage Hauler                    $200.00 per year
On-Sale Liquor Renewal            $1,800.00 + $100.00 background check per year
On-Sale Liquor - NEW              $1,800.00 + $500.00 background check
On-Sale 3.2% License              $100.00 per year
On-Sale Wine License              $300.00 per year
3.2% Temporary Liquor             $25.00 per event
1-4 Day Temp Liquor               $50.00 per event
Special Event Permit              $25.00
Business License                  $25.00 one-time fee
Vending Operations                $25.00 per vehicle
Peddler/Solicitor Application Fee $25.00 per person
Pawn Shop                         $1,500.00 per year
 
   (E)   Public works fees.
 
Street Sweeper                  $110.00 per hour (three-hour minimum)
Truck Rental (single axle)      $80.00 per hour
Loader Rental                   $130.00 per hour
Street Sign /Replacement        $150.00
Sanding                         $200.00 per ton spread
Bobcat Rental                   $100.00 per hour
Water Turned ON/OFF (foreclosed $40.00 per request
properties)
 
   (F)   Miscellaneous fees.
Assessment Search                           $20.00
Bad Check Fee                               $30.00
Administrative Fee + Charges
Special Service Charges                     $100.00 + expenses
(mowing, snow removal, and the like)
Cemetery Lots - Purchase                    Traditional - $600.00
(20% permanent care, 30% operating, 50%     Cremation - $300.00
improvement)
                                            Traditional, Summer - $350.00
Cemetery Lots - Open/Close                  Traditional, Winter - $425.00
                                            Cremation, Summer - $75.00
                                            Cremation, Winter - $90.00
Weekend Surcharge                           Traditional - $75.00
                                            Cremation - $25.00
Columbarium Niche Purchase (includes niche, $1,000.00
the opening, the marker, and the closing)
                                            Mobile Homes - $2.00 per unit
                                            Town Homes - $2.00 per
Street Lighting Fees (Quarterly)            Multifamily (3+) - $2.25 per unit
                                            Residential (1-2) - $3.25 per unit
                                            Commercial - $8.00 per account
                                            Schools/Churches - $25.00 account
Tax Increment Financing (TIF)               $25,000 + actual costs
Copies/ Fax Machine                         $0.25 per page
 
   (G)   Rental fees.
Park Rental                            $50.00 + $3.69 tax + $50.00 cash deposit
Allemansratt Campsites                 $15 per night
Community Center Rental                Resident Non-Resident
   Social
      (scheduled within 3 weeks of less)
         4 hours or less      $40.00   $50.00
         Over 4 hours         $70.00   $80.00
      Friday                     $175.00  $225.00
      Saturdays & Holidays
         October - March      $290.00  $370.00
         April - September    $315.00  $395.00
   Commercial                       $125.00  $150.00
      Monday - Thursday
   School                           $50.00 per hour
      Sports Banquets/ Social
Cash Deposit
Cash Damage Deposit                    $150.00 Community Center Rental
                                       $50.00 Park Rental
Police Coverage
See Community Center Rental Policy and
Agreement for Complete Information
Council Chambers                       $35.00 per hour (small groups)
 
(Ord. 04-01, passed 1-15-04; Am. Ord. 05-12-01, passed 12-15-05; Am. Ord. 07-
02-01, passed 2-15-07; Am. Ord. 08-01-01, passed 1-24-08; Am. Ord. 09-01-01,
passed 1-15-09; Am. Ord. 10-02-01, passed 2-18- 10; Am. Ord. 11-05-01, passed
5-19-11; Am. Ord. 12-01-01, passed 1-19-12; Am. Ord. 13-01-01, passed 1-17-13;
Am. Ord. passed 1-6-15; Am. Ord. passed 8-20-15; Am. Ord. passed 12-17-15; Am.
Ord. passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord. 20170720-02, passed 7-20-17; Am. Ord. 20180104-01,
passed 1-4-18; Am. Ord. passed 1-3-19; Am. Ord. 20190620-02, passed  passed 6-
20-19; Am. Ord. --, passed 1-21-21)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
   
50.   GARBAGE
   
51.   GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS
   
52.   WATER
   
53.   SEWERS
   
54.   STREET LIGHT UTILITY CHARGES
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Purpose
   
50.02   License required
   
50.03   Definitions
   
50.04   Franchise agreements
   
50.05   Suspension of license or franchise
   
50.06   Financial responsibility
   
50.07   Equipment
   
50.08   Inspections
   
50.09   Bonds
   
50.10   Containers; placement
   
50.11   Accumulations
   
50.12   Dumping
§ 50.01 PURPOSE.
   In order to provide for a continuous system of refuse collection and
disposal in a manner which meets the needs and conveniences of the residents of
this city and in order to protect the area from the problems of uncoordinated,
unsanitary and improper solid waste disposal, the Council hereby determines
that it is in the best interest of the residents of the city to require
licenses of persons collecting and/or hauling garbage and rubbish for hire,
reserving to the city the right and authority to grant an exclusive refuse
collection franchise to a single operator.
(`87 Code, § 506.01)
§ 50.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No persons may collect or haul garbage or rubbish within the city
without first obtaining a written license, therefore, from the Council. An
application for license shall be submitted in writing to the city and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Description of the equipment which will be used within the city by
the applicant;
      (3)   A schedule of the rate that will be charged by the applicant for
the various categories of customers within the city; and
      (4)   Evidence of compliance with the other applicable sections of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Each license under this chapter shall be valid for up to one
year and is nontransferable and nonrefundable. No license shall be issued until
the appropriate fee is paid in full. The annual fee for every license shall be
set by resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Application for renewal of a license shall be submitted in writing
to the city on or before December 1 of each year and shall contain the
information required by the initial application for a license, as stated above.
      (3)   Licenses shall be for a term of one year commencing January 1 of
each year, but may be issued on a pro rata basis.
(`87 Code, § 506.02) (Am. Ord. passed 11-19-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE and RUBBISH. Litter, refuse, solid waste, building demolition
material, trash, organic matter, recyclables of any kind that accumulate in the
operation of a household, demolition firm, commercial business, industrial
enterprise or construction company.
   ROLL-OFF CONTAINER. A large metal container designed and used for the
temporary storage of refuse, rubbish, trash, garbage, junk, debris, offal, or
any material rejected as useless and fit only to be thrown away. Such container
is typically rented or leased to owners or occupants of property for their
temporary use and which is typically delivered and removed by truck.
(`87 Code, § 506.03) (Am. Ord. passed 11-19-15)
§ 50.04 FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS.
   The Council may exercise its reserved right to provide for a franchise to a
single operator for the collection of garbage and rubbish within the city.
(`87 Code, § 506.04)
§ 50.05 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE.
   A franchise or license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked or suspended for a violation of this chapter or other applicable
regulations of law, upon a showing that the franchisee or licensee has failed
to comply with the same.
(`87 Code, § 506.05)
§ 50.06 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The licensee or franchisee shall show financial responsibility or a
certificate of insurance coverage prior to obtaining a license or franchise
whereby each vehicle to be used by the licensee or franchisee shall be covered
against loss or injury in the following amounts:
      (1)   $200,000 when the claim is one for death by wrongful act or
omission;
      (2)   $500, 000 for any and all claims arising out of the operation of
the vehicle; and
      (3)   $500,000 for any and all other claims arising out of the business
activities.
   (B)   (1)   The licensee or franchisee shall also provide evidence of
workers compensation insurance for employees, the insurance policy shall be for
the full term of the license or franchise and shall provide for the giving of
ten days prior notice to the city of the termination or cancellation of the
policies.
      (2)   In case any of the policies are terminated, the license or
franchise shall be automatically revoked upon receipt by the city of the
termination or cancellation.
(`87 Code, § 506.06)
§ 50.07 EQUIPMENT.
   All trucks or motor vehicles used by the licensee or franchisee shall be
watertight so as not to allow the leakage of liquids or refuse while hauling
the same and shall be covered with a metal covering to prevent the scattering
of its contents upon the public streets or private properties in the city.
(`87 Code, § 506.07)
§ 50.08 INSPECTIONS.
   All vehicles used for garbage or rubbish shall be made available for
inspection within the city at the times and places as the city shall designate.
(`87 Code, § 506.08) (Am. Ord. passed 11-19-15)
§ 50.09 BONDS.
   The franchisee or licensee may be required to furnish a surety bond in an
amount as the city deems necessary running to and approved by the city,
guaranteeing his or her faithful and continuous performance of the terms of the
franchise, license or contract and of this chapter.
(`87 Code, § 506.09) (Am. Ord. passed 11-19-15)
§ 50.10 CONTAINERS; PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Every household or occupant of any dwelling house, boarding house,
restaurant or any place of business, having garbage to dispose of, who does not
otherwise provide for the disposal of garbage in a sanitary manner, shall
provide himself or herself with one or more fly-tight metal or plastic cans
sufficient to receive all garbage which may accumulate between the times of
collection.
(`87 Code, § 506.10)
   (B)   Garbage cans shall be kept at the rear of the property if there is an
alley and shall be accessible to collectors at all reasonable times.
   (C)   A permit is required for roll-off containers to be placed in the city.
Roll-off containers must be placed entirely on private property, unless
permission is granted by the city to place the container on public property.
      (1)   A container placed in the public right-of-way must have a flasher
or reflector on the outside corner facing traffic at all times. Where traffic
may approach from either side, the container must have a flasher or reflector
on the outside corner on both sides.
      (2)   Containers shall not block a public sidewalk or be placed in a
location that restricts the "sight lines" of an intersection. "Sight lines"
will be determined by the city.
      (3)   Dumpsters placed in the public right-of-way for construction,
remodeling or demolition projects shall be removed immediately upon the
completion of the project. No dumpster shall be placed in the public right-of-
way for more than 30 days. An extension of the 30 day rule may be allowed with
written permission from the city.
      (4)   No container shall be placed on streets, sides of streets or areas
designated as "No Parking." Dumpsters shall not be placed in public parking
lots or parks without prior written permission from the city.
      (5)   The owner and/or the user of a container on a public right-of-way
are responsible for any public property, street, curb and gutter, or public
infrastructure damage.
      (6)   No container shall be placed in the public right-of-way during the
winter snow season, defined for the purpose of this chapter as the period from
November 1 to the following April 1. The city may issue a special permit to a
property owner for placement of a container in the city right-of-way during the
winter snow season due to the necessity of immediate cleanup of solid waste or
storage of personal property due to fire, flood, or other calamity. The permit
would be issued on a temporary basis not to exceed 30 days, and the permit may
provide additional requirements for visibility. Extensions cannot be granted
for more than the aforesaid time period unless a longer period is granted by
the City Council.
      (7)   The permit will expire after 30 days and the roll-off container
must be timely removed unless a new permit is obtained.
(`87 Code, § 506.13) (Am. Ord. passed 11-19-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.11 ACCUMULATIONS.
   No person shall fail to dispose of garbage and rubbish accumulated upon
property owned or occupied by him or her in a sanitary manner.
(`87 Code, § 506.11)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.12 DUMPING.
   All garbage and rubbish accumulating between the times of collection shall
be placed and stored in approved cans or containers.
(`87 Code, § 506.12)
CHAPTER 51: GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS
Section
   
51.01   Use restricted
   
51.02   Application for service; fees
   
51.03   Requirements to connect
   
51.04   Service connections; charges
   
51.05   Meters
   
51.06   Plumbing regulations
   
51.07   Well construction permit
§ 51.01 USE RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No person other than a city employee shall uncover or make or use any
water or sewer service installation connected to the city water or sewer
system, except pursuant to application an permit as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall make or use any installation contrary to the
regulatory provisions of this chapter.
(`87 Code, § 401.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.02 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; FEES.
   (A)   Application for a water or sewer service installation and for water
service shall be made to the City Administrator on forms approved by the
Council and furnished by the city. By his or her signature, the applicant shall
agree to conform to this chapter and to rules and regulations that may be
established by the city as conditions for the use of water.
   (B)   (1)   Application for a service installation shall be made by the
owner of the property to be served or by his or her agent. The applicant shall,
at the time of making application, pay to the city the fees or deposit required
for the installation of the service connection as provided in this chapter.
      (2)   When a water service connection has been installed, application for
water service may be made either by the owner or his or her agent or by the
tenant or occupant of the premises.
(`87 Code, § 401.02)
§ 51.03 REQUIREMENTS TO CONNECT.
   Each lot, piece or parcel of property in the city on which is situated any
building from which sewage or waste of any kind is produced and/or disposed of
is hereby required to be connected with the sanitary sewer and water system of
the city within two years after the mains are constructed to within 75 feet of
the premises provided that private disposal system is functioning properly.
This requirement may be specifically waived or amended by the Council. It shall
be unlawful for any owner of any property to suffer the construction, operation
or maintenance of any cesspool, septic tank or privy on the premises after the
time.
(`87 Code, § 401.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.04 SERVICE CONNECTIONS; CHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   No access or connection shall be made to the city sewer or water
systems unless a permit is issued by the City Administrator. The permit fees
shall be as set by Council. These fees shall be in addition to any fees
required under any other subdivision of this chapter.
      (2)   When a connection requires installation of a service line from the
main to the property line, the applicant for a permit shall pay to the city an
amount not less than the cost of making the necessary connections, taps and
installation of pipe and appurtenances to provide service to the property and
the necessary street repairs.
      (3)   No permit shall be issued to connect with any water or sanitary
sewer main unless the City Administrator certifies to the truth of one of the
following or the payment required hereunder is made:
         (a)   The lot or tract to be served has been assessed for the cost of
construction of the main with which the connection is made or that proceedings
for levying the assessment have been or will be commenced in due course;
         (b)   The construction cost has been paid by the developer platting
the lot or tract; or
         (c)   If neither of the foregoing is true, a sum equal to the portion
of the cost of constructing the main which would be assessable against the lot
or parcel has been paid to the city.
      (4)   If no certificate can be issued, the applicant shall pay an
additional connection fee equal to the greater of the following:
         (a)   The uniform charge which represents the average sewer and water
assessment for the city based on actual past assessments levied within the
city; and/or (The uniform charge shall be set by the City Council and adjusted,
as necessary, from time to time.)
         (b)   A fee equal to the amount actually levied against the other
properties served when the service line(s) were originally installed.
            1.   In addition to any other charges or fees for sewer connection
and use, an incremental treatment capacity connection charge shall be required
of each individual or entity requesting or receiving connection to the sanitary
sewer system, as a prerequisite to connection. A single-family unit equivalent
incremental treatment capacity connection charge shall be as set by Council.
            2.   The City Administrator shall maintain a separate fund within
the sewer account of the city and shall deposit all proceeds collected pursuant
to this chapter in the Fund. Proceeds in the Incremental Treatment Capacity
Connection Charge Fund shall be used only to finance construction and
incidental costs of additional capacity, purchase of machinery or equipment
increasing present capacity, purchase of additional lands in connection with
the sewage disposal plant, for lands, construction or equipment and incidents
in connection with the development of a new sewage disposal plant, or for
interceptors necessitated by additions of effluent to be treated in the city
sewage system.
   (B)   Trunk line charges: The City Council may, by resolution, apportion
costs incurred by the city for the construction of trunk sewer and/or water
infrastructure in an area against new construction in the area serviced by the
trunk line. The trunk charges shall be payable from the developer as a
condition of development but, if specified in a development agreement between
the developer and city, may be collected as lots are developed or sold as a
surcharge to the water access fee and /or sewer access fee or in another
manner. No access or connection to the city sewer or water systems shall be
allowed until all applicable trunk line charges are paid. Trunk line charges
shall be in addition to any fees required under any other ordinance or
resolution.
   (C)   (1)   Water shall not be shut off hereunder or for a violation of
rules and regulations affecting water service until notice and an opportunity
for a hearing have first been given the occupant of the premises involved. The
notice shall be personally served and shall state that if payment is not made
before a day stated in the notice but not less then ten days after the date on
which the notice is given, the water supply to the premises will be shut off.
The resolution and any customer who does so shall be charged $5 for each day of
violation and the charge shall be added to his or her next water bill. No water
service of a residential customer shall be disconnected if the disconnection
affects the primary heat source for the residential unit when the disconnection
would occur during the period between October 15 and April 15, the customer has
declared inability to pay on forms provided by the city, the household income
of the customer is less than 185% of the federal poverty level as documented by
the customer to the city, and the customer’s account is current for the billing
period immediately prior to October 15 or the customer has entered into a
payment schedule and is reasonably current with payments under the schedule.
The city shall, between August 15 and October 15, of each year, notify all
residential customers of these provisions.
      (2)   If the emergency requires immediate compliance with terms of the
resolution, the Council may provide for the delivery of a copy of the
resolution to the premises of each customer, and any customer who has received
the notice and thereafter uses or permits water to be used in violation of the
resolution shall be subject to the charge provided above. Continued violation
shall be cause for discontinuance of water service.
   (D)   Private wells existing prior to the installation of the city owned
water lines abutting any lot piece of parcel of property in the city may be
used by the occupant of the property for non-potable purposes (such as watering
lawns, washing vehicles and the like) so long as the property remains in
conformance with the following:
      (1)   The structure on the property must be properly hooked up to the
city water system;
      (2)   The connection to the private well shall be distinctly severed from
all inside water taps and connected to only one outside spigot; and
      (3)   The property owner shall agree in writing that the connection(s)
may be inspected by the city at least once a year for compliance with the above
for an initial and annual fee, both to be set by motion of the City Council.
The inspection may be done at any reasonable time or times and may be without
prior notice of the city. The well use agreement shall bind any and all current
and future users of the system and shall be recorded with the County Recorder
at the property owner’s expense.
   (E)   Calculation of units. The city shall calculate the number of units for
the purposes of the Water Access Fee (WAC) and the Sewer Access Fee (SAC) in
accordance with the Metropolitan Council’s SAC Procedure Manual, Appendix A-1:
Gross Square Foot SAC Criteria for Commercial Properties, issued on January 1,
2021, as it may be amended from time to time. The aforementioned Appendix A-
1 is incorporated herein.
(`87 Code, § 401.04) (Ord. 01-01, passed 1-18-2001; Am. Ord. 20210520-01,
passed 5-20-2021)
§ 51.05 METERS.
   (A)   Except for extinguishing of fires, no person other than an authorized
city employee shall use water from the city water supply system or permit water
to be drawn therefrom unless the water passes through a meter supplied or
approved by the city. No person not authorized by the City Administrator shall
connect, disconnect, take apart or in any manner change or interfere with any
meter or its use.
   (B)   The city shall maintain and repair, at its expense, any meter that has
become unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and shall replace it if
necessary. Where repair or replacement is made necessary by act or neglect of
the owner or occupant of the premises it serves, any city expense caused
thereby shall be a charge against and collected from the water consumer, and
water service may be discontinued until the cause is corrected and the amount
charged is paid.
   (C)   When a consumer complains that the bill for any past service period is
excessive, the city shall have the meter reread on request. If the consumer
remains dissatisfied, and he or she may, on written request and the deposit of
$20 have the meter tested. If the test shows an error in the city’s favor
exceeding 5% of the water consumed, the deposit shall be refunded, an accurate
meter shall be installed, and the bill shall be adjusted accordingly. The
adjustment shall not extend back more than one service period from the date of
the written request.
   (D)   Water meters shall be the property of the city and may be removed or
replaced as to size and type when deemed necessary.
   (E)   Authorized meter readers shall have free access at reasonable hours of
the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with the city
water supply system in order to read meters and make inspections.
(`87 Code, § 402.02)
§ 51.06 PLUMBING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Every service pipe shall be laid with sufficient bend to allow
not less than one foot of extra length and in a manner as to prevent rupture by
settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than six feet below the
surface and be so arranged as to prevent rupture by freezing. A shut-off or
other stop cock with waste valve of   the size and strength required shall be
placed close to the inside wall of the building and be well protected from
freezing. Copper tubing shall be used for all services of two inches or less.
      (2)   Joints on copper tubing shall be as few as possible and not more
than one joint shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length. Each joint
shall be left uncovered until inspected by the city. Every service over two
inches shall be cast iron. Connections with the mains for domestic supply shall
be at least three-fourths of an inch per residential unit, or equivalent.
   (B)   Every water meter shall be installed in accordance with the following
provisions:
      (1)   The service pipe from the water main to the meter shall be brought
through the floor in a vertical position where the pipe enters the building.
The stop and waste valve shall be 12 inches above the floor.
      (2)   The bottom of the meter shall be between six and 12 inches above
the finished floor line. The meter shall be set not more than 12 inches
horizontally from the inside line of the basement wall unless a different
position is approved by the City Administrator or his or her designee. A
suitable bracket shall be provided to support the meter in a proper vertical
position and prevent noise from vibration.
      (3)   Each meter installation shall have a stop and waste valve on the
street side of the meter. In no case shall more than 12 inches of pipe be
exposed between the point of entrance through the basement floor and the stop
and waste valve. A stop and waste valve shall also be installed on the house
side of the meter.
      (4)   The water pipe connecting with the main shall not exceed two feet
under the basement floor from the inside of the basement wall to the water
meter connection.
      (5)   Deviation from the installation specifications herein shall be by
Council approval only.
(`87 Code, § 402.03)
§ 51.07 WELL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Before proceeding within the city with construction or reconstruction
of any well, which involves drilling or casing insertion, the owners of the
premises upon which the well is located or to be located shall obtain a permit
from the Council.
   (B)   Application for a well permit shall be in writing on a form provided
by the City Administrator, shall contain the information required thereon and
shall be accompanied by a fee.
   (C)   The Council shall study the proposed well location, design, depth,
capacity, cost and proposed water use, and consider the impact of the proposed
private well upon present and planned public water supply and the health safety
and welfare of the city and surrounding areas. The Council shall issue the
permit unless it finds facts that show, and determines by resolution that the
health, safety and welfare of the public require a denial.
(`87 Code, § 402.05)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
   
52.01   Discontinuance of service
   
52.02   Supply from one service
   
52.03   Turning on water; tapping mains
   
52.04   Repair of leaks
   
52.05   Use of fire hydrants
   
52.06   Private water supply
   
52.07   Restricted hours
   
52.08   Water rates
§ 52.01 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   The city may discontinue service to any water consumer without notice for
necessary repairs or, upon notice as provided herein, for non-payment of
charges or for violation of rules and regulations affecting utility service. No
water service of a residential customer shall be disconnected if the
disconnection affects the primary heat source for the residential unit when the
disconnection would occur during the period between October 15 and April 15,
the customer has declared inability to pay on forms provided by the city, the
household income of the customer is less than 185% of the federal poverty level
as documented by the customer to the city, and the customer’s account is
current for the billing period immediately prior to October 15 or the customer
has entered into a payment schedule and is reasonably current with payments
under the schedule. The city shall, between August 15 and October 15, of each
year, notify all residential customers of these provisions.
(`87 Code, § 402.01)
§ 52.02 SUPPLY FROM ONE SERVICE.
   (A)   No more than one house or building shall be supplied from one service
connection, except by special permission of the Council.
   (B)   Whenever two or more parties are supplied from one pipe connecting
with a service main, each building or part of building separately supplied
shall have a separate stop box and a separate meter.
(`87 Code, § 402.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.03 TURNING ON WATER; TAPPING MAINS.
   No person, except an authorized city employee, shall turn on any water
supply at the stop box or tap any distributing main or pipe of the water supply
system or insert a stop cock or other appurtenance therein without a city
permit.
(`87 Code, § 402.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.04 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   The consumer or owner shall be responsible for maintaining the service pipe
from the curb box into the building served. If he or she fails to repair any
leak in the service pipe within 24 hours after notice by the city, the city may
turn the water off. The water shall not then be turned on again until the sum
of $5 has been paid to the city. When the waste of water is great or damage is
likely to result from the leak, the city shall turn the water off immediately
upon the giving of notice if repair is not commenced immediately.
(`87 Code, § 402.01)
§ 52.05 USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No person other than an authorized city employee shall operate a fire
hydrant or interfere in any way with the city water system without first
obtaining authority to do so from the City Administrator.
(`87 Code, § 402.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.06 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   No water pipe of the city water supply system shall be connected with any
pump, well or tank that is connected with any other source of water supply.
When any connection is found, the City Administrator shall notify the owner to
sever the connection and if this is not done immediately, the city shall turn
off the water supply forthwith. Before any new connection to the city system is
permitted, city employees shall ascertain that no cross-connection will exist
when the new connection is made.
(`87 Code, § 402.01)
§ 52.07 RESTRICTED HOURS.
   Whenever the Council determines that a shortage of water supply threatens
the city, it may, by resolution, limit the times and hours during which city
water may be used for sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning or
other specified uses. After publication of the resolution or two days after the
mailing of the resolution to each customer, no person shall use or permit water
to be used in violation of this chapter.
(`87 Code, § 402.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.08 WATER RATES.
   (A)   User fees for water used will be computed and billed on a quarterly
basis.
   (B)   Rate structure: The City Council may, by adoption of a resolution,
periodically review and set the rates for water usage, based on a reasonable
analysis of associated costs to provide the service.
(`87 Code, § 402.04) (Ord. 01-04, passed 8-15-2001)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Protection from damage
   
53.03   Rates and charges
   
53.04   Inspectors; powers and authority
   
53.05   Private disposal
Use Regulations; Connections
   
53.20   Use required
   
53.21   Discharges
   
53.22   Privies
   
53.23   Connections; failure to connect
   
53.24   Building sewers and connections
   
53.25   Inflow and infiltration
   
53.26   Prohibited discharges
   
53.27   Substance limitations
   
53.28   City alternatives
   
53.29   Increases
   
53.30   Pretreatment
   
53.31   Interceptors
   
53.32   Observation and measurement; testing
   
53.33   Accidental discharges; traps
   
53.34   Car washes
   
53.35   Cost of repairs
   
53.36   Special agreements
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   BOD5 or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), as described in
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, current edition.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also referred to as a service connection.
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of any joint participant,
except the county as presently established or as amended by ordinance or other
legal actions at a future time. The term CITY, when used herein, may also be
used to refer to the specific city which has adopted this chapter and to the
City Council and its authorized representative.
   COD or CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   COMMISSION. When used in the text will refer to the city’s Joint Sewage
Treatment Commission.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SDS
permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat the pollutants to a
degree which complies with effluent concentration limits imposed by the permit.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. Any manhole installed at an industry to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of waste.
   COUNTY. The area within the county sewer district area. The term COUNTY,
when used herein, may also be used to refer to the South Lindstrom - South
Center Sanitary District or to the county and its board and their authorized
representatives.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
man and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Any oil, that has a density less than that of water which
causes it to float on the sewage and which tends to coat surfaces and cause
maintenance problems.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   IGU or INDIVIDUAL GOVERNMENTAL UNIT. When used in this chapter will refer to
the applicable city or county, as previously defined.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from industrial
or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development,
recovery and processing of natural resources, as distinct from residential or
domestic strength wastes.
   INDUSTRY. Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of a publicly owned
treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classifications
Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A, B, D, E and I.
   INFILTRATION. Water entering a sewer system, including building drains and
pipe, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
   I/I or INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system, including
building drains, from such sources as, but not limited to roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins, surface
runoff, street wash water or drainage.
   INTERFERENCE.
      (1)   The inhibition or disruption of the city’s or county’s wastewater
disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s or county’s NPDES
and/or SDS permit.
      (2)   The term includes of sewage sludge use or disposal by the city or
county in accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under
Section 405 of the Act or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or more
stringent State criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed
by the city or county.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MPCA. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-
owned wastewater treatment facilities, which are determined to be not
susceptible to treatment by the treatment facilities or would interfere with
the operation of the treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 307 (b) of the
Act.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, which leads directly or indirectly to the
natural environment without first going through the public sewer system.
   NON-CONTRACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or during which the only pollutant
added, is heat.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater that is primarily introduced by
residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than 200 mg/l, a
suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 250 mg/l.
   NPDES PERMIT or NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT. A
permit issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may
legally discharge into navigable waters of the United States, pursuant to
Sections 402 and 405 of the Act.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
terms of grams per liter of solution.
   PLANT OPERATION. The utilities superintendent or a deputy, agent or
representative thereof.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to
the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   SDS PERMIT or STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT. Any permit, including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof, issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system, as
defined by M.S. § 115.01(8), as it may be amended from time to time.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is “wastewater.”
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewater from individual point source discharges and connections.
      (2)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.
      (3)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a
public authority. It shall include the entire service line including that
beneath the public right-of-way to the point of connection with the lateral or
other public sewer line.
      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public
authority.
      (7)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial building, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters
which are not admitted intentionally.
      (8)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry
storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street wash
water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment
facility which has a discharge flow:
      (1)   In excess of 25,000 gallons per average work day;
      (2)   Has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the treatment
facility;
      (3)   Whose waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amount pursuant to
Section 307 (a) of the Act; or
      (4)   Whose discharge has a significant effect, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal
system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality or emissions
generated by the treatment system.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flows during normal operation, and which adversely affect the collection
system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   SS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS or TSS or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause
adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307(a) of
the Act.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city’s wastewater disposal system.
   USER CHARGE. The quarterly fee charged each user of the sewer utility to
cover all operation, maintenance and replacement costs incurred by the
Commission.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that
may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city and county, for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial
wastewater or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including
interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other
equipment and their appurtenances;  extensions, improvements, remodeling,
additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable
recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well
facilities; and any works including land which is an integral part of the
treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
the treatment.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
   WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
(`87 Code, § 403.01)
§ 53.02 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charges of a misdemeanor.
(`87 Code, § 403.05)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.03 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The City Administrator shall prepare an annual report which shall
include at least the following:
      (1)   Total costs for OM&R for the previous year and estimated for the
next year, divided into the established user categories and further distributed
among the functions for these categories: treatment, conveyance, collection and
administration;
      (2)   Total revenue collected by user and user class for the proceeding
year;
      (3)   Estimated or measured flow discharged by each user and user class
for the preceding and succeeding years; and
      (4)   Method for proportionately distributing the succeeding year’s
estimated OM&R costs to each user and user class, which shall comprise the
proposed user charge system.
   (B)   Each user of sewer service shall pay the charge(s) applicable to the
type of service, and in accordance with the most recent resolution of the City
Council establishing a rate schedule for users. The resolution shall be based
on a sewer utility budget estimating sewer revenues and expenditures in the
succeeding year and shall meet these general requirements:
      (1)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of OM&R costs among users
and user classes;
      (2)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total OM&R costs necessary
for proper OM&R of the sewer utility;
      (3)   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs
of OM&R attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the user
charges accordingly; and
      (4)   Calculate the user charge based upon the flow and waste load
estimated to be discharged to the sewer utility in the succeeding year,
including infiltration and inflow.
(`87 Code, § 403.06)
§ 53.04 INSPECTORS; POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The duly authorized representative or other duly authorized employees
of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observations,
measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city’s
sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition to
other penalties for refusal to permit inspections under this section, all
subsequent sewer bills shall be charged triple the regular rate until
inspection if freely permitted by the refusing service recipient.
   (B)   The duly authorized representative or other duly authorized employees
are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have
a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system. An industry may withhold information considered confidential
however, the industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the
information in question, might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   While performing necessary work on private properties, the duly
authorized representative or duly authorized employees of the city shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company,
and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city
employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, as required
in § 53.32(A).
   (D)   The duly authorized representative or other duly authorized employees
of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within
the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
(`87 Code, § 403.07)
§ 53.05 PRIVATE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of § 53.23,
the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater
disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
city.
      (2)   The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and
other information as are deemed necessary by the city.
   (C)   Operation of a private wastewater disposal system shall not be allowed
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city or its
authorized representative. The city or its representative shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant
for the permit shall notify the city when work is ready for final inspection,
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 48 hours of the receipt of notice, if reasonably practicable.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Minn. Rules Chapter 7080,
as it may be amended from time to time, entitled, Individual Sewage Treatment
System Program. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to
any natural outlet.
   (E)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
city.
   (F)   The routine maintenance and pumping of on-site systems is essential to
protect the community health and welfare and extends the life of the system. A
pumping receipt from a licensed maintainer or service provider and an
inspection report from all on-site systems shall be required at a minimum of
three year intervals.
   (G)   At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced
by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer within 120 days in compliance with this chapter, and within
seven days any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be broken to permit
drainage and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
   (H)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or the
Department of Health of the state.
(`87 Code, § 403.08) (Am. Ord. passed 11-19-15)
USE REGULATIONS; CONNECTIONS
§ 53.20 USE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste. Generally accepted gardening and agricultural practices
are not prohibited hereby.
(`87 Code, § 403.02)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.21 DISCHARGES.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, any wastewater or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the NPDES permit.
(`87 Code, § 403.02)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.22 PRIVIES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewer without approval of the city.
(`87 Code, § 403.02)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.23 CONNECTIONS; FAILURE TO CONNECT.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes from which wastewater is discharged,
and which is situated within the city and adjacent to any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located or is proposed to be located any
public sanitary sewer of the city or county, shall be required at the owner’s
expense to install suitable connection to the public sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter within 120 days of the date the public sewer is
operational, provided access to the public sewer is within 200 feet of the
structure generating the wastewater. All future buildings constructed on
property adjacent to the public sewer shall be required to immediately connect
to the public sewer. If sewer connections are not made pursuant to this
section, an official 90-day notice shall be served instructing the affected
property owner to make the connection.
(`87 Code, § 403.02) (Am. Ord. 20170420-01, passed 4-20-17)
§ 53.24 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any new connection(s) to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited
unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities including,
but not limited to capacity for flow, BOD5 and suspended solids.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (C)   Applications for permits shall be made in conformance herewith by the
owner or their authorized agent and the party employed to do the work, and
shall state the location, name of owner, street number of the building to be
connected and how occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain
beyond the limits of the building or property for which the service connection
permit has been given.
   (D)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and for commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of
activity.
   (E)   All costs and expenses and liabilities incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   (1)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building, and the
whole considered one building sewer.
      (2)   Subdivision of the lots shall be permitted until separate sewer
lines are installed. The city does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any connection
aforementioned.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used to connect buildings only when they
are found, on examination and testing by the city to meet all requirements of
this chapter.
   (H)   (1)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the state building and plumbing code and rules and regulations
of the city.
      (2)   In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, state plumbing code and the Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (I)   (1)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.
      (2)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
   (J)   No person shall make or maintain connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or indirectly to the wastewater disposal system.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing Code and
applicable rules and regulations of the city or county or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9.
All connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by proper
testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city or county
prior to installation.
   (L)   (1)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer.
      (2)   The connection and inspection shall be made under the supervision
of the City Building Inspector or authorized representative thereof.
   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and light so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (N)   Any person desiring to make a service connection to the public sewer
shall comply with the conditions set forth by the city.
   (O)   No person shall make a service connection to the public sewer until a
bond to the city is approved by and filed with the City Administrator
conditioned that the person will indemnify and save harmless the city from all
suits, accidents and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in any
street, alley or public ground, made by the person or by those in the person’s
employment for any purpose whatever, and that the person will replace and
restore the street and alley over the opening to the condition existing prior
to installation, adequately guard with barricades and lights and will keep and
maintain the same to the satisfaction of the City Administrator, and shall
conform in all respects to the rules and regulations of the city relative
thereto and pay all fines that may be imposed on the person by law.
   (P)   The Council may suspend or revoke any permit issue under this chapter
and may take other action as it may deem reasonable in order to facilitate
compliance for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Giving false information in connection with the application for a
permit;
      (2)   Incompetence of the permit holder; and
      (3)   Willful violation of any provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation pertaining to the mixing of service connections.
(`87 Code, § 403.03)
§ 53.25 INFLOW AND INFILTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of the I/I prevention program is to reduce the
amount of water other than wastewater that enters the city sanitary sewer
system from sources including but not limited to sewer service connections,
defective pipes, pipe joints, yard drains, area drains, drains from springs and
swampy areas, manholes, manhole covers, roof borders, foundation drain tile,
cellar drains, cross- connections between storm sewers, catch basins, cooling
towers, storm waters, surface runoff, street wastewater, other drainage and
ground waters.
      (2)   The City Council hereby establishes the following guidelines,
criteria and standards to govern compliance with the I/I prevention program.
      (3)   The Building Inspector shall inspect the property for which a
building permit is issued for compliance with the regulations relating to the
installation and use of a sump pump. Any system found in violation shall be
permanently altered, at the property owner’s expense, to comply with the
regulations.
      (4)   The City Council may, by motion, establish an additional fee for
the inspection.
   (B)   (1)   Prior to the transfer of title for any parcel of property within
the city, a designated city official shall inspect the property for compliance
with the regulations relating to the installation and use of a sump pump. Any
system found in violation shall be permanently altered, at the property owner’s
expense, to comply with the regulations. The City Council may, by motion,
establish a fee for the inspection.
      (2)   The City Council may establish a program to assist property owners
in reducing or removing the amount of water other than wastewater that enters
the city sanitary sewer system.
      (3)   The City Council may establish, by resolution, other programs and
initiate other actions to eliminate or reduce the amount of I/I entering the
city sanitary sewer system.
      (4)   In the event that ownership of property changes without first being
inspected for compliance with the standards outlined herein, the city reserves
the right to discontinue city water service to the property until the time as
the required inspection is completed. This penalty does not preclude the city’s
authority to issue a citation for violation of this chapter.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.26 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described water or wastes to any public sewers.
   (A)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;
   (B)   Solid or viscuous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
treatment facility such as, but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers and the like and either whole or ground garbage
grinders; (Solids shall have a maximum allowable diameter of three inches.)
   (C)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal system; and/or
   (D)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal
system. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant
identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.27 SUBSTANCE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The following described substances, materials, water or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
and/or soil, vegetation and ground water or will not otherwise endanger lives,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The Commission may set
limitations more severe than limitations established in the regulations below
if, in their opinion, the more severe limitations are necessary to meet the
above objectives. In forming their opinion as to the acceptability of wastes,
the Commission will give consideration to the factors as the quantity of
subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, the
Commission’s NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other
pertinent factors.
   (B)   The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the Commission are as follows:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C), or
causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or
having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater
treatment works resulting in interference therein;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscuous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (150°F) (0°C
and 65°C), and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of
mineral origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;
      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a
“slug,” as defined herein;
      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined herein; (Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food on the premises or when served by
caterers.)
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewer
for their maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions;
      (7)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage or
groundwater;
      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in
which quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal
system;
      (9)   Any radioactive waste or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Commission in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing the following substances: arsenic,
cadmium, copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, total chromium, zinc
or phenolic compounds to a degree that the materials received prevent adequate
treatment of the waste;
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater
disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance of
any regulatory agency or state or federal regulatory body; and/or
      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of the
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
the materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific written agreement subject to the provisions hereof.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.28 CITY ALTERNATIVES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated herein, and/or which in the judgment of the
Commission may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facility
processes, equipment or receiving water and/or soil, vegetation and ground
water or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers; pursuant to section 307 (b) of the Act and all addendums
thereof;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treatment
and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
   (B)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the facilities and equipment shall be made at
owner’s expense and shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Commission, pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.29 INCREASES.
   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained herein, or
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards or any state
requirements.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.30 PRETREATMENT.
   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation at user’s own expense.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.31 INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or extra septic tanks shall be provided
and installed by the owner when, in the opinion of the City Engineer they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease
in excessive amounts as specified herein, any flammable wastes, as specified
herein, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by
appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal
which are subject to review by the city. Any removal and hauling of the
collecting materials not performed by the owner’s personnel, must be performed
by a currently licensed waste disposal firm.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.32 OBSERVATION AND MEASUREMENT; TESTING.
   (A)   (1)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure or control manhole with necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
wastes.
      (2)   The structure shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the city. The structure
shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained
by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests and analysis of waters and wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special conditions for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge. The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analysis
to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry
must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge
to assure that compliance with the federal, state and local standards are being
met.
      (2)   The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analysis to the city at the times and in the manner as prescribed by the city.
The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analysis and reporting
required by the city. At the times deemed necessary, the city reserves the
right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an independent
laboratory.
   (C)   (1)   All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association.
      (2)   Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the City Engineer.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.33 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE; TRAPS.
   (A)   (1)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the city for review and approval prior to construction of the
facility. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Users shall notify the city and the Commission immediately upon
having a slug or accidental discharge of substances of wastewater in violation
of this chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken by the city and the
Commission to minimize damage to the wastewater treatment works. The
notification will not relieve any user of any liability for any expense, loss
or damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment process, or for any
fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any state and federal law.
Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or discover a discharge
are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
   (B)   No person, having charge of any building or other premises which
drains into the public sewer, shall permit any substance or matter which may
form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within 15
days after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall install a
suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists,
shall clean out, repair or alter the same and perform other work as the city
may deem necessary. Upon the owner’s refusal or neglect to install a catch
basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair or alter the same after the period
of 15 days, the city may cause the work to be completed at the expense of the
owner or representative thereof.
   (C)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the
purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause the work to be done as the
city may direct. Each day after 15 days that a person neglects or fails to so
act shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and the city may
then cause the work to be done, and recover from the owner or agent the expense
thereof by an action in the name of the city.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.34 CAR WASHES.
   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing facility
shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times, a catch basin
or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil, dirt or
mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.35 COST OF REPAIRS.
   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of
repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of
the discharge of prohibited wastes by the person, any may collect such
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in
any other manner deemed appropriate by the city or county.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.36 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial
concern, providing that national categorical pretreatment standards and/or
state disposal system permit limitations are not violated.
(`87 Code, § 403.04)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Misdemeanor. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any
rule or regulation adopted in pursuance thereof, or any other provision of any
code adopted in the chapter by reference, shall, upon conviction be subject to
a fine of not more than $700 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days
or both, plus, in either case, the costs of prosecution.
   (B)   Separate violations. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation
and every day on which a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate
offense.
   (C)   Application to city personnel. The failure of any officer or employee
of the city or the Commission to perform any official duty imposed by this
chapter shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for
violation unless a penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
   (D)   Expenses. In addition to other penalties imposed for violation of this
chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
city or county by reason of such violations.
(`87 Code, § 403.09)
CHAPTER 54: STREET LIGHT UTILITY CHARGES
Section
   
54.01   Policy and purpose
   
54.02   Authority to impose street light utility charge
   
54.03   Collection of fees
   
54.04   Enforcement for collection of charges
   
54.05   Exemptions
§ 54.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council has determined that it is in the best interests of
the residents of the City of Lindstrom to operate a street light system
throughout the city to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the
residents pursuant to M.S. § 412.221, Subd. 7. In order to help defray the
costs of the establishment, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance,
enlargement and improvement of the system, it is hereby determined by the City
Council that every lot, building or premises benefits from the safety and
convenience of street lights and, therefore, there shall be a street light
utility charge, whether residential, commercial, institutional or industrial.
   (B)   It is hereby determined to be the policy of the city that the benefit
of street lighting to any lot, piece or parcel of land developed within the
city limits is similar and that payment for the services or availability should
be collected on as fair, reasonable, and equitable basis as possible.
(Ord. 10-11-01, passed 11-18-10)
§ 54.02 AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE STREET LIGHT UTILITY CHARGE.
   (A)   Installation costs. The cost of installation of the street light
system in all new subdivisions shall be included in the cost of required public
improvements and may be assessed against the benefiting property owners in
accordance with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 429.
   (B)   Operating costs. For the purpose of providing funds to defray the cost
of maintenance and operation of the street light system, the costs of
construction, maintenance and operation of street lights, there is hereby
levied upon each lot, building or premises within the city, a quarterly street
light utility charge determined as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 10-11-01, passed 11-18-10)
§ 54.03 COLLECTION OF FEES.
   Street light utility charges shall be determined by resolution of the City
Council and shall be as set forth in Chapter 35 of the Code of Ordinances (Fee
Schedule). Street light utility charges shall be collected in conjunction with
other city utility charges. The Council may prescribe the date and manner of
billing, a penalty for failure to pay within the period set for payment, and
such other rules and regulations relative to the system as it may deem
necessary from time to time.
(Ord. 10-11-01, passed 11-18-10)
§ 54.04 ENFORCEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   Any unpaid or delinquent street light utility charges may be recovered from
the occupant or owner of the premises billed therefore, may be certified to the
County Auditor as taxes against any such property to be collected and paid over
to the city along with other taxes. Unpaid charges for operation of the street
light system shall be certified for collection as special assessments in
accordance with the procedures specified in M.S. § 429.101. Payment of
delinquent street light utility charges shall be credited to the same fund used
for current street light utility charges.
(Ord. 10-11-01, passed 11-18-10)
§ 54.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following land uses are exempt from street light fees:
   (A)   Public rights-of-way; and
   (B)   City-owned property.
(Ord. 10-11-01, passed 11-18-10)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
   
70.   TRAFFIC RULES
   
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
   
72.   SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
   
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
   
74.   SPECIAL USE AND RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Tuning movements
   
70.03   Through and one-way streets
   
70.04   Trunk restrictions
   
70.05   Prohibited equipment and animals
   
70.06   Safety zones, lanes of traffic and the like
   
70.07   Exhibition driving prohibited
   
70.08   Police duties
   
70.09   Motor vehicle noise
   
70.10   Motor vehicles in parks prohibited
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Any term used in this code and defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may be
amended from time to time, has the meaning given it by that section.
(`87 Code, § 701.01)
§ 70.02 TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   The Council by resolution may, whenever necessary to preserve a free flow of
traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection as one where the
turning of vehicles to the left or to the right, or both, is to be restricted
at all times or during specified hours. The City Engineer shall mark, by
appropriate signs, any intersection so designated. No intersection on a trunk
highway shall be so designated until the consent of the Commissioner of
Highways to a designation is first obtained. No person shall turn a vehicle at
any intersection contrary to the directions on the signs.
(`87 Code, § 701.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.03 THROUGH AND ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The Council, by resolution, may designate any street or portion of street as
a through highway or a one-way roadway where necessary to preserve the free
flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The Chief of Police shall cause
appropriate signs to be posted at the entrance to the street. No trunk highway
shall be so designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Highways to a
designation is first secured.
(`87 Code, § 701.03)
§ 70.04 TRUNK RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council, by resolution, may designate streets on which
travel by commercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds axle weight is
prohibited.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall cause appropriate signs to be erected on
the streets.
   (B)   No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on posted streets in
violation of the restrictions stated.
(`87 Code, § 701.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.05 PROHIBITED EQUIPMENT AND ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate any vehicle or equipment of any type
whatsoever not equipped with pneumatic tires, a pneumatic tire being a tire in
which compressed air is designed to support the load.
   (B)   It is unlawful to ride or otherwise permit an animal with shod hoofs
upon any street or alley in the city, except for those participating in a
parade or other function specifically authorized by the city.
   (C)   In addition to other applicable laws and ordinances, it is unlawful
for any vehicle, other than those displaying valid passenger or recreational
class license plates, to be parked or stand on any city street, alley or
property located within any residentially zoned area (R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3 and
R-4) within the city. The only vehicles exempt from this specific section are:
      (1)   City maintenance vehicles;
      (2)   Refuse vehicles owned by companies currently licensed by the city;
      (3)   Construction equipment being used to perform tasks for which the
city has issued a right-of- way, building or impervious surface or other
appropriate permit;
      (4)   Utility vehicles (gas/electric/telephone) servicing, installing or
repairing services;
      (5)   Fire trucks, ambulances and other public safety vehicles while in
service;
      (6)   In-service delivery vehicles; and
      (7)   Other non-passenger vehicles operating under the express permission
of the City Administrator.
(`87 Code, § 701.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.06 SAFETY ZONES, LANES OF TRAFFIC AND THE LIKE.
   To assist in the direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving
conditions at any intersection or dangerous location and to warm pedestrians or
drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous conditions or hazards, the Chief of
Police may establish safety zones, lanes of traffic and stop intersections, and
he or she may order installation of stop signs, yield signs, warning signs,
signals, pavement markings or other devices with the approval of the City
Council. No regulation may be established on a trunk highway unless the consent
of the Commissioner of Highways is first secured.
(`87 Code, § 701.08)
§ 70.07 EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor,
vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or
backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or
gravel, or in a manner simulating a race. Unreasonable squealing or screeching
sounds emitted by tires, or the unreasonable throwing of sand or gravel by the
tires is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(`87 Code, § 701.09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.08 POLICE DUTIES.
   During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Fire Department may direct or assist the police in
directing traffic at the scene of a fire or in the immediate vicinity.
(`87 Code, § 701.12)
§ 70.09 MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.
         (a)   Distinct and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort and repose of any person or
precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property’s value;
         (b)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.69, as it may be
amended from time to time, which requires every motor vehicle to be equipped
with a muffler in good working order; or
         (c)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.693 and Minn.
Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute and these rules may be
amended from time to time, which establish motor vehicle noise standards.
      ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE. A Dynamic Brake, Jake Brake, Jacobs Brake, C-
Brake, Paccar Brake, transmission brake or other similar engine retarding brake
system which alters the normal compression of the engine and subsequently
releases that compression.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or permit
the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a muffler
that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies with all
applicable state laws and regulations.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally
use an engine retarding brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or
alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise from the engine
because of an illegally modified or defective exhaust system, except in an
emergency.
   (D)   M.S. § 169.69 and 169.693 (motor vehicle noise limits) and Minn. Rules
parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these statutes and rules may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.
   (E)   Signs stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” may be installed at
locations deemed appropriate by the City Council to advise motorists of the
prohibitions contained in this section, except that no sign stating “VEHICLE
NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” shall be installed on a state highway without a permit
from the Minnesota Department of Transportation. The provisions of this section
are in full force and effect even if no signs are installed.
§ 70.10 MOTOR VEHICLES IN PARKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any self-propelled vehicle, except those
maintenance vehicles authorized by the city, emergency vehicles, and
handicapped vehicles, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles as defined
in M.S. Chapter 169, other self-propelled vehicles, motorcycles, and
snowmobiles, to travel within the city parks, except on established roadways.
(Ord. 20180315-01, passed 3-15-18)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Angle and parallel parking
   
71.02   No parking zones and the like
   
71.03   Time limit parking zones
   
71.04   Time limit and winter parking permits
   
71.05   Removal of unattended vehicles
   
71.06   Display of sale
   
71.07   Truck and loading zones
   
71.08   Parking on public property
   
71.09   Boat trailer parking
   
71.10   Wrecked, junked and abandoned vehicles
   
71.11   Outside storage
   
71.12   No parking
§ 71.01 ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING.
   (A)   Angle parking shall be required on streets as designated by the
Council by resolution. On any street, every vehicle parked shall be parked with
the front of the vehicle facing the curb or the edge of the traveled portion of
the street and shall be parked in a single space marked for vehicle parking by
painted lines on the street and/or curb, and no part of the vehicle shall
extend into any other marked space.
   (B)   (1)   Except where angle parking is permitted by ordinance, each
vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way or two-way roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb.
      (2)   Every vehicle parked where parking spaces are marked shall be
parked in a single space marked for vehicle parking by painted lines on the
street and/or curb, and no part of the vehicle shall extend into any other
marked space or into any curb painted yellow.
   (C)   Upon streets and highways not having a curb, each vehicle stopped or
parked shall be stopped or parked parallel with and to the right of the paved
or improved or main traveled part of the street or highway.
(`87 Code, § 701.05)
§ 71.02 NO PARKING ZONES AND THE LIKE.
   The City Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets or portions
of streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones and may limit the
hours in which the restrictions apply. The City Engineer shall mark by
appropriate signs each zone so designated. Except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or a traffic-control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in
an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is
prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a no-parking zone during hours when
parking is prohibited, except that a vehicle may be parked temporarily in the
zone for the purpose of forming a funeral procession and a truck may be parked
temporarily between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. of any business day
for the purpose of loading or unloading where access to the premises is not
otherwise available.
(`87 Code, § 701.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.03 TIME LIMIT PARKING ZONES.
   The City Council may, by resolution, designate certain areas where the right
to park is limited during hours specified. The City Engineer shall mark by
appropriate signs each zone so designated. During the hours specified on the
sign, no person shall park a vehicle on any limited parking zone for a longer
period than is so specified.
(`87 Code, § 701.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.04 TIME LIMIT AND WINTER PARKING PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park motor vehicles,
equipment or structures on a residential street or alley in the city for more
than 24 consecutive hours, without a special written permit from the City
Administrator.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park motor vehicles, equipment
or structures on a street or alley in the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. between November 1 and April 15 of the following year, those
dates inclusive.
      (3)   Parking in designated areas for a period in excess of two hours is
prohibited unless otherwise posted.
      (4)   Parking in designated areas for a period of more than 30 minutes is
prohibited unless otherwise posted.
   (B)   (1)   Parking permits allowing permitted vehicles to be parked
overnight in that certain municipal parking lot located at the southeast corner
of Park Street and First Avenue may be issued to the owners of vehicles who
live in the apartments located within those areas of the city zoned CBD. The
permits shall be valid from July 1 of the issuance year and expire on June 30
of the following year.
      (2)   The fee and procedures for the permit shall be set by motion of the
Council and may be changed from time to time with the initial charge being set
at $25.
(`87 Code, § 701.05) (Am. Ord. 20170316-01, passed 3-16-17)
§ 71.05 REMOVAL OF UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   Any police officer may remove a vehicle from a street to a garage or other
place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an
obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal or street improvement or
maintenance operations. The vehicle shall not be released until the fees for
towing and storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed for violation of
this chapter.
(`87 Code, § 701.05)
§ 71.06 DISPLAY OF SALE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a property owner, lessor, renter or lessee to allow
the parking or placing any vehicle, vehicle part or accessory, vessel, vehicle
or vessel part or accessory any of which is normally licensed by the State
Department of Natural Resources or the State Department of Public Safety or
used for farming purposes on any street, highway, private parking lot or any
property in order to display the item for sale or exchange.
   (B)   A vehicle, vehicle part or accessory, vessel, vehicle or vessel part
or accessory is deemed to be displayed in violation of this section when found:
      (1)   Standing on any street, highway, private parking lot or any public
property; and/or
      (2)   Bearing any sign or notice on or near the vehicle and vessel
indicating that the item is for sale or exchange.
   (C)   The following items are exempt from the provisions of this section:
      (1)   Vehicles or vessels, displayed in the established driveway or on
the property of the vehicle or vessel’s registered owner;
      (2)   Vehicles and vessels displayed on property specifically zoned and
permitted for the display of vehicles; and
      (3)   Vehicles which, in the judgment of the city, are in the immediate
use of the owner.
   (D)   The presence of any motor vehicle on any street when standing or
parked in violation of this section is prima facie evidence that the registered
owner of the vehicle committed or authorized the commission of the violation.
(`87 Code, § 701.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.07 TRUCK AND LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   The City Council may by resolution establish spaces in streets as
loading zones or truck zones. The City Council may specify, in the resolution
establishing the zone, the times as shall be the loading zone or truck zone
hours. The Chief of Police shall mark each zone by appropriate signs.
   (B)   During truck zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle, except a truck in a truck zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a
truck in a truck zone, except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and
then only for a period no longer than is necessary for the purpose.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a loading
zone, except to receive or discharge passengers for the purpose.
      (2)   No person shall occupy a loading zone with a vehicle other than a
truck for more than five minutes.
   (D)   Any person desiring the establishment of a loading zone or truck zone
abutting premises occupied by him or her shall make written application
therefore to the City Council. If the Council grants the request, the proper
city officer shall bill the applicant for the estimated cost of placing signs
and of painting the curb. When the amount is paid to the City Treasurer, the
Chief of Police shall install the necessary signs and paint the curb.
   (E)   No person shall allow a semi-trailer to stand or be parked unattached
from a tractor for any length of time on any street in the city, except in an
emergency in order to change tractors.
   (F)   (1)   The Council may by resolution establish “no truck parking” zones
in the business district and the City Engineer shall mark by appropriate signs
any zones so established. The zones shall be established in the business
district where heavy traffic by trucks or other traffic congestion make parking
by trucks a hazard to the safety of vehicles or pedestrians.
      (2)   No person shall park a truck of more than two-ton capacity between
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any week day upon any street in any zone except
vehicles owned by contractors providing services to the abutting property, but
parking of the vehicle for a period of not more than 30 minutes shall be
permitted in the zone for the purpose of having access to abutting property
when the access cannot conveniently be secured otherwise.
(`87 Code, § 701.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.08 PARKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Whenever any public school property and/or the areas of any public governing
body or authority customarily or usually open to traffic by the public are
posted by order of the appropriate school board or other proper authority or
governing body in control of the property, then it shall be unlawful to drive,
operate, stop, park or leave standing any vehicle on the property contrary to
the posting.
(`87 Code, § 701.10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.09 BOAT TRAILER PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful to park or let stand any trailer within any public
right-of-way in designated areas.
(`87 Code, § 701.11)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.10 WRECKED, JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful to store wrecked, junked, abandoned vehicles or an excessive
number of operable motor vehicles in certain residential areas of the city.
(`87 Code, § 701.13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.11 OUTSIDE STORAGE.
   In any single-family residential zoning district within the city, it shall
be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to park more than
three motor vehicles on private property anytime between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. outside of a garage or other appropriate accessory structure
within any 48-hour period.
(`87 Code, § 701.13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.12 NO PARKING.
   No person may park a vehicle in any of the following places: within ten feet
of a mailbox.
(Ord. 20180419-02, passed 4-19-18)
CHAPTER 72: SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Section
   
72.01   Definitions
   
72.02   Permitted uses
   
72.03   Crossing streets and highways
   
72.04   Applicability
   
72.05   Yielding right-of-way
   
72.06   Operation by minors
   
72.07   Prohibited uses
   
72.08   Equipment required; ignition lock
   
72.09   Emergency operation
   
72.10   Signal from officer to stop
   
72.11   Exemptions
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE. A device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.
   NATURAL TERRAIN. Areas other than roadways or driveways (private or public),
parking lots and other areas, the surface of which has been intentionally
modified for motor vehicle operation thereon.
   OPERATOR. Every person who drives, operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder having the property in or title to
snowmobile entitled to the use or possession thereof.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
steered by skis or runners.
(`87 Code, § 702.01) (Am. Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25)
§ 72.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Except as herein specifically permitted and authorized, it is unlawful for
any person to operate a snowmobile not licensed as a motor vehicle within the
limits of the city.
   (A)   On the portion of any right-of-way of any public highway, street,
road, trail or alley used for motor vehicle travel, except that a snowmobile
may operate upon the most right-hand lane of a municipal street or alley and
may, in passing or making a left turn, operate on other lanes which are used
for vehicle traffic in the same direction, for purposes of going to or
returning from a non-highway area of permissible operation, by the most direct
route. Snowmobiles may also be operated upon the ditch bottom or the outside
bank of trunk, county state-aid and county highways, where the highways are so
configured within the corporate limits. Snowmobiles shall only be allowed to
travel on city streets during the winter season beginning November 1 through
March 31 of each year;
   (B)   On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel;
   (C)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way;
   (D)   On a trail not specified for snowmobiles use;
   (E)   On private property of another without specific permission of the
owner or person in control of the property;
   (F)   On any other public place, except as may be specifically permitted by
other provisions of the city;
   (G)   At a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour;
   (H)   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as
to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of another person(s);
   (I)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be
likely to endanger, the safety of any person or property of any other person;
   (J)   At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined
in M.S. § 169.121, as it may be amended from time to time;
   (K)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit the crossing of a city
or county right-of-way, which is otherwise allowed by M.S. § 84.87, as may be
amended from time to time; and
   (L)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit the operation of a
snowmobile upon the shoulder inside bank, or slope of any public highway,
street, road, trail or alley as permitted by M.S. § 84.87, Subd. 3, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(`87 Code, § 702.02) (Am. Ord. 06-02-01, passed 2-16-06; Am. Ord. 09-02-03,
passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 CROSSING STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   A snowmobile not licensed as a motor vehicle may make a direct crossing of a
street or highway, except an interstate highway or freeway provided:
   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing;
   (B)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way;
   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
   (D)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of the street or highway with another public street or highway;
and
   (E)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour before
sunrise to one-half hour after sunset or, in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on.
(`87 Code, § 702.03) (Am. Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25)
§ 72.04 APPLICABILITY.
   City traffic ordinances shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles not
licensed as a motor vehicle upon streets and highways, except for those
relating to required equipment, those which by their nature have no application
and those inconsistent with the provisions herein. To the extent that any
provision of this chapter is inconsistent with the state regulations of
snowmobiles in M.S. §§ 84.81 to 84.88, the state regulations shall apply.
(`87 Code, § 702.04) (Am. Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25)
§ 72.05 YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way
to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so close to the
intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(`87 Code, § 702.05) (Am. Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 OPERATION BY MINORS.
   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or the roadway
surface of highways or make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state road,
county highway or city street as the operator of a snowmobile. A person 14
years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile
on streets and highways as permitted under this chapter and make a direct
crossing of the streets and highways only if he or she has in his or her
immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the
Commissioner, as provided by M.S. § 84.872, as it may be amended from time to
time. A person under 18 years of age operating a snowmobile on local city
streets or frozen waters must wear an approved helmet.
(`87 Code, § 702.06) (Am. Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile not licensed for
highway use when operating on natural terrain within the limits of the city:
      (1)   At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, as
defined in M.S. § 169.121, as it may be amended from time to time, which is
hereby incorporated herein by reference;
      (2)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
surrounding circumstances;
      (3)   At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner or
heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as
to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or
property;
      (4)   During the hours from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any day, except
for leaving or returning to the residence of the operator upon the most direct
route;
      (5)   So as to tow any person or thing, except through use of a rigid tow
bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile; and/or
      (6)   Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink or
sliding area where the operation would conflict with use or endanger other
persons or property or within 100 feet of any dwelling which is usually
occupied by one or more persons.
(`87 Code, § 702.07)
   (B)   It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
animal with a snowmobile.
(`87 Code, § 702.11) (Am. Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED; IGNITION LOCK.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within
the limits of the city, unless it is equipped with the following:
      (1)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the
noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation; (No
person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass straight pipe or similar device on a
snowmobile.)
      (2)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of, and to stop and hold
the snowmobile or ATV under any condition of operation;
      (3)   A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in operating condition;
      (4)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and
one-half hour before sunrise, or at time of reduced visibility, at least one
clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons
and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of
darkness and under normal atmospheric conditions; and (The headlamp shall be so
aimed that glaring
rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile. It shall also
be equipped with at least one red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of
500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.)
      (5)   Reflective material at least 16 inches square on each side, forward
of the handlebars or steering device of a snowmobile, and at the highest
practical point on any towed object, as to reflect light at a 90 degree angle.
(`87 Code, § 702.08)
   (B)   Every person leaving a snowmobile on a public place or way shall lock
the ignition, remove the key and take the same with him or her.
(`87 Code, § 702.09) (Am. Ord. 06-02-01, passed 2-16-06; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 EMERGENCY OPERATION.
   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time and
at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.
(`87 Code, § 702.10) (Am. Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25)
§ 72.10 SIGNAL FROM OFFICER TO STOP.
   It is unlawful for a snowmobile operator, after having received a visual or
audible signal from a law enforcement officer, to operate the vehicle in
willful or wanton disregard of the signal to stop, interfere with or endanger
the law enforcement officer or any other person or vehicle or increase speed or
attempt to flee or elude the officer.
(`87 Code, § 702.12) (Am. Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01,
passed 8-20-25) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following uses are exempt from this chapter:
   (A)   Any motorized vehicles used for the purpose of property maintenance;
   (B)   Any agent or employee of any road authority, law enforcement or public
safety agency, or any agent or employee of the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources or any other governmental body in conducting official business; and
   (C)   Any organized track-racing event that is required to be registered
with the DNR.
(Ord. 09-02-03, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Section
   
I.   One-hour restrictions
   
II.   Two-hour restrictions
   
III.   Thirty-minute restrictions
SCHEDULE I. ONE-HOUR RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to park or leave standing any motor
vehicle for more than one hour in any of the following designated places.
 
Direction Street                       Location
          County State Aid Highway 25  Between 292 Street and 295 Street,
Both      (Olinda Trail)               except for Saturdays, Sundays and
                                       Holidays
 
(`87 Code, § 701.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE II. TWO-HOUR RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to park or leave standing any motor
vehicle for more than two hours in any of the following designated places.
Direction Street Location
Direction Street    Location
          Minnesota
Both      Trunk     From Linden Street on the west to Oak Street on the east
          Highway 8
          First     From Linden Street on the west to a location 200 feet west of the
South     Avenue    intersection of First Avenue North and Maple Street on the east
          North
          First
North     Avenue    From Linden Street on the west to Maple Street on the east
          North
          Linden
          Street
          (north of Between First Avenue North and Newell Avenue.
          Highway
          8)
          Park      Between First Avenue North and Newell Avenue.
          Street
          Maple     Between First Avenue North and Newell Avenue.
          Street
          Oak       Between First Avenue North and Newell Avenue
          Street
          St. Croix For it’s entire length, except for the south side of the street west of
          Avenue    Broadway Street
                    Within any municipal parking lot located in the Central Business District
 
(`87 Code, § 701.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE III. THIRTY-MINUTE RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to park or leave standing any motor
vehicle for more than 30 minutes in any of the following designated places.
 
Direction Street             Location
                             From a point 50 feet east of the center line of
                             the certain unnamed alley that runs north and
Both      First Avenue North south connecting the avenue and Third Avenue North
                             and located between Maple Street and North Lake
                             Trail (CSAH 20) to a point 90 feet further east, a
                             total distance of 50 feet
 
(`87 Code, § 701.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 74: SPECIAL USE AND RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
74.01 Purpose
   
74.02 Definitions
   
74.03 Special use vehicles: motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, ATVs
and mini trucks
   
74.04 Operation of recreational vehicles
   
74.05 Minimum equipment requirements for recreational motor vehicles
   
74.06 Designated roadways and public areas for use
   
74.07 Applicability
§ 74.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to reasonably regulate special use and
recreational vehicles on public and private property in the city to ensure
public safety and prevent public nuisances. This chapter is not intended to
permit what state law prohibits or to prohibit what state law expressly
permits.
(Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25)
§ 74.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OR ATV. A motorized vehicle having the same meaning as
defined in M.S. § 84.92, Subd. 8 as it may be amended from time to time.
   DESIGNATED ROADWAY. Trails or areas on private or public property permitted
for use by a special use or recreational motor vehicle.
   MINI TRUCK. A motor vehicle having the same meaning as defined in M.S. §
169.011, Subd. 40a as it may be amended from time to time.
   MOTORIZED GOLF CART. Any passenger conveyance being driven with four wheels
with four low-pressure tires that is limited in engine displacement of less
than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less than 800 pounds.
   OPERATOR. A person who drives, operates, or has physical control over a
vehicle defined in this chapter.
   OWNER. A person, other than a person with a security interest, having a
property interest in or title to a vehicle described in this section entitling
the person to the use or possession thereof.
   PUBLIC ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire right-of-way of a public road,
including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders, and medians of a
roadway, that is not privately owned.
   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational purposes,
including but not limited to snowmobiles, trail bike or other ATV, hovercraft,
or motor vehicle licensed for highway operation which is being used for off-
road recreational purposes, including but not limited to off-road vehicles
defined in M.S. § 84.797, Subd. 7 and off-highway vehicles defined in M.S. §
84.771, as these statutes may be amended from time to time.
   SPECIAL USE VEHICLE. An ATV, motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, or
mini truck.
   UTILITY TASK VEHICLE. A side-by-side, four-wheel drive, off-road vehicle
that has four wheels, is propelled by an internal combustion engine with a
piston displacement capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less, and has a
total dry weight of 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds.
(Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25)
§ 74.03 SPECIAL USE VEHICLES: MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS, UTILITY TASK VEHICLES,
ATVS, AND MINI TRUCKS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a special use vehicle on streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public property without obtaining a permit under this
section.
   (B)   Every application for a permit under this section shall be made on a
form supplied by the city and shall contain all of the following information:
      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant.
      (2)   Model name, make, and year and vehicle identification number or
serial number of the special use vehicle sought to be operated.
      (3)   Other information as the city may require.
   (C)   All applications for a permit under this section shall be accompanied
by the fee established by city ordinance, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (D)   Permits shall be granted for a period of three years and may be
renewed in the same manner and with the same fee as for new applications.
   (E)   No permit shall be granted or renewed unless all of the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The applicant demonstrates that they are able to safely operate the
special use vehicle on the designated roadways. An applicant may be required to
submit a certificate signed by a physician verifying their ability to safely
operate the special use vehicle on the designated roadways.
      (2)   The applicant provides evidence of insurance for the special use
vehicle in compliance with the provisions of M.S. § 65B.45.
      (3)   The applicant's driver's license has not been revoked as the result
of criminal proceedings.
   (F)   A permit may be suspended or revoked by the City Council upon a
finding that the permit holder has violated any of the conditions in this
section or M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, or the
permit holder cannot safely operate the special use vehicle on the designated
roadways.
   (G)   Special use vehicles may only be operated on designated roadways
within the city, not state or federal highways, except to cross at designated
intersections and where a street or highway intersects a designated roadway.
   (H)   ATVs may make a direct crossing of a public road right-of-way
provided:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the road and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and
safe crossing.
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the road.
      (3)   The driver yield the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      (4)   In crossing a divided road, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of the road with another public road.
      (5)   The crossing may not be made later than one-half hour after sunset
or earlier than one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced
visibility, unless the vehicle is equipped with front and rear lights that are
turned on during operation of the ATV at such times.
   (I)   Special use vehicles, except for mini trucks, may only be operated on
designated roadways from sunrise to sunset, unless equipped with original
equipment headlights, taillights, and rear-facing brake lights. They shall not
be operated in inclement weather conditions or at any time when there is
insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a
distance of 500 feet.
   (J)   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving vehicle emblem
provided for in M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from time to time, when
operated on designated roadways.
   (K)   Every person operating a special use vehicle on designated roadways
has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle
under M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, except when
these M.S. § 169.045, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (L)   The owner or operator of the special use vehicle may not permit its
operation in a manner that exceeds the design occupant load.
(Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25)
§ 74.04 OPERATION OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful to operate a recreational motor vehicle:
   (A)   Outside the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
   (B)   On land not owned by the owner or operator of the recreational motor
vehicle after being notified not to do so, either orally or by written or
posted notice, by the owner, occupant, or lessee. Where posted notice is used,
an owner, occupant, or lessee may post any sign prohibiting recreational motor
vehicles that has been adopted by rule of the state commissioner of natural
resources or signs bearing letters not less than two inches high which state as
follows or using substantially similar wording: "Recreational Vehicles
Prohibited," "Snowmobiles Prohibit," "Trail Bike Prohibited," "All-Terrain
Vehicles Prohibited." All notices or signs under this section shall be posted
at corners and ordinary ingress and egress to the property and when so posted
shall raise a presumption that a person operating a recreational motor vehicle
on the property was notified not do operate such vehicle on that land. Failure
to post notice as provided in this section shall not deprive a person of the
right to bring any civil action for damage to one's person or property as
otherwise provided by law.
   (C)   On publicly owned land, including schools, city streets, park
property, playgrounds, recreation areas, and golf courses, except where
permitted by this chapter.
   (D)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise that
disturbs, annoys, or interferes with the peace and quiet of others.
   (E)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian
travel.
   (F)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled
substances.
   (G)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or permitted under the
circumstances.
   (H)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger or by
likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or property.
   (I)   On any public street, highway, or right-of-way unless registered
pursuant to Minnesota law.
   (J)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over, or kill any animal, wild or
domestic.
   (K)   By halting any recreational motor vehicle carelessly or heedlessly in
disregard of the rights or the safety of others or in a manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or in excess of 25
miles per hour on publicly owned lands.
   (L)   Within 150 yards of any public recreational area or gathering of
people. This provision does not apply to the occasional use of recreational
motor vehicles on private property for the purpose of loading or unloading it
from a trailer or for mechanically checking it.
   (M)   Without a functioning stoplight if so equipped.
   (N)   Without a break operational by either hand or foot.
   (O)   At a speed exceeding ten miles per hour on the frozen surface of
public waters within 100 feet of a person not on an ATV or within 100 feet of a
fishing shelter.
   (P)   Without a safety helmet approved by the State Commissioner of public
safety for persons less than 18 years of age, either as a passenger or as an
operator of a recreational vehicle.
   (Q)   Without a seat belt where a seat belt has been provided for persons
less than 18 years of age.
   (R)   Where the person is under 18 years of age and the recreational motor
vehicle being operated is an ATV.
   (S)   Where the person is 18 years of age or older and is operating a Class
1 ATV with more than one passenger or a Class 2 ATV with more passenger than
the vehicle design occupant load.
   (T)   To make a direct crossing of any street, highway, or public right-of-
way if the operator is less than 12 years of age.
   (U)   On public lands or waters without a parent or legal guardian if the
operator is at least ten years of age but under 12 years of age and the
recreational motor vehicle is an ATV with an engine capacity of up to 90cc.
(Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25)
§ 74.05 MINIMUM EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful to operate a recreational motor vehicle that does not meet
the following minimum equipment requirements:
   (A)   Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant operation
to reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for
operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe, or
similar device on a recreational motor vehicle motor. The exhaust system shall
not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.
   (B)   Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement of and to stop and
hold under any conditions of operation.
   (C)   At least one clear lamp shall be attached to the front with sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. The
head lamp shall be so that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an
oncoming vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped with at least one red tail
lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red
light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours
of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. This equipment shall be in
operating condition at all times and shall be turned on when the vehicle is
operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour
before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility.
(Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25)
§ 74.06 DESIGNATED ROADWAYS AND PUBLIC AREAS FOR USE.
   (A)   The Council may designate public areas and roadways for the use of
recreational motor vehicles and special use vehicles by resolution approved by
a majority of council members. The areas designated may be changed from time to
time by the City Council. An up-to-date map of any designated public areas and
designated roadways shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and a
copy posted on the city's website.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate a recreational motor vehicle or
special use vehicle on any public areas or roadways not specifically designated
under this section except as expressly authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25)
§ 74.07 APPLICABILITY.
   To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent with M.S.
Chapter 84, the state regulations shall supersede the applicability of that
provision.
(Ord. 20250820-01, passed 8-20-25)
   Every person operating a motorized cart under permit on designated bike
paths, designated streets, and designated bike lanes has all the rights and
duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 169, as amended, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be
applied to motorized carts and except as otherwise specifically provided in
M.S. § 169.045, Subd. 7, as amended.
(Ord. 07-08-01, passed 8-16-07)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
90.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY
   
91.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
   
92.   ANIMALS
   
93.   NUISANCES
   
94.   USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
   
95.   FIRE PREVENTION CODE
   
96.   SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
   
97.   FAIRVIEW CEMETERY
CHAPTER 90: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
90.01   Election to manage the public right-of-way
   
90.02   Definitions and adoption of rules by reference
   
90.03   Permit requirement
   
90.04   Permit applications
   
90.05   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
90.06   Permit fees
   
90.07   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
90.08   Supplementary applications
   
90.09   Denial of permit
   
90.10   Installation requirements
   
90.11   Inspection
   
90.12   Work done without a permit
   
90.13   Supplementary notification
   
90.14   Revocation of permits
   
90.15   Mapping data; information required
   
90.16   Location of facilities
   
90.17   Damage to other facilities
   
90.18   Right-of-way vacation
   
90.19   Indemnification and liability
   
90.20   Abandoned facilities; removal of abandoned facilities
   
90.21   Appeal
   
90.22   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
   
90.23   Trees and other vegetative plantings in city rights-of-way and easement
areas
Cross-reference:
   For provisions regarding use of public property, see
Chapter 94
§ 90.01 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects pursuant to
this chapter to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS AND ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   Minn. Rules Chapter 7819, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference and is incorporated into this code as if set out in full.
The definitions included in Minn. Rules part 7819.0100 subps. 1 through 23, as
it may be amended from time to time, are the definitions of the terms used in
the following provisions of this subchapter.
§ 90.03 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate permit from the city.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate
that part of the right-of- way described in the permit and to hinder free and
open passage over the specified portion of the right- of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit.  An obstruction permit is required to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of- way permit before the
expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000 subp. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding division (B) of this
section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable
delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The
delay penalty shall be as established by from time to time by Council
resolution, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the City Administrator,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.04 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete only
upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:
      (1)   Each permittee’s name, gopher one-call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the City Administrator, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities, and collapse of property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent
or other person designated by the Council be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by
the Council in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to
carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required
to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to time as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the certificate
from the Commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees as established by from time to time by Council
resolution, as it may be amended from time to time, estimated restoration costs
and other management costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of the applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-
way or any emergency actions taken by the city; or
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges as established by from time to time
by Council resolution, as it may be amended from time to time, if applicable.
§ 90.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of- way and its current use.
§ 90.06 PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees shall be in an amount as established by from time to time by
Council resolution, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee as established by from time to time by Council resolution, as it may be
amended from time to time, in an amount sufficient to recover the following
costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction Permit Fee.  The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee as established by from time to time by Council resolution, as it may
be amended from time to time, and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover
the city management costs.
   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay those fees within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Non-refundable. Permit fees as established by from time to time by
Council resolution, as it may be amended from time to time, that were paid for
a permit that the City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council has revoked for a breach as stated in § 90.14 are not
refundable.
   (E)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
   (F)   All permit fees shall be established consistent with the provisions of
Minn. Rules part 7819.100, as it may be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.07 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under this
subchapter.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch its own work. The
city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If following
the restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee’s improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
all costs associated with having to correct the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it may be required at the time of application for an excavation permit
to post a construction performance bond or a deposit in accordance with the
provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and
shall comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to
time. The City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and
extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general
application or on a case-by-case basis.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching, or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents. The
permittee upon notification from the City Administrator, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council, shall correct all
restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the City
Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the
Council. The work shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt
of the notice from the City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council, not including days during which work cannot
be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work
is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under this subchapter.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the City Administrator,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the City
Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the
Council, the City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council at his or her option may do the work. In that event
the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way. If the permittee fails to pay as required, the city
may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.
   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee as
established by from time to time by Council resolution, as it may be amended
from time to time. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for
patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.
§ 90.08 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
§ 90.09 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
§ 90.10 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of- way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to time and other applicable
local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with M.S. §§ 237.162
and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
§ 90.11 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. Rules part 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site available to
city personnel and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the City Administrator, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council may issue an order to the permittee for any work
which does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct
the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the City
Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the
Council that the violation has been corrected. If proof has not been presented
within the required time, the City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or
other person designated by the Council may revoke the permit pursuant to §
90.14.
§ 90.12 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately
notify the city of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be
an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply for the necessary permits,
pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements
necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the actions it
took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the
city will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility owner
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the
normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by this code,
deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-
way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 90.13 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the City
Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the
Council of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
§ 90.14 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited, to the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittees control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
90.11.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy that violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach.  Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan,
or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with the revocation.
§ 90.15 MAPPING DATA; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city in
accordance with Minn. Rules parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 90.16 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Compliance required. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities
must comply with applicable laws, and with Minn. Rules parts 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time, to the
extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the right-of-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
   (C)   Limitation of space.  To protect the health, safety, and welfare or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the City
Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the
Council shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or
additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making those decisions, the
City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the
Council shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and
potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public’s needs for the particular
utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with
respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the
right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.
§ 90.17 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the City Administrator,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council shall notify
the local representative as early as is reasonably possible and placed as
required. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and
must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall
be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way
which it or its facilities damages. Each facility owner shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant
caused during the city’s response to an emergency occasioned by that owner’s
facilities.
§ 90.18 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minn. Rules part 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 90.19 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minn. Rules 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 90.20 ABANDONED FACILITIES; REMOVAL OF ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove
them from that right-of- way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way
repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the
City Administrator, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the
Council.
§ 90.21 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied a
permit; has had permit revoked; or believes that the fees imposed are invalid,
may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written
request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written
request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council
affirming the denial, revocation, or fee as imposition will be in writing and
supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
§ 90.22 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee’s or registrant’s rights are subject to the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 90.23 TREES AND OTHER VEGETATIVE PLANTINGS IN CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENT
AREAS.
   (A)   Planting trees or other vegetation in the boulevard (street right-of-
way) is not allowed without a permit from the city. Trees and other vegetation
planted within city rights-of-way shall be maintained by the city.
   (B)   The city may plant or maintain trees and other vegetation in city
rights-of-way and may assess the abutting property for any benefit or costs
associated with the planting, maintenance or removal of the tree or other
vegetation, whether planted by the city or the property owner.
   (C)   Trees and other vegetation may be planted and maintained in drainage
and utility easements without a permit from the city at the risk of the
property owner and provided that the trees or vegetation do not interfere with
access to or use of the easement.
(Ord. 04-11-02, passed 11-18-2004)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 91: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
91.01   Findings and purpose
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Violation to abandon motor vehicle or to keep junk vehicles
   
91.04   Authority to impound vehicles
   
91.05   Sale; waiting periods
   
91.06   Notice of taking and sale
   
91.07   Right to reclaim
   
91.08   Operator’s deficiency claim; consent to sale
   
91.09   Disposition by impound lot
   
91.10   Disposal authority
   
91.11   Contracts; reimbursement by MPCA
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned property, see §
34.01
§ 91.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   M.S. Chapter 168B, and Minn. Rules Chapter 7035, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. Sections 91.01 through 91.11 of
this code are adopted under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, Subd. 2, as it may
be amended from time to time. If any of these provisions are less stringent
that the provisions of M.S. § 168B or Minn. Rules Chapter 7035, as it may be
amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take precedence.
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01 as it may be amended
from time to time, that:
         (a)   Has remained illegally:
            1.   For a period of more than 48 hours on any property owned or
controlled by a unit of government, or more than four hours on that property
when it is properly posted; or
            2.   On private property for a period of time, as determined under
§
91.04(B), without the consent of the person in control of the property; and
         (b)   Is located on private or public property and lacks vital
component parts or cannot be driven or propelled under its own powers in its
existing condition, or lacks valid, current registration plates, unless it is
kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.
      (2)   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. § 168.10 as it may
be amended from time to time, is not considered an abandoned vehicle.
      (3)   Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards
that are defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance with M.S. § 161.242 as
it may be amended from time to time, or that are licensed and maintained in
accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not considered abandoned
vehicles.
      (4)   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under
police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered
abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ or
court order is in effect.
   DEPARTMENT. The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
   IMPOUND. To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. There are two types of
impounds: public and nonpublic.
    IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR. A person who engages in impounding or
storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. OPERATOR
includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot, regardless of
whether tow truck service is provided.
   JUNK VEHICLE.   A vehicle that:
      (1)   Is three years old or older;
      (2)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including things as broken
or missing wheels, motor, drive train or transmission;
      (3)   Is apparently inoperable; and
      (4)   Does not have a valid, current registration plate.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Has the meaning given “motor vehicle” in M.S. §
169.01, as it may be amended from time to time.
   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE. Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the operation
of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as tires and
used motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.
   MPCA or AGENCY. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NONPUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot that is not a public impound lot.
   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot owned by or contracting with a unit of
government under §
91.10.
   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment
pursuant to §
91.04(B), or M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended from time to time, but is not
a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.
   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT. Includes a state department or agency, a special purpose
district, and a county, statutory or home rule charter city, or town.
   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to
the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things as the motor,
drive train and wheels.
(Am. Ord. 07-06-01, passed 6-21-07)
§ 91.03 VIOLATION TO ABANDON MOTOR VEHICLE OR TO KEEP JUNK VEHICLES.
   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private property,
without the consent of the person in control of the property, or locates or
keeps a junk vehicle on residential property outside an enclosed structure, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Am. Ord. 07-06-01, passed 6-21-07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.04 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   (A)   Abandoned or junk vehicles. The City Administrator or his or her
designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by
the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle if the
vehicle is on public property. If the abandoned or junk vehicle is located on
private property, the vehicle shall not be removed or impounded until the
provisions of §
91.04(C) are complied with.
   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles. The City Administrator, or his or her designee
or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city
may take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under M.S. § 169.041
as it may be amended from time to time. A vehicle may also be impounded after
it has been left unattended in one of the following public or private locations
for the indicated period of time:
      (1)   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 169.041 as it may be
amended from time to time:
         (a)   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace officer, four hours;
         (b)   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic hazard to the
traveling public, as determined by a peace officer, immediately; or
         (c)   That is a parking facility or other public property owned or
controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, four hours; or
      (2)   On private property, only with the express permission of the owner
of the property, a resident or other person in control of the premises:
         (a)   That is single-family or duplex residential property,
immediately;
         (b)   That is private, nonresidential property, properly posted,
immediately;
         (c)   That is private, nonresidential property, not posted, 24 hours;
or
         (d)   That is any residential property, properly posted, immediately.
      (3)   If under division (B)(2) of this section, permission is not
granted, then the city shall not remove and impound any vehicle until the
procedure established in division (C) of this section have been followed.
   (C)   If the vehicle is on private property, the City Administrator or his
or her designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted
for by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle
on private property only with the permission of the owner of the property, a
resident, or other person in control of the premises. If permission is denied,
the city may declare the existence of the abandoned or junk vehicle to be a
nuisance and proceed to abate the nuisance as provided for in §§
93.15 through
93.21. Once the abatement procedure has been completed, the city may apply for
an order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the removal and
impoundment of the vehicle and, after the order has been granted, the city may
then remove and impound the vehicle.
(Am. Ord. 07-06-01, passed 6-21-07)
§ 91.05 SALE; WAITING PERIODS.
   (A)   Sale after 15 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or
sale under §
91.09, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be:
      (1)   A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subdivision; or
      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.
   (B)   Sale after 45 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or
sale under §
91.09, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be an
unauthorized vehicle.
§ 91.06 NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.
   (A)   Contents; notice given within five days. When an impounded vehicle is
taken into custody, the city or impound lot operator taking it into custody
shall give notice of the taking within five days. The notice shall:
      (1)   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year, make, model
and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if the information can be
reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is being held;
      (2)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle under §
91.07; and
      (3)   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time allowed
under §
91.05 shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and interest in the
vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or
sale of the vehicle and contents pursuant to §
91.09.
   (B)   Notice by mail or publication. The notice shall be sent by mail to the
registered owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lienholders of record. The Department makes this information
available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. If it is
impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of
the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was
towed from or abandoned. Published notices may be grouped together for
convenience and economy.
   (C)   Unauthorized vehicles; notice. If an unauthorized vehicle remains
unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under division (B) of
this section, a second notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and to
all readily identifiable lienholders of record.
§ 91.07 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
   (A)   Payment of charges. The owner or any lienholder of an impounded
vehicle shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or impound lot
operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and storage charges
resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or 45 days, as
applicable under §
91.05, after the date of the notice required by §
91.06.
   (B)   Lienholders. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any
lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state, or the right of a
lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGEKEEPER is an
operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles.
§ 91.08 OPERATOR’S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.
   (A)   Deficiency claim. The nonpublic impound lot operator has a deficiency
claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable costs of
services provided in the towing, storage and inspection of the vehicle minus
the proceeds of the sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not exceed
the costs of:
      (1)   25 days storage for a vehicle described in §
91.05(A); and
      (2)   55 days storage for a vehicle described in §
91.05(B).
   (B)   Implied consent to sale. A registered owner who fails to claim the
impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under §
91.05 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to the
disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title.
§ 91.09 DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.
   (A)   Auction or sale.
      (1)   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken into
custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under §
91.07, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible pursuant
to §§
91.06 and
91.07.
      (2)   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the
vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle
and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   (B)   Unsold vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the city or
public impound lots pursuant to division (A) of this section shall be disposed
of in accordance with §
91.10.
   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities. From the proceeds of a sale under this
section by the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or unauthorized motor
vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and
storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and publication costs
incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this chapter. Any remainder from
the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the treasury of the city.
   (D)   Sale proceeds; nonpublic impound lots. The operator of a nonpublic
impound lot may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted under the
authority of division (A) of this section. The operator may retain all proceeds
from sale of any personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that were not
claimed by the owner or the owner’s agent before the sale, except that any
suspected contraband or other items that likely would be subject to forfeiture
in a criminal trial must be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement
agency.
§ 91.10 DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.
   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal. The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than five abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day period.
§ 91.11 CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA.
   (A)   MPCA review and approval. If the city proposes to enter into a
contract with a person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a
contract pursuant to §
91.10, the MPCA may review the proposed contract before it is entered into by
the city, to determine whether it conforms to the MPCA’s plan for solid waste
management and is in compliance with MPCA rules. A contract that does so
conform may be approved by the MPCA and entered into by the city. Where a
contract has been approved, the MPCA may reimburse the city for the costs
incurred under the contract that have not been reimbursed under §
91.09. Except as otherwise provided in §
91.10, the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has been entered into
without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons duly licensed by
the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to M.S. § 116.07, as it
may be amended from time to time; does not provide for a full performance bond;
or does not provide for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor
vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve a contract covering solely
collection or transportation of abandoned motor vehicles where the MPCA
determines total collection and transportation to be impracticable and where
all other requirements herein have been met and the unit of government, after
proper notice and request for bids, has not received any bid for total
collection and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles.
   (B)    The city may perform work. If the city utilizes its own equipment and
personnel pursuant to its authority under §
91.10, and the use of the equipment and personnel conforms to the MPCA’s plan
for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA rules, the city may
be reimbursed by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred which are not
reimbursed under §
91.09.
   (C)   The city required to contract work. The MPCA may demand that the city
contract for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal
pursuant to the MPCA’s plan for solid waste disposal. If the city fails to
contract within 180 days of the demand, the MPCA, through the Department of
Administration and on behalf of the city, may contract with any person duly
licensed by the MPCA for the disposal.
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Enforcement; interference
   
92.03   Exemptions
   
92.04   License and registration
   
92.05   Vaccination required
   
92.06   Regulations; owner responsibility
   
92.07   Guard dog warnings
   
92.08   Wild dogs, wild cats and other wild animals
   
92.09   Impoundment and confinement; fees
   
92.10   Rabies control
   
92.11   Biting animals; quarantine
   
92.12   Dangerous animals
   
92.13   Nondomestic animals
   
92.14   Kennels
   
92.15   Chickens and other fowl
   
92.16   Keeping of honeybees
   
92.17   Trapping
 
   
92.99   Penalty
   
Appendix:   Chicken care sheet
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any non-human animal, reptile, amphibian or bird, domestic or non-
domestic, including dogs and cats.
   ANIMAL, DOMESTIC. Animals normally kept within the home, but not exclusive
of the home, such as fish, dogs, cats, household birds and similar animals.
   ANIMAL, NON-DOMESTIC. Animals that are normally kept outside of a
residential dwelling for purposes of food or pleasure, such as cattle, hogs,
chicken and other fowl, sheep, horses, bees, goats, birds such as pigeons,
falcons and similar animals.
   ANIMAL, WILD. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild and not
naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered to be
inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of people. Unless
otherwise defined, wild animals shall include:
      (1)   Any member of the large cat family (family felidae), including
lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats.
      (2)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae),
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs.
      (3)   Any crossbreeds, such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
      (4)   Any member or relative of the rodent family, including any raccoon
or squirrel, but excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly accepted
as domesticated pets.
      (5)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families, including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
      (6)   Any other animal not explicitly listed above, but which can be
reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including but not limited to,
bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
   AT LARGE. Any of the above animals not effectively restrained within a
fenced area, or any animal permitted to be in any unfenced area, whether public
or private, or lot abutting upon a street, alley, public park, public place,
without being effectively restrained from moving beyond the unfenced area or
lot, or any animal permitted to be on any street, public park, school grounds
or public place, without being effectively restrained by a chain or lease not
exceeding six feet in length, shall be deemed to be AT LARGE.
   CAT. Any domesticated feline animal, male or female, whole or neutered.
   CHICKEN. A domesticated fowl of the genus and species Gallus gallus.
   CHICKEN COOP. Any structure used for the housing of chickens.
   CHICKEN RUN. A fenced outside yard for the keeping and exercising of
chickens.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has committed any of the acts set forth
below:
      (1)   Without provocation, inflicts substantial bodily harm on a human
being on public or private property;
      (2)   Kills a domestic animal without provocation; or
      (3)   Been found to be a potentially dangerous animal, and after the
owner has been notified that the animal is potentially dangerous, the animal
aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
   DOG. Any canine animal, male or female, whole or neutered.
   DOG KENNEL. Any place where more than three dogs over six months of age are
boarded or bred and/or offered for sale, except for a veterinary clinic.
   ENCLOSURE. Any structure, except a dwelling, designated to securely enclose
and prevent an animal from escaping therefrom, and/or designed to provide the
animal with shelter and protection from the weather.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department,
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in or having temporary or
permanent custody or control of an animal.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has committed any of the acts
set forth below:
      (1)   When unprovoked, bites a human or domestic animal;
      (2)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the public
street, sidewalks or any other public property in an apparent attitude of
attack; or
      (3)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
   RESTRAINED. On a leash and in the custody of a person of sufficient age,
strength and experience to adequately control the animal, in a vehicle or
confined to the owner’s property by enclosure or fencing, such that they cannot
interact with other humans or domestic animals.
   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which involves a temporary, but
substantial disfigurement or which causes a temporary, but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member, limb or organ, or which causes
a fracture of any bodily member.
(`87 Code, § 508.01) (Am. Ord. 05-11-01, passed 11-17-05; Am. Ord. 11-06-01,
passed 6-16-11)
§ 92.02 ENFORCEMENT; INTERFERENCE.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the following:
      (1)   The primary law enforcement agency of the city;
      (2)   Any law enforcement agency contracted with by the city;
      (3)   Any animal control agency or officer as designated or contracted
with by the city; and/or
      (4)   Any law enforcement agency operating under a mutual aid agreement
with the city.
(`87 Code, § 508.02)
   (B)   No person shall, in any manner, interfere with or hinder an animal
control officer or law enforcement officer in the discharge of his or her
duties. For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter, an
animal control officer or law enforcement officer is empowered to enter upon
the private property of another without permission, with or without a warrant.
(`87 Code, § 508.03)
   (C)   Whenever an animal control officer or police officer determines that
any animal presents an immediate threat to the safety of any member of the
public, after making a reasonable attempt to impound the animal, the officer is
hereby authorized to summarily destroy the animal in the interest of public
safety.
(`87 Code, § 508.16)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the following
circumstances:
   (A)   Unless specified herein, the provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to animals used or confined to hospitals, clinics or businesses operated
by licensed veterinarians.
   (B)   Relating to vaccination requirements, §
92.05 shall not apply to any animal belonging to a nonresident of the city and
kept within the city not longer than 30 days, provided that all animals kept in
the city shall at all times be properly restrained while in the city.
   (C)   Relating to dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals, §
92.12 shall not apply to police dogs under the control of a licensed peace
officer during the performance of authorized police activities.
   (D)   Section
92.08(B) shall not apply to raptors possessed by licensed falconers holding
valid state and federal falconry permits, so long as the conditions of the
permits are satisfied.
(`87 Code, § 508.04) (Am. Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-16-11)
§ 92.04 LICENSE AND REGISTRATION.
   All dogs and cats owned and/or kept within the city shall be licensed, with
the following exceptions:
   (A)   Dogs and cats under the age of six months;
   (B)   Dogs and cats whose owners are temporarily in the city for a period of
time not exceeding 30 days; and/or
   (C)   Dogs and cats that are brought into the city for the purpose of
performance, an animal show, circus or similar lawful appearance.
(`87 Code, § 508.05)
§ 92.05 VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to keep or maintain any
dog or cat older than six months of age unless it has been vaccinated with an
anti-rabies vaccine by an licensed veterinarian.
   (B)   No license shall be issued, except upon compliance with this section.
      (1)   Except as herein provided, within 30 days of acquiring possession
of a dog or cat which has not been licensed by the city, the owner of the dog
or cat shall make application for a dog or cat license. The application shall
be on forms provided by the city.
      (2)   The license for each dog or cat must be submitted with the license
application. License fees shall be established by Council resolution.
      (3)   A license may be issued for each calendar year from January 1
through December 31, but at no time shall a license exceed the expiration date
of the vaccination.
      (4)   Upon completion of the application form for a specific dog or cat,
receipt of the license fee(s), and receipt of proof of vaccination, the city
shall issue a dog or cat license to be issued to the applicant for that
particular dog or cat.
      (5)   The city shall cause a license fee receipt to be issued to the
applicant, along with a metallic tag. The applicant shall cause the tag to be
affixed permanently by a metal fastening device to the collar of the licensed
dog or cat in a manner that the tag is easily observed. If a tag is lost, a
duplicate may be issued by the city upon presentation of a receipt showing
payment of the initial license fee and upon payment of an additional fee for
each duplicate tag.
      (6)   An applicant who has obtained a dog or at license shall notify the
city of the applicant’s address change within corporate limits of the city
within 30 days of any address change.
      (7)   No person shall counterfeit or alter, attempt to counterfeit or
alter or attach any counterfeit or altered dog or cat license tag to any dog or
cat in the city.
      (8)   No person shall transfer a dog or cat tag from one dog or cat to
any other dog or cat.
(`87 Code, § 508.06)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.06 REGULATIONS; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Except as herein provided, the owner of any animal within the city
shall cause the animal to be contained to the individual’s property by adequate
fencing, enclosure or leash.
   (B)   The owner of any female dog or cat in heat shall cause the dog or cat
to be confined in a manner so as not to come in contact with any other dog or
cat during the time as the dog or cat is in heat, except for intentional
breeding purposes.
   (C)   (1)   The owner of any animal within the city shall cause such animal
to be restrained by leash, chain or cord of sufficient strength to effectively
restrain and control the animal, and in the custody of a person of sufficient
age, strength and experience, to adequately control the animal at all times,
and while the animal is in or upon a public place, including, but not limited
to parks, school yards, sidewalks, paths, trails, alleys, streets or any public
right-of-way.
      (2)   A police officer or animal control officer, upon receiving a
complaint, shall determine that the animal is in violation by observing such
violations from a public street or adjoining property line, and upon making a
determination that a violation has occurred, shall warn the owner of the animal
on the first offense, and on a second documented and confirmed complaint, shall
issue an appropriate citation to the owner of such animal.
   (D)   (1)   The owner of any animal shall take steps to ensure that any
animal does not create a nuisance by allowing the animal to bark, bay or howl
in any of the following manners:
         (a)   Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. (local time) for a
continuous period of ten minutes or longer;
         (b)   Between the hours of 8:00 a.m and 8:00 p.m. for a continuous
period of 20 minutes or longer;
         (c)   For the purpose of this section, a citizen may file a complaint
with the Police Department if the citizen produces an adult witness (in
addition to the complainant) to the offense from the same household as the
complainant or from a second household within the immediate vicinity of the
animal creating the nuisance. Upon being presented with the name of the
complaining citizen and witness, the police shall present the information to
the County Attorney’s office so the complaint can be dealt with according to
law; or
         (d)   A police officer or animal control officer, upon receiving a
complaint, shall determine that the animal is in violation by observing the
violations from a public street or adjoining property line, and upon making a
determination that a violation has occurred, shall warn the owner of the animal
on the first offense, and on a second documented and confirmed complaint, shall
issue an appropriate citation to the owner of the animal.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, a second verified and documented
complaint of the violation within 30 days shall be deemed a violation of this
section.
   (E)   (1)   The owner of any animal shall be responsible for the sanitary
disposal of any feces material deposited by the animal in the following manner:
         (a)   During the period of November 1 through April 30, all feces
material shall be removed from the owner’s premises and/or stored in a sanitary
manner within 72 hours.
         (b)   During the period of May 1 through October 31, all feces
material shall be removed from the owner’s property and/or stored in a sanitary
manner within 48 hours.
         (c)   Objectionable feces odor and/or flies detectable at the
adjoining property line shall be deemed a violation of this section.
      (2)   The owner of any animal shall not permit an animal to be on public
property or the property of another without having, in the owner’s immediate
possession, a device for the immediate removal of feces material deposited by
the animal, as well as a container for transport of the feces to an appropriate
disposal receptacle located on the property of the animal’s owner.
   (F)   (1)   The owner of any animal within the city shall provide such
animal with sufficient wholesome food and water on a daily basis, as well as
proper and sufficient shelter from the weather, and veterinary care when needed
to prevent suffering of any sick or injured animal.
      (2)   No person shall beat, torment, tease or otherwise abuse an animal
or permit an animal fight.
      (3)   No person shall allow residentially or commercially zoned property
to be used for maintaining more than three dogs or cats over six months of age.
Any person who desires to exceed this limitation shall first apply for a kennel
license from the city on a form prescribed and provided by the City
Administrator.
(`87 Code, § 508.07) (Ord. 01-03, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 11-04-01, passed 4-
21-11)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.07 GUARD DOG WARNINGS.
   A person maintaining a dog for security purposes within the city shall post
a sign at all entrances to the property. The sign shall be a minimum of six
inches by 12 inches, with letters of contrasting colors a minimum of two inches
in height and a brush stroke of one-half inch minimum with the following words
affixed to a sign, “DANGER - GUARD DOG.”
(`87 Code, § 508.08)
§ 92.08 WILD DOGS, WILD CATS AND OTHER WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   Upon written notice of the Chief of Police that private property of
another is attracting or providing shelter to dogs or cats that are not owned
or cared for by any known person, the owner of the property shall be
responsible for removing the wild dogs or cats in a humane manner within 30
days of the written notice.
(`87 Code, § 508.09)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or
offer for sale, any wild animal within the city, except the following will be
allowed with a valid health certificate and an annual checkup by a
veterinarian:
         (a)   Skunks, if de-scented and neutered;
         (b)   Ferrets;
         (c)   Hedgehogs;
         (d)   Chinchillas;
         (e)   Sugar gliders (a marsupial).
      (2)   Raccoons will be allowed for display only by a commercial pet store
operating with a CUP (Conditional Use Permit). Any owner of a wild animal at
the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which to remove the
animal from the city, after which time the city may impound the animal as
provided for in this section. An exception shall be made to this prohibition
for animals specifically trained for, and actually providing assistance to, the
handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into the city as part of
an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or a
licensed show or exhibition.
(`87 Code, § 508.15) (Am. Ord. 05-11-01, passed 11-17-05)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.09 IMPOUNDMENT AND CONFINEMENT; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Any animal found running at large may be seized by an animal
control officer or a police officer, impounded at a designated animal shelter
and there confined in a humane manner for a minimum period of no less than
seven business days or until claimed by the animal’s owner, whichever occurs
first.
      (2)   Immediately upon impoundment of any animal, reasonable efforts
shall be made by the impounding official to notify the owner of the animal, of
the animal’s confinement and the procedures to be followed for reclamation of
the animal.
      (3)   Except for cruelly treated animals which have been impounded, an
animal which is not redeemed by the owner within seven business days, excluding
holidays, after the impoundment, may be disposed of in any manner provide by
law. Cruelly treated animals shall be kept for ten days before being disposed
of, and notice shall be given to the owners as provided for by M.S. § 343.325,
as it may be amended from time to time. An animal that is not claimed by the
owner within the prescribed time may be euthanized and deposed of in humane
manner by the appropriate animal shelter facility. Upon notice from the
appropriate animal shelter facility that an animal is sick and/or injured, the
Chief of Police is authorized to permit euthanization at any time within the
seven-day impoundment period in an effort to end the suffering of the animal.
      (4)   Upon expiration of the above described seven business day period,
if the animal has not been claimed by the owner, owner title of any animal may
be transferred to the animal shelter facility.
(`87 Code, § 508.10)
   (B)   Before the owner shall be permitted to retake possession of the
animal, the owner shall make payment to the owner of the impoundment facility
for all required fees and costs associated with the impoundment.
(`87 Code, § 508.11)
§ 92.10 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   The state health laws and regulations are hereby adopted in cases of
rabid animals which have bitten any person or animals suspected of being rabid.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every physician to report to the Police
Department the names and addresses of any person treated for bites inflicted by
any animal within the city limits, together with any other information deemed
helpful in the control of rabies.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal to immediately, but in
all cases, no later than 24 hours, to report to the Police Department all bites
inflicted by the owner’s animal to any person. The owner of any animal shall be
required to provide to the police written proof of vaccination and pertinent
insurance information when warranted by the police.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of any veterinarian to report to the city his or
her diagnosis of any animal within the city observed by him or her to be rabid.
   (E)   The police or animal control officer are hereby authorized to take
into possession any animal suspected of having rabies following a bite
inflicted to any person, and have the animal destroyed in a humane manner for
the purpose of determining whether the animal is in fact a rabies carrier. The
city and/or its agents shall not be held liable for the destruction of the
animal when the animal has inflicted injury upon any person and the city and/or
its agents act in good faith to protect the public.
(`87 Code, § 508.12)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.11 BITING ANIMALS; QUARANTINE.
   Whenever an animal has bitten a person, or whenever a suspected or known
rabid animal is picked up by an animal control officer or police officer, the
animal shall be confined for a minimum period of ten days as follows:
   (A)   Upon proof of current rabies vaccination, the animal control officer
or police may authorize the confinement of the animal at the owner’s place of
residence, provided that the animal shall not be permitted to come in contact
with other animals or persons, and provided further that the animal be muzzled
and on a leash not to exceed six feet when removed from the place of
confinement.
   (B)   If no proof of current vaccination is provided, or if the animal
control officer or police do not consent to confinement at the owner’s place of
residence, the animal shall be confined at the animal control facility for the
entire ten-day period at the animal owner’s expense.
   (C)   An animal under confinement may not be removed from the confinement
without written permission of the animal control officer or the Police Chief.
   (D)   The owner of any animal confined at the owner’s residence shall, at
all times, permit the inspection of the animal during the confinement period
upon oral request of an animal control officer or police officer. The owner
shall further be responsible for immediately reporting any change in the
animal’s health or behavior to the appropriate animal control officer during
the confinement period.
   (E)   A quarantined animal shall be confined to an enclosure in a manner so
as to prevent the animal from escaping. All openings to the enclosure shall be
locked with a secure locking device and the animal shall not be removed from
the enclosure unless muzzled and on a leash not exceeding six feet in length
and in the custody of a person of sufficient age, strength and experience to
adequately control the animal.
   (F)   An animal control officer and/or police officer may enter upon private
property of another for the purposes of removing the quarantined animal to an
animal shelter when it has been determined that the quarantined animal is not
being maintained by the owner in a manner consistent with the provisions of
this section.
(`87 Code, § 508.13)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.12 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any animal that has bitten a person and inflicted substantial bodily
harm to the person or committed any of the acts set forth in §
92.01 shall be considered a dangerous animal. Upon report to the police that an
animal has committed an act, the Police Chief or animal control officer shall
notify the owner of the animal of his or her intent to classify the animal as
dangerous. The notice shall be sent to the owner of the animal by certified
mail, return receipt required. If the owner does not pick up the certified
letter, the Police Chief or animal control officer shall hand deliver the
notice to the owner of the animal. Within 14 days from the date of mailing of
the certified letter, the owner of the animal may contest the classification of
the animal as dangerous. The request for an appeal shall be placed in writing
by the owner of the animal and delivered to City Hall.
   (B)   If the owner of the animal elects to appeal the dangerous animal
classification, the appeal shall be referred to the City Council for an
appropriate hearing. The City Administrator shall notify the owner of the
animal as to the time and date of the hearing, but in all cases, at least 14
days notice shall be given to the owner.
   (C)   The owner shall be informed of his or her right by the City
Administrator to be represented by legal counsel during the hearing, as well as
the right to provide oral and written testimony as to why the City Council
should not declare the animal as dangerous.
   (D)   During the hearing, the Council shall maintain an electronic recording
of the hearing.
   (E)   If the City Council declares the animal to be dangerous, the City
Administrator shall notify the owner of the animal by certified mail, return
receipt required, that the animal has been declared dangerous. If the owner
does not pick up the certified letter, the Police Chief or animal control
officer shall hand deliver the notice to the owner of the animal.
   (F)   The owner of any declared dangerous dog shall then have 14 days to
comply with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 347.50, as it may be amended from
time to time, from the date the certified letter described herein and shall, in
writing, report the dangerous dog to the County Sheriff’s Department. If the
owner of a dog that has been declared dangerous fails to comply with the 14-day
reporting requirement, the animal control authority and/or the police may seize
the dog and cause the dog to be housed at the appropriate animal shelter
facility for a minimum period of seven days, excluding holidays. If the owner
of the dog fails to comply with the reporting requirements of the dangerous dog
statute within the seven-day period, the dog shall be destroyed at the owner’s
expense.
   (G)   If deemed necessary, the Council shall, by Council resolution, set
fourth similar requirements to be met by the owners of dangerous animals, other
than dogs. The owner of the dangerous animals shall then have 14 days to comply
with the order of the City Council. If the owner of the dangerous animal fails
to comply with the Council’s order within the 14 days, the animal control
authority and/or the police may seize the dangerous animal and cause the same
to be housed at the appropriate animal shelter facility at the owner’s expense.
All seized animals shall be housed at the animal control facility for a minimum
period of seven days, excluding holidays. If the owner of the dangerous animal
fails to comply with the Council’s order within seven days, excluding holidays,
the animal shall be destroyed at the owner’s expense.
   (H)   Any animal that has bitten a person and inflicts injury to a human
being or commits any act outlined herein may be classified as a potentially
dangerous animal. The procedures set fourth under §
92.12 shall also apply procedurally to the classification and hearing process
of potentially dangerous animals.
(`87 Code, § 508.14)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.13 NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   Nondomestic animals are allowed to be kept only on parcels larger than
20 acres in areas of the city zoned “A-O.”
   (B)   Certain nondomestic and wild animals may be held for slaughter and
processing by meat processors duly licensed for the activities by the state.
Those animals include cattle, hogs, chickens, sheep, horses, goats, other fowl,
bears, bobcats, deer, antelopes, elks, moose, ostriches, buffalos and other
exotic animals.
(`87 Code, § 508.17) (Am. Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-16-11)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.14 KENNELS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than three dogs without
first obtaining a kennel license from the city. Kennel licenses may only be
issued in zoning districts where kennels are an allowed accessory or
conditional use.
(`87 Code, § 508.17)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.15 CHICKENS AND OTHER FOWL.
   (A)   Permit required for keeping of chickens and other fowl. No person
shall anywhere in the city keep, harbor or maintain care, custody or control
over any chicken without obtaining a permit issued by the city.
      (1)   No permit shall be granted to keep any chicken within a dwelling
unit or part thereof, nor on any property containing two or more dwelling
units.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to dogs, cats, ferrets or rabbits, nor
to veterinarians or licensed pet shops or licensed kennels.
   (B)   Application for permit. Any person desiring a permit under this
section shall make written application to the City Code Enforcement Officer.
Approval of application is subject to conditions prescribed by the city in the
Appendix. Failure to adhere to conditions in the Appendix is cause for
cancellation of the permit and/or may result in an administrative citation.
   (C)   Duration of permit. All initial permits issued shall expire on
December 31 of the following year after its issuance unless sooner revoked.
Renewal permits shall expire on December 31 of the second year following its
issuance unless sooner revoked. The application fee for such permit shall be
set by City Council and may be changed from time to time.
   (D)   Refusal to grant permit. The city may refuse a permit to keep or
maintain chickens hereunder for failure to comply with the provisions of this
section, and shall refuse a permit if such chickens should not be kept upon the
premises described in the application or the permit. If any such permit is
refused, the fee paid with the application shall be retained by the city.
   (E)   Numbers and types of chickens allowed.
      (1)   No more than five chickens shall be maintained at any one residence
or premises.
      (2)   Hen chickens may be kept within the city as specified in §
151.02.23,
Table 151.02.02.
      (3)   The keeping of roosters is prohibited. Chickens shall not be raised
or kept for fighting.
   (F)   Impounding of non-domesticated animals, chickens, and other fowl. Any
non-domesticated animal, including chickens and other fowl, kept in violation
of this section may be impounded by the city, and after being so impounded for
five days or more without being reclaimed by the owner, may be destroyed or
sold. Any person reclaiming such impounded animal shall pay the costs of
impounding and keeping the same.
   (G)   Public or private nuisance. 
      (1)   No person shall allow any chicken under his or her ownership or
control to disturb the peace and quiet of the city or to otherwise become a
public or private nuisance so as to annoy, injure or endanger the health,
safety, comfort or repose of the public.
      (2)   Nor shall the owner of chickens maintain them in a manner so as to
create a nuisance to owners of property adjacent to or in close proximity with
the property on which the chickens are located.
      (3)   Factors to be considered in deciding whether the keeping of
chickens creates a public or private nuisance include, but are not limited to,
the following;
         (a)   The condition of any structure or building wherein any chicken
and other fowl is kept.
         (b)   The proximity of pens, fences and other structures to adjacent
property lines.
         (c)   The general nature and characteristics of the neighborhood.
         (d)   The number of chickens kept on any one parcel.
         (e)   The relative size of the parcel on which the chickens are kept.
         (f)   The type of chickens being kept.
         (g)   The extent to which neighboring property is protected from the
effects of the chickens, e.g., solid fences, landscape screening, buffer areas,
and the like.
         (h)   The presence of objectionable odors and/or noise.
         (i)   The relative danger the chickens would pose if exposed to the
general public.
   (H)   Pens and yards. All chicken coops and chicken runs wherein chickens
are kept or permitted to be shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, devoid of all rodents and vermin, and free from objectionable odors.
Such structures shall be maintained in good condition and shall be sufficient
in strength and size to allow the particular chickens being kept to move about,
but also able to prevent the escape of the chickens by climbing digging,
chewing, manipulating of locks, gates or any other means if such restraint is
necessary to prevent the creation of a nuisance. Upon complaint of any
individual, the city shall inspect any such structure or premises, and issue
any such order as may be necessary to carry out the provisions hereof.
   (I)   Chickens within city limits; confinement.  Every person who owns,
controls, keeps, maintains or harbors hen chickens must keep them confined on
the premises at all times in a chicken coop or chicken run while in the city.
Chickens are not allowed to be located in any part of the home, unfenced yard
and/or garage.
   (J)   Chicken coops and chicken runs.
      (1)   Any chicken coop and run fencing must be consistent with building
and zoning codes.
      (2)   No chicken coop or run shall be constructed on any lot prior to the
time of construction of the principal structure.
      (3)   Chicken coops and runs shall not be in the front or side yard.
      (4)   Any chicken coop or run shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
residential structure on any adjacent lots, and ten feet from the property
line.
      (5)   Any coop or run shall be screened from view with a solid fence or
landscaped buffer with a minimum height of four feet.
      (6)   All chicken coops must have a minimum four square feet per chicken,
must not exceed ten square feet per chicken, and must not exceed six feet in
total height. Fenced-in chicken runs must not exceed 20 square feet per
chicken, and fencing must not exceed six feet in total height. Chicken runs may
be enclosed with wood and/or woven wire materials, and may allow chickens to
contact the ground. Chicken runs must have a protective overhead netting to
keep the chickens separated from other animals.
      (7)   Chickens must be secured in a chicken coop from sunset to sunrise
each day.
      (8)   Chicken coops must be elevated a minimum of 12 inches and a maximum
of 24 inches above grade to ensure circulation beneath the coop.
      (9)   Chicken grains and feed must be stored in rodent-proof containers
inside a structure.
   (K)   Conditions and inspection. No person who owns, controls, keeps,
maintains or harbors hen chickens shall permit the premises where the hen
chicken are kept to be or remain in an unhealthy, unsanitary or noxious
condition, or to permit the premises to be in such condition that noxious odors
are carried to adjacent public or private property. Any chicken coop and
chicken run authorized under this section may be inspected at any reasonable
time by the City Code Enforcement Officer or other agent of the city.
   (L)   Enforcement. The City Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-16-11; Am. Ord. 20230615-02, passed 6-15-23) Penalty,
see §
92.99
§ 92.16 KEEPING OF HONEYBEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall keep, maintain or allow to be kept
any hive or other facility for the housing of honeybees on or in any property
in the city without a permit.
      (1)   Any person desiring a permit for the keeping of honeybees shall
make application to the city. Approval of the application is subject to
reasonable conditions prescribed by City Administrator or designated authority.
All permits issued shall expire on January 31 of the year following issuance
unless revoked sooner. The initial fee for such permit shall be $25, which
shall be paid at the time of application. The annual renewal thereafter for
such permit shall be notification to the city of the continuance to maintain a
colony. The city shall inspect the premises annually or as deemed necessary.
Should the permit be refused, denied or revoked, the fee paid with the
application shall be retained by the city.
      (2)   The number and location of hives, colonies and/or facilities for
the housing of honeybees permitted by this section shall be noted on a permit
issued by the city. The permit shall specify any restrictions, limitations,
conditions or prohibitions required by this section, as necessary to safeguard
public health and general welfare, and to protect abutting property owners.
Subject to a hearing to be held by a committee of the Council or other
designated hearing examiner, if requested within five days of the notification,
the City Administrator or designated authority may deny, suspend or revoke any
permit applied for or granted pursuant to this section, if any condition or
requirement is violated or if the keeping of honeybees becomes a public
nuisance.
      (3)   The City Administrator or designated authority may grant a permit
pursuant to this section only after the applicant has met any educational
requirements as established and published by the city.
      (4)   The City Administrator or designated authority shall enforce the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of honeybees at a single
location.
      BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
honeybees.
      BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT. Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such
as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
      COLONY. An aggregate of honeybees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs and honey.
      HIVE. The receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured for that
purpose.
      HONEYBEE. All life stages of the common domestic honeybee, Apis mellifera
species of European origin.
      LOT. A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.
      NUCLEUS COLONY. A small quantity of honeybees with a queen housed in a
smaller than usual hive box designed for a particular purpose.
      SUPERS. Any box above the brood box or boxes for storage of surplus
honey.
      UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. Any idle land that is not improved or actually in
the process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church,
park, school or governmental facilities or other structures or improvements
intended for human occupancy, with the grounds maintained in association
therewith. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively
as a street or highway or property used for commercial agricultural purposes.
   (C)   Standards of practice. Any person obtaining a permit pursuant to this
section shall comply with the following standards of practice.
      (1)   Hives shall be located not less than 20 feet from the property line
and located only in the rear yard.
      (2)   Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames,
which shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
      (3)   Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available to the colony prior to and so long as colonies remain active outside
of the hive.
      (4)   Each beekeeper shall ensure that no wax comb or other material that
might encourage robbing by other bees are left upon the grounds of the apiary
lot. Once removed from the site, such materials shall be handled and stored in
sealed containers, or placed within a building, or other insect-proof
container.
      (5)   For each colony permitted to be maintained under this section,
there may also be maintained upon the same apiary lot, one nucleus colony in a
hive structure not to exceed one standard nine-and-five-eighths-inch-depth,
ten-frame hive body with no supers.
      (6)   Each beekeeper shall maintain his/her beekeeping equipment in good
condition, including keeping the hives painted, and securing unused equipment
from weather, potential theft or vandalism, and occupancy by swarms. It shall
be a violation of this section for any beekeeper's unused equipment to attract
a swarm, even if the beekeeper is not intentionally keeping honeybees.
      (7)   Each beekeeper shall enclose hive area with a latching fence.
   (D)   Colony density. Any person obtaining a permit pursuant to this section
shall comply with the following restrictions on colony density.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, in each instance
where a colony is kept less than 25 feet from a property line of the lot upon
which the apiary is located, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to
the property line, and any entrances to the hive faces the property line, the
beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet in
height. The flyway barrier may consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a
combination thereof, such that honeybees will fly over rather than through the
material to reach the colony. If a flyway barrier of dense vegetation is used,
the initial planting may be four feet in height, so long as the vegetation
normally reaches six feet in height or higher. The flyway barrier must continue
parallel to the apiary lot line for ten feet in either direction from the hive.
All other sides of the area encompassing the colonies shall consist of fencing,
a wall, dense vegetation or combination thereof at least four-feet tall. The
area encompassing the colonies need not entail the entire property. A flyway
barrier is not required if the property adjoining the apiary lot line is
undeveloped, or is zoned agricultural or industrial, or is a wildlife
management area or naturalistic park land with no horse or foot trails located
within 25 feet of the apiary lot line. A flyway barrier is not required if the
hives are located on the roof of a structure containing at least one full
story, if all hives are located at least five feet from the side of the
structure, and at least 15 feet from any adjacent and occupied structure. A
flyway barrier shall be required if an undeveloped adjoining property becomes
developed.
      (2)   No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers of
colonies on any lot within the city, based upon the size or configuration of
the apiary lot.
         (a)   One-half acre or smaller lot: two colonies;
         (b)   Larger than one-half acre but smaller than three-quarter acre
lot: four colonies;
         (c)   Larger than three-quarter acre lot but smaller than one acre
lot: six colonies;
         (d)   One acre but smaller than five acres: eight colonies;
         (e)   Larger than five acres: as determined by the City Administrator
or designated authority.
      (3)   Regardless of lot size, so long as all lots within a radius of at
least 200 feet from any hive, measured from any point on the front of the hive,
remain undeveloped, the maximum number of colonies may be increased by City
Administrator or designated authority.
(Ord. 12-05-01, passed 5-17-12) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 TRAPPING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      TRAP. Any device, snare, artificial light, net, bird line, ferret, hawk,
vehicle or contrivance whatever used to catch, snare, kill, or otherwise
restrain the free movement of animals or birds.
      TRAPPING. The act of setting, laying or possession with intent to set or
lay a trap.
   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to do any trapping on city
public property.
   (C)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Quick-kill trapping if the traps are designed to kill only rats,
mice, gophers or moles.
      (2)   Employees or duly authorized representatives of the city, county,
state or federal government acting within the course and scope of their
employment.
      (3)   Teachers trapping for educational programs or scientists for the
purpose of studying animals, wildlife or birds, which will be returned to their
natural environment uninjured.
      (4)   Any law enforcement personnel or person duly appointed and
designated by the City Administrator, while in the course of and for the
purposes of wildlife management and control at the direction of the City
Council. For purposes of this section, the term WILDLIFE shall mean wild
animals or animals living in a natural, undomesticated condition, including,
but not limited to: coyote, skunk, raccoon, possum, bear or fox.
(Ord. 13-03-01, passed 3-21-13; Am. Ord. 13-19-01, passed 12-19-13)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Each day on which this
violation continue shall constitute a separate violation.
(`87 Code, § 508.18)
APPENDIX: CHICKEN CARE SHEET
CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE PURCHASE
While livestock animals must be kept as carefully as pet animals, it is
important to keep in mind
that when these animals are kept as pets they can live up to 14 years or
longer.
Will you have sufficient time to clean the coop on a weekly basis?
Are you willing to spend $10 to $15 twice a year for fecal examination?
Are you able to provide the birds with proper veterinary care and the
vaccinations needed?
Chickens need to be tended to twice daily. Will you have a person ready to
substitute for you when you have a reason to be absent?
HOW TO RECOGNIZE HEALTHY CHICKENS
Smooth, shiny and full plumage.
Intensely colored red comb and wattles.
Alert and shiny eyes,
Relatively firm, well formed; they must be clean; animals must be active,
curious, busily picking or scratching for food; chickens should be actively
dusting and preening their plumage; birds should be free of ectoparasites like
mites, fleas or ticks.
THE RIGHT PLACE FOR THE COOP
Chickens require light, warmth and shelter from wind and drafts. The coop
should be constructed with a southern exposure for the front (including a
window and door); this will provide some heat and light to the coop. To protect
the coop from winds, hedges, shrubs or bushes should be placed toward the
northeast and western sections of the coop. Despite their love of warmth,
chickens tolerate heat poorly, as they have no sweat glands to allow for
perspiration. For summer heat you must provide access to shade.
   •   Space Requirements: If you plan to raise large breeds, at least four
square feet will be needed for each bird. If the chickens will be confined to
the coop for a great portion of the time, they will need more room: allow ten
square feet for each bird, or six to eight square feet per bantam.
   •   Nesting Box: Some kind of nesting box will be needed in the coop. Supply
one nest for every four hens.
   •   Perches/Roots: Perches or roosts will also be needed; a good rule of
thumb is one per bird.
   •   Heat: You might consider running electricity to your coop. This is
especially desirable if it tends to get very cold in the winter, as chickens
are prone to frostbitten combs and wattles. A few properly placed heat lamps,
kept burning at night, will keep chickens warm and may prevent their drinking
water from freezing.
   •   Walls: Avoid building materials that permit absorption of moisture, as
this will have a bad effect on the health of your chickens. Chemically treated
wood is the most suitable building material for coops. Treatment of the wood
should be done only with chemical compounds that are non-toxic to animals. A
good compound with antifungal agents is good for humid areas. Clear varnish is
also good. Everything should be treated or painted before it is assembled.
Wooden structures should be built with double walls that have a one and one-
half inch insulated layer between them. All bantams need warmer coop
temperatures than larger chickens.
   •   Roofing: The coop roof should be made of a material that will not
collect and hold heat. The roof surface should be covered with an insulating
tar paper to protect from heavy rains. The roof should be slightly inclined to
allow water to run off; if it overhangs at the front wall, it will protect from
downpours. A few small openings along the eaves allow moisture to escape and
provide fresh air.
   •   Floorings: The floor should be one that will not collect and hold
moisture, is easy to clean, and that the chickens will not have trouble walking
on. A dirt floor fulfills most to the essential demands, a concert floor is
ideal, especially since it discourages rodents. A wood floor is adequate;
provided it is at least on foot off the ground, insulated and sealed properly.
It is a good idea to throw litter on the floor wherever the chickens will be to
absorb moisture and facilitate cleaning.
CLEANING
How often the coop is cleaned depends on a lot of variables. If the chickens
are kept inside, ideally droppings should be removed every day, but not less
than every two to three days. Perches/roosts should get a quick wiping off at
the same time. In a larger coop outdoors, once a week might be appropriate, but
a major cleaning must be done twice annually: once in the spring and again in
the fall. All of the litter must be removed, and all parts and accessories
washed, scrubbed and thoroughly disinfected and dried before returning the
birds to the coop.
FEEDING
It has been found that chickens, like people, need a variety of foods in order
to remain healthy, and like people, suffer several nutritional disorders if
certain things are missing for their diet. Prepared chicken feeds are designed
to provide a perfectly balanced diet. Most prepared feeds contain such
ingredients as meat and bone scraps, blood meal, bone meal, molasses, ground
grains and grain meals. They also contain minerals and vitamins that chickens
are known to need.
   •   Scratch: This is an old time favorite chicken feed and is a mixture of
various whole grains and cracked corn. This feed goes over big with chickens,
but is not complete dietary ration. Scratch mixtures with a high proportion of
corn are not recommended. Some corn is fine, but as grains go, corn is lower in
protein and higher in fat, and it tends to make the chickens obese.
   •   Grit: Chickens must have access to grit in order for their digestive
systems to function properly. Since chickens do not have teeth, the grinding
function is performed by their gizzards. The gizzards uses grit as a grinding
agent, which may simply be pebbles and other small stones. The grit gradually
gets ground up along with the grain so it must be continuously renewed.
   •   Greens: Chickens love fresh greens, salad scraps, weeds and surplus or
overripe fruit and vegetables from the garden. These are an important part of
feeding program for a backyard flock. Not only will it help keep down your feed
bill, but it adds variety and needed vitamins and nutrients to their diet. When
you feed scraps, sort out anything that has begun to rot as it might make the
chickens sick.
HOW MUCH AND HOW OFTEN TO FEED
An average bantam in confinement may consume 40 to 50 pounds of feed annually,
while a larger breed may consume twice that amount. Chickens won't eat more
then they need, so they should be allowed to eat as much as they want. Although
feed should be continuously available, it is wise to feed them each day rather
then put a lot of feed out every few days. Feeding troughs are more sanitary
and economical then just throwing feed on the ground. Once a week you should
clean out the feed troughs and dispose of any residue to help keep the feed
fresh.
WATER
Fresh water must be available to the chickens at all times. This cannot be
overemphasized. They must have clean water with their feed to be able to digest
it properly. A chicken is more than 50% water. A large chicken will drink from
one to two cups of water a day, depending on the weather. Chickens cannot drink
much at one time, so they must drink often. Puddles of stagnant water from rain
or leaky waters are a breeding ground for harmful bacteria and other disease-
causing organisms, and also tend to become fouled by the chickens’ excrement.
Even if fresh water is available, puddles should be eliminated so the chickens
do not have access to them for this reason.
NOISE
If you are going to be keeping any roosters, you should know that it is a myth
that they only crow at sunup. The truth is they crow anytime they feel like it,
sometimes even at night. If complaints are received, your permit could be
revoked.
PREDATOR PROTECTION
You must provide protection from predators; raccoons, fox, mink and skunks all
like chickens. Raccoons can open latches and reach through screens.
RESOURCES
Gail Damerow, Your Chickens: A Kid’s Guide to Raising and Showing.
Barbara Kilarski, Keeping Chickens! Tending Small Flocks in Cities, Suburbs and
Other Small Spaces.
Andy Lee, Chicken Tractor, the Gardener’s Guide to Happy Hens and Healthy Soil.
Leonard S. Mercia, Raising Poultry the Modern Way.
Jay Rossier, Living with Chickens.
Sue Weaver, Chickens, Tending a Small Scale Flock for Pleasure and Profit,
Hobby Farms Book Series.
Raising Poultry Magazine Backyardpoultrymag.com
INTERNET SOURCES
www.albc-usa.org The American Livestock Breeds conservancy provides information
on heritage breeds of poultry.
www.featherside.com A great place to research all breeds of poultry.
MPR's All Things Considered on urban chickens in the Twin Cities (with audio
recording of the original broadcast) http://minnesota.publicaradio.org/display/
web/2007/06/l_8chikencoops/?rssource=l
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-16-11)
 
 
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Assessable current services
   
93.02   Tree diseases
   
93.03   Repeat nuisance call service fee
Nuisances
   
93.15   Public nuisance
   
93.16   Public nuisances affecting health
   
93.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
93.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
93.19   Duties of city officers
   
93.20   Abatement
   
93.21   Recovery of cost
Weeds
   
93.35   Short title
   
93.36   Jurisdiction
   
93.37   Definitions; exclusions
   
93.38   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like
   
93.39   Filing complaint
   
93.40   Notice of violations
   
93.41   Appeals
   
93.42   Abatement by city
   
93.43   Liability
Open Burning
   
93.60   Definitions
   
93.61   Prohibited materials
   
93.62   Permit required for open burning
   
93.63   Purposes allowed for open burning
   
93.64   Permit application for open burning; permit fees
   
93.65   Permit process for open burning
   
93.66   Permit holder responsibility
   
93.67   Revocation of open burning permit
   
93.68   Denial of open burning permit
   
93.69   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
93.70   Rules and laws adopted by reference
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CURRENT SERVICE. Shall mean one or more of the following: snow, ice or
rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous
building, included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they may amended from
time to time; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling,
street flushing, light street oiling or other dust treatment of streets; repair
of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and
insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the
operation of a street lighting system.
   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.
      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk
safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt or
rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.
      (2)   Removal by city. The City Administrator or other person designated
by the City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all snow, ice,
dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after any matter has
been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The City
Administrator or other designated person shall keep a record showing the cost
of removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.
   (C)   Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates
public health or safety hazards from private property under the following
provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing
the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against
each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the
City Administrator.
   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city
installs or repairs water service lines serving private property, the City
Administrator shall keep a record of the total cost of the installation or
repair against the property.
   (E)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
      (1)   Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a
public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe
for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard
specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the Office of the
City Administrator.
      (2)   Inspections; notice. The City Council or its designee shall make
inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys
within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If it
is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and
in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a notice to be served, by
registered or certified mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of
the property, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and
made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the city
will do so and that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and if
unpaid it will be made a special assessment against the property concerned.
      (3)   Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30
days after receipt of the notice, the City Administrator shall report the facts
to the City Council and the City Council shall by resolution order the work
done by contract in accordance with law. The City Administrator shall keep a
record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of
property.
   (F)   Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent to
which a current service has been performed shall be personally liable for the
cost of the service. As soon as the service has been completed and the cost
determined, the City Administrator or other designated official shall prepare a
bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due
and payable at the Office of the City Administrator.
   (G)   Damage to public property.
      (1)   Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance
upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be liable for all damages
which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal
operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment or object or
contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any vehicle,
equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight
permitted by statute or this code. When the driver is not the owner of the
vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but is operating, driving or moving
it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the
driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any damage.
      (2)   Any person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by
that act damages any public property shall be liable for the amount thereof,
which amount shall be collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the City
Administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current
service and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to
which they are attributable under this section. The City Council may then
spread the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under
the authority of M.S. § 429.101 as it may be amended from time to time and
other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection
along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.02 TREE DISEASES.
   (A)   Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public
nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:
      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps,
firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and
burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;
      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the
designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not been
stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;
      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
   (B)   Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any
public nuisance as defined in division (A) of this section to remain on any
premises the person owns or controls within the city. The City Council may by
resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on that
resolution, the City Council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to
consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to
the affected property owner and published once no less than one week prior to
the meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the
street affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the
proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs. At such hearing or adjournment
thereof, the City Council shall hear any property owner with reference to the
scope and desirability of the proposed project. The City Council shall
thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with
modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work
by day labor or by contract.
   (C)   Record of costs. The City Administrator shall keep a record of the
costs of abatement done under this section for all work done for which
assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land,
lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.
   (D)   Unpaid charges. On or before September 1 of each year, the City
Administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against
each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section.
The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the
property involved as a special assessment as authorized by M.S. § 429.101 as it
may be amended from time to time and other pertinent statutes for certification
to the County Auditor and collection the following year along with the current
taxes.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.03 REPEAT NUISANCE CALL SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public safety,
health and welfare and to prevent and abate repeat service response calls by
the city to the same property or location for nuisance service calls, as
defined herein, which prevalent police or public safety services to other
residents of the city. It is the intent of the city by the adoption of this
section to impose and collect service call fees from the owner or occupant, or
both, of property to which city officials must repeatedly respond for any
repeat nuisance event or activity that generates extraordinary costs to the
city. The repeat nuisance service call fee is intended to cover that cost over
and above the cost of providing normal law or code enforcement services and
police protection city wide.
   (B)   Scope and application. This section shall apply to all owners and
occupants of private property which is the subject or location of the repeat
nuisance service call by the city. This section shall apply to any repeat
nuisance service calls as set forth herein made by a peace officer, part time
peace officer, community service officer, animal control officers and code
enforcement officers/technicians.
   (C)   Definition of nuisance call or similar conduct. The term NUISANCE
SERVICE CALL shall mean any activity, conduct, or condition occurring upon
private property within the city which: (i) unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any member of the
public; (ii) or will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or
provoke breach of the peace, to which the city is required to respond,
including, but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Any activity, conduct, or condition deemed as a public nuisance
under any provision of the city code;
      (2)   Any activity, conduct, or condition in violation of any provision
of
Chapter 154;
      (3)   Any conduct, activity or condition constituting a violation of
Minnesota State laws prohibiting or regulating prostitution, gambling,
controlled substances, use of firearms; and
      (4)   Any conduct, activity, or condition constituting disorderly conduct
under M.S. Chapter 609 as it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Repeat nuisance service call fee. The city may impose a repeat
nuisance service call fee upon the owner or occupant of private property if the
city has rendered services or responded to the property on three or more
occasions within a period of 365 days in response to or for the abatement of
nuisance conduct, activity, or condition of the same or similar kind. The
repeat nuisance service call fee under this section shall be an amount as set
forth and duly adopted by City Council resolution. All repeat nuisance service
call fees imposed and charged against the owner or occupant under this section
shall be deemed delinquent 30 days after the city’s mailing a billing statement
therefore. Delinquent payments are subject to a 10% late penalty of the amount
due.
   (E)   Notice. No repeat nuisance service call fee may be imposed against an
owner or occupant of property without first providing the owner or occupant
with written notice of the prior nuisance service calls prior to the latest
nuisance service call rendered by the city upon which the fee is imposed. The
written notice shall:
      (1)   State the nuisance conduct, activity or condition that is or has
occurred or is maintained or permitted on the property, the dates of the
nuisance conduct, activity or condition;
      (2)   State that the owner or occupant may be subject to a repeat
nuisance call service fee if a third nuisance service call is rendered to the
property for the same nuisance, in addition to the city’s right to seek other
legal remedies or actions for abatement of the nuisance or compliance with the
law; and
      (3)   Be served personally or by U.S. Mail upon the owner or occupant at
the last known address.
   (F)   Right to appeal nuisance service call fee.
      (1)   Upon the imposition of a repeat nuisance service call fee, the city
shall inform the owner or occupant of his or her right to a hearing on the
alleged repeat nuisance service calls. The owner or occupant upon whom the fee
is imposed may request a hearing by serving upon the City Administrator within
five business days of the mailing of the fee invoice, inclusive of the day the
invoice is mailed, a written request for hearing. The hearing shall be heard by
the hearing office within 14 days of the date of the owner’s or occupant’s
request for hearing.
      (2)   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the
Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of Evidence shall not be strictly
applied. The hearing need not be transcribed, but may be transcribed at the
sole expense of the party who requests the transcription. After considering all
evidence submitted, the Hearing Officer shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions on the issue of whether the city responded to or rendered services
for repeat nuisance service calls of the same or similar kind on three or more
occasions within a 365-day period. The findings and conclusions shall be served
upon the owner or occupant by U.S. Mail within five days of the notice of
hearing.
      (3)   An owner’s or occupant’s right to a hearing shall be deemed waived
if the owner or occupant fails to serve a written request for hearing as
required herein or fails to appear at the scheduled hearing date. Upon waiver
of the right to hearing, or upon the hearing officer’s written findings of fact
and conclusions that the repeat nuisance call service fee is warranted
hereunder, the owner or occupant shall immediately pay the fee imposed.
   (G)   Legal remedies nonexclusive. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to limit the city’s other available legal remedies for any violation
of the law which may constitute a nuisance service call hereunder, including
criminal, civil, injunctive or others.
(Ord. 02-08, passed 5-16-02; Am. Ord. passed 1-20-11)
NUISANCES
§ 93.15 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is
a misdemeanor:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law, §§
93.16,
93.17 or
93.18 or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no
sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease;
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license; and
   (L)   The discharge from a private sump pump within 15 feet of public
property or a publicly held right-of-way.
(Am. Ord. 20161117-01, passed 11-17-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor
is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and
other property used for maintaining that place;
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal
purpose.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Chapter 7030, as
amended from time to time, which are hereby incorporated by reference into this
code;
   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any recreational device
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
   (F)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly
audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person
nearby; (Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line
of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of 50
feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this section.)
   (G)   The participation in a party or gathering of people giving rise to
noise which disturbs the peace, quiet or repose of the occupants of adjoining
or other property;
   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, including scavenging or treasure
hunting with the aid of electronic or motorized devices, except under
conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties;
   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation;
   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;
   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance;
   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone.
(Am. Ord. 04-03, passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.19 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   The Police Department or Sheriff, if the city has at the time no Police
Department, shall enforce the provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace
officer shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all
reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public
nuisances.
§ 93.20 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
a peace officer on the owner of record or occupant of the premises either in
person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the
owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to
accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be served by posting it
on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record
and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council
hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard
Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17
(Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Procedure. Whenever a peace officer determines that a public nuisance
is being maintained or exists on the premises in the city, the officer shall
notify in writing the owner of record or occupant of the premises of such fact
and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice of violation
shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within
which the nuisance is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not complied
with within the time specified, the officer shall report that fact forthwith to
the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner
or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the
city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where
delay in abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements
set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section will permit a continuing
nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with
summary enforcement, the officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists
or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of
the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare. The
officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the
nature of the nuisance and of the city’s intention to seek summary enforcement
and the time and place of the City Council meeting to consider the question of
summary enforcement. The City Council shall determine whether or not the
condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance,
whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by
delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A)
of this section, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or
abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.21 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator or other official
shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the
amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City
Administrator.
   (B)   Assessment. If the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on
private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the
growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled portion of streets,
or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Administrator shall, on or before
September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid
charges along with all other the charges as well as other charges for current
services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are
attributable. The City Council may then spread the charges against the property
under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County
Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.
Penalty, see § 10.99
WEEDS
§ 93.35 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be cited as the “Weed Subchapter.”
§ 93.36 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county
ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.
§ 93.37 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice served by the City Administrator or
designated city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the
ordinance violation.
      PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal
title or a person having control over the property of another, such as a right-
of-way, easement, license or lease.
      WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION. Includes but is not limited to the
following:
         (1)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be
limited to: alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle,
Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed, French Weed, Hairy
Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle, Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge,
Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle, Poison
Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle,
Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild
Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;
         (2)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned,
sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive years;
         (3)   Bushes of the species of tall, common or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
         (4)   Any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers or
other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding eight inches;
         (5)   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth
of annuals and perennial plants; and
         (6)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants
or crops.
   (B)   In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have
been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being noxious or
detrimental plants.
(Am. Ord. 08-06-02, passed 6-19-08)
§ 93.38 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.
   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or
disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other
uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice, is in
excess of eight inches in height.
(Am. Ord. 08-06-02, passed 6-19-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.39 FILING COMPLAINT.
   (A)   Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located
within the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant matter in
violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint signed, dated and
filed with the City Administrator.
   (B)   If the city makes the complaint, an employee, officer or Council
Member of the city shall file the complaint in all respects as set out above.
§ 93.40 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds in violation
of this subchapter, a person designated by the City Administrator shall make an
inspection and prepare a written report regarding the condition. The City
Administrator, upon concluding that there is a probable belief that this
subchapter has been violated, shall forward written notification in the form of
a destruction order to the property owner or the person occupying the property
as that information is contained within the records of the City Administrator
or any other city agency. The notice shall be served in writing by certified
mail. The notice shall provide that within seven days after the receipt of the
notice that the designated violation shall be removed by the property owner or
person occupying the property.
   (B)   (1)   All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with
the City Administrator.
      (2)   Certified mailing to the City Administrator or others is deemed
filed on the date of posting to the U.S. Postal Service.
(Am. Ord. 08-06-02, passed 6-19-08)
§ 93.41 APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of
objections with the City Administrator within 48 hours of the notice, excluding
weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the finding of the City
Administrator.
      (2)   It is the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that the
matter in question is shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops or is not
otherwise in violation of this subchapter, and should not be subject to
destruction under the subchapter.
   (B)   An appeal by the property owner shall be initially heard by the City
Administrator and if the property owner so requests, the matter shall be
brought before the City Council and shall be decided by a majority vote of the
Council members in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special
meeting of the City Council.
(Am. Ord. 08-06-02, passed 6-19-08)
§ 93.42 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the
destruction order within seven days and has not filed a notice within 48 hours
to the City Administrator of an intent to appeal, the City Administrator may
employ the services of city employees or outside contractors and remove the
weeds to conform to this subchapter by all lawful means.
(Am. Ord. 08-06-02, passed 6-19-08)
§ 93.43 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting or
destruction of weeds as defined by this subchapter.
   (B)   The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated
with weed destruction, including but not limited to court costs, attorney’s
fees and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the city. If the city uses
municipal employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate per hour rate for
employees, equipment, supplies and chemicals which may be used.
   (C)   All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the City
Administrator and to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for
expenses and costs incurred by the city.
   (D)   All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special
assessment as provided by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time.
OPEN BURNING
§ 93.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices
such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers and propane or
natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three
feet in height, contained within the border of a “recreational fire site” using
dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished
completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions,
neighbors, burning bans and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety
hazards will not be created. No more than one RECREATIONAL FIRE is allowed on
any property at one time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a three foot diameter circle
(measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by
non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural
rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which area is
depressed below ground, on the ground or on a raised bed. Included are
permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a RECREATION
FIRE SITE, as defined herein. RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be located
closer than 25 feet to any structure.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter
fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs,”
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked or treated
with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreational
fires when cut into three foot lengths.
§ 93.61 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheetrock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.62 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city
without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not
required for any fire which is a recreational fire, as defined in §
93.60.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.63 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means;
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are
not practical;
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives; and
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical.
   (B)   Fire training permits can only issued by the State Department of
Natural Resources.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.64 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire
Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing those
applications.
   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees
shall be in the amount established in Council ordinance and may be amended from
time to time.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.65 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit
fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a
preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special
conditions and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety
considerations.
§ 93.66 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   (1)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be
responsible for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in
effect. Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder
or his or her competent representative.
      (2)   The open burning site shall have available, appropriate
communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire safety
plan.
   (B)   (1)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the
permit holder or his or her representative leaves the site.
      (2)   No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person present. It is the
responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this
subchapter, available for inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire
Department, MPCA representative or DNR forest officer.
   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of
all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.67 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR
forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals.
Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard existing or
developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit
being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions
developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame
present.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.68 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not
met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
§ 93.69 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has
officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or
when the MPCA has declared an air quality alert.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.70 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22 and Minn. Rules Chapter 1510, as
these statutes and rules may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of this subchapter as if fully set forth at this
point.
CHAPTER 94: USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Hours of use and activity restrictions
   
94.03   Watercraft prohibited
   
94.04   Alcoholic beverages
   
94.05   Sidewalk and trail obstructions
   
94.06   Sales from public property
Cross-reference:
   For provisions regarding streets, sidewalks and other public property, see
Chapter 90
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC BATHING BEACH. Any public land, road or highway adjoining public
waters, specifically set aside and designated as public beaches by the
placement of signs indicating the boundaries thereof within the city.
   PUBLIC PARK. Any public land set aside and designated for public park
purposes.
   PUBLIC PARKING LOT. Any public land set aside and designated for public
vehicle parking purposes, whether continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 06-03-01, passed 3-16-06)
§ 94.02 HOURS AND ACTIVITY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Hours restriction. No person shall be present in or located upon
public parks, including parking areas appurtenant thereto, between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without the express approval of the City Administrator
or Police Chief.
   (B)   Activity restrictions.
      (1)   No person or persons shall use a public bathing beach, public
parking lot or public park, except during the hours such activities are
permitted.
      (2)   A list of permitted or prohibited activities, and the hours of such
activities, shall be posted at the entrance to, or at conspicuous places on,
each public bathing beach, parking lot or park.
      (3)   No person shall use tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, or an electronic delivery device, as defined in §
114.01, in any public park.
(Ord. 06-03-01, passed 3-16-06; Am. Ord. 06-07-02, passed 7-20-06; Am. Ord.
20180621-04, passed 6-21-18)
§ 94.03 WATERCRAFT PROHIBITED.
   Except for purposes of rendering emergency assistance, no person shall
launch or operate a watercraft within water areas that have been marked off or
set aside as a swimming or bathing area, without first obtaining the written
permission of the City Administrator.
(Ord. 06-03-01, passed 3-16-06)
§ 94.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   No person shall possess, consume or provide to others any alcoholic
beverages in or upon the Newell Avenue Beach Park or other public parks, or
upon any public street, sidewalk, trail or parking area, without first
obtaining a written permit therefor from the City Administrator.
   (B)   Delivery of alcoholic beverages in connection with lawful sale at the
City Liquor Store is not a violation of this section.
(Ord. 06-03-01, passed 3-16-06)
§ 94.05 SIDEWALK AND TRAIL OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with the use of city sidewalks
or trails, except as allowed by this section or other section of this code.
   (B)   Courtesy benches and plant pots or planters, not less than 26 inches
in height, may be placed in such locations upon such conditions as may be
authorized by written council permit.
   (C)   In addition, the Council may designate certain days for public sales
or promotions, and on those designated days merchants may utilize portions of
the public sidewalk for display and sale of goods consistent with any terms or
conditions specified by the Council.
(Ord. 06-03-01, passed 3-16-06)
§ 94.06 SALES FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   License requirements.
      (1)   No owner or operator of any vehicle used for dispensing or vending
confections or other goods directly from such vehicle shall carry on such
dispensing or vending, unless as exempted by state law or licensed as provided
in this chapter.
      (2)   This chapter shall not apply to persons using vehicles for the
delivery of goods or services directly to homes or establishments, where the
goods are taken by the operator of the vehicle onto private property for
delivery; nor shall it apply to the operations of any political subdivision or
unit of government.
      (3)   For purposes of this chapter, a VEHICLE shall mean any mobile unit
being used on the public streets for the purpose of vending or dispensing as
aforesaid.
   (B)   Application for license. 
      (1)   Application for license shall be made to the City Clerk.
         (a)   It shall describe the vehicle or vehicles from which vending
operations will be carried on, and shall give the names of the persons
interested in the business.
         (b)   It shall also describe the types of confections or other goods
that will be sold from the vehicle or vehicles.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by the annual fee, which shall
be $25 per vehicle.
      (3)   Licenses shall run from January 1 to December 31.
      (4)   If an application for a license is denied, the fee shall be
refunded to the applicant.
   (C)   Hours. No person licensed hereunder shall carry on vending operations,
except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.; nor on any public street
between the one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour before sunrise.
   (D)   Area restriction. The Council may restrict the area of vending
operations, which area will be specified on the license.
   (E)   Safety requirements.
      (1)   Every licensee shall maintain liability insurance in the amount of
at least $500,000 for any and all claims arising out of the activity licensed,
together with at least $200,000 property insurance, and shall name the city as
an additional insured. A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the City
Administrator.
      (2)   Vehicles must be parked at the curb while engaging in vending
operations, and vending shall be done only at the curb side of the vehicle.
         (a)   Each vehicle must be equipped with flashing lights, on both the
front and rear of vehicle, clearly visible to oncoming cars in full daylight.
         (b)   While carrying on vending operations, every vehicle shall
activate its flashing lights for the full period in which it is stopped for
vending, or which is stopped in such manner or at such place as to reasonably
cause others to believe that it is proposing to engage in vending operations.
   (F)   Noise. No vehicle licensed hereunder shall use any sound or attractive
light other than of a type and magnitude specifically approved by the Council.
(Ord. 06-03-01, passed 3-16-06)
CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Adoption of Minnesota State Fire Code
   
95.03   Establishment and duties of Fire Prevention Bureau
   
95.04   Permits required
   
95.05   Fire prevention inspections
   
95.06   Explosives and blasting agents
   
95.07   Storage of flammable and combustible liquids
   
95.08   Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas
   
95.09   New bulk plants
   
95.10   Adoption of Minnesota Fire Code Appendix H: Fires or Barbecues on
Balconies or Porches
   
95.11   Open burning
   
95.12   New materials, process or occupancies
   
95.13   Evidence of compliance with code
   
95.14   Revocation of permits
   
95.15   Day cares and DHS licensed facilities fire code inspections
   
95.16   Appeals
§ 95.01 PURPOSE.
   The city is dedicated to the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents. This chapter sets regulations and restrictions to protect life and
property by enforcing the Minnesota State Fire Code.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
§ 95.02 ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE.
   The most recent edition of the Minnesota State Fire Code, as published by
the International Fire Code Institute and adopted by the State Fire Marshal,
along with all amendments to that edition adopted by the State Fire Marshal are
adopted by reference and made a part of the City Code.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
§ 95.03 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU.
   (A)   The City of Lindstrom hereby establishes a Fire Prevention Bureau.
   (B)   The Fire Prevention Bureau shall consist of the Fire Chief being the
Fire Marshal, Fire Code Official designated by the Fire Chief and the City
Council, and Fire Department members designated by the Fire Chief.
   (C)   The Minnesota State Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention
Bureau of the city.
   (D)   Whenever the term State Fire Marshal or Fire Chief appear in the
Minnesota State Fire Code, it shall include the Fire Chief and his or her
designated bureau members.
   (E)   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail members of the Fire
Department as Assistant Fire Marshals.
   (F)   A report of the Office of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be made
annually and shall be transmitted to the City Administrator. It shall contain
all proceedings under this code with such statistics as the City Administrator
may require.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
§ 95.04 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit from the Fire Prevention Bureau is required to conduct the
following:
      (1)   Install any automatic fire sprinkler system;
      (2)   Install any automatic fire suppression or extinguishing system;
      (3)   Modify an automatic sprinkler, fire suppression system or fire
extinguishing system;
      (4)   Install any aboveground or underground liquid fuel storage tank;
      (5)   Install any aboveground or underground liquefied gas storage tank;
      (6)   Install or modify any fire alarm detection or signaling system when
the value of the installation or modification exceeds $1,000;
      (7)   Remove an underground liquid fuel storage tank;
      (8)   Clean and degrease commercial hoods and ducts; and
      (9)   Temporary tent / canopy.
   (B)   A fee, as established in § 35.01 of this code shall be paid for each
permit required by this section. A plan check fee as authorized in § 35.01 of
this code is required.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.05 FIRE PREVENTION INSPECTIONS.
   The Fire Prevention Bureau of the city are authorized to conduct fire
prevention inspections of any and all Group A, B, E, H, I, F, M, S, and R
occupancies as defined in the Minnesota State Building Code, located within the
city.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
§ 95.06 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.
   Storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited in all areas other
than those zoned I-1 only when stored in accordance with NFPA No. 495 and with
notification to the Fire Prevention Bureau.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.07 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS.
   The storage of class IA and IB flammable liquids in above-ground tanks
outside of buildings is prohibited in all parts of the city except those areas
zoned I-1 industrial district pursuant to this chapter. This section shall not
apply to commercial installations not intended for public use and installed as
provided in the Fire Code Chapter 22.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.08 BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   The storage of liquefied petroleum gases is prohibited in all parts of the
city except those areas zoned I-1 industrial district pursuant to this chapter.
Except for commercial sales at gas stations when in compliance of Minnesota
State Fire Code provisions.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11) penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.09 NEW BULK PLANTS.
   New bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited in all
parts of the city except those areas zoned 1-1 industrial district pursuant to
the provisions set forth in the Minnesota State Fire Code.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.10 ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA FIRE CODE APPENDIX H: FIRES OR BARBECUES ON
BALCONIES OR PATIOS.
   (A)   In any structure containing three or more dwelling units, no person
shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above
ground level, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of the structure.
   (B)   No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch or other
similar heating or lighting chemical or device in the locations designated in
division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Exception: listed electric or gas-fired barbecue grills that are
permanently mounted and wired or plumbed to the building’s gas supply or
electric system and that maintain a minimum clearance of 18 inches on all
sides, unless listed for lesser clearances, may be installed on balconies when
approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
   (D)   In any structure containing one or two dwelling units, no person shall
kindle, maintain or cause any fire or open flame including barbecues on any
covered deck or porches. Open flames must maintain a minimum of five feet from
structure on open decks. Listed gas or electric fired barbecues must maintain a
minimum clearance of 18 inches on all sides.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.11 OPEN BURNING.
   Open burning in the city limits is prohibited without a burning permit from
the Fire Prevention Bureau. Recreation fires or campfires are allowed in the
city with restrictions.
   (A)   OPEN BURNING is the burning of any matter if the resulting combustion
products are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney, except a recreational or campfire as defined herein.
Mobile cooking devices such as charcoal grills, wood smokers, manufactured
hibachis, and propane or natural gas devices are not considered open burning
devices.
   (B)   RECREATIONAL FIRE OR CAMPFIRE SITE is an area of no more than a three-
foot diameter circle (as measured from the inside of the fire ring or border);
completely surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing
material, either natural rock, cement, brick, tile, blocks or ferrous metal.
Burning barrels are not a recreational fire site as defined herein.
RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any
structure or combustible materials.
   (C)   RECREATIONAL FIRE or CAMPFIRE is a fire for recreational, ceremonial,
or social food preparation conducted under the following restrictions:
      (1)   The fire is set only with an approved starter fuel;
      (2)   The fire is no more than three feet in height and contained within
a recreational fire site;
      (3)   The fire burns using only dry, clean wood, producing little
detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property line, tree brush and grass
clippings are prohibited;
      (4)   The fire is conducted by a person at least 18 years of age tending
the fire at all times;
      (5)   Fire extinguishing equipment such as an operable fire extinguisher,
buckets, shovels or garden hoses must be readily available and located within
ten feet of the recreational fire site;
      (6)   No more than one recreational fire is allowed on a property at one
time;
      (7)   No recreational fire or campfire is allowed when wind speeds exceed
15 miles per hour based on weather channel reports for sustained winds at the
time of the fire or if a burning restriction is issued by the Fire Prevention
Bureau or The Minnesota DNR;
      (8)   A recreational fire may only be conducted between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight with a maximum duration of six hours per recreational
fire;
      (9)   A recreational fire or campfire must burn cleanly in a manner that
does not cause objectionable smoke beyond the property line, as determined by a
Fire Prevention Bureau Official or a police officer; and
      (10)   The fire must be extinguished completely and not allowed to
smolder before quitting the occasion.
   (D)   Any person burning in violation of this section will be instructed by
a Fire Prevention Official or Law Enforcement Officer to immediately extinguish
fire and may be issued an administrative fine established in the City Fee
Schedule in § 35.01.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.12 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESS OR OCCUPANCIES.
   The Fire Prevention Bureau shall act as a committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new
materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits in addition to
those now enumerated in this code. The Fire Marshal shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in the Fire Marshal’s office and distribute copies to
interested persons.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
§ 95.13 EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE WITH CODE.
   The Fire Prevention Bureau may accept written reports from qualified persons
that any particular establishment is complying with all the regulations of the
Minnesota State Fire Code. The Fire Prevention Bureau in determining who is
qualified to make such reports may consider licenses held by such individuals
in other municipalities.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
§ 95.14 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   The Office of the Fire Prevention Bureau may revoke a permit or approval
issued if any violation of the Minnesota State Fire Code is found upon
inspection or where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as
to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval
was based.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
§ 95.15 DAY CARE AND DHS LICENSED FACILITIES FIRE CODE INSPECTION.
   All day care and DHS licensed facility fire/life safety inspection fees
shall be as established in the City Fee Schedule in § 35.01.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
§ 95.16 APPEALS.
   An appeal of the following actions can be made to the City Council by the
affected party within 30 days of the affected party being notified of the
actions:
   (A)   Issuance of fire prevention orders;
   (B)   Extension of time limits for compliance with a fire prevention order
issued by the Fire Prevention Bureau;
   (C)   Refusal of the Fire Prevention Bureau to issue permits authorized in
this code;
   (D)   Revocation of a permit pursuant to this code;
   (E)   Affected party claims that the code does not apply or that the intent
of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted.
(Ord. 11-05-01, passed 5-19-11)
CHAPTER 96: SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
Section
   
96.01   Findings and intent
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibition; penalties;
exceptions
   
96.04   Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual
offenders and sexual predators; penalties
§ 96.01 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence,
and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an
extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to
use physical violence and to repeat their offenses. Most sexual offenders
commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual
offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly
exorbitant.
   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to serve the city's compelling
interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of its
citizens by creating a civil, non-punitive regulatory scheme, establishing
areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated
numbers, wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited
from establishing temporary or permanent residence.
(Ord. 11-11-01, passed 11-17-11)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHILDREN. Persons age 16 and younger.
   DAY CARE CENTER. A facility licensed by the State of Minnesota in which
care, supervision and training for children is provided for part of a 24-hour
period.
   DESIGNATED OFFENDER. Any person who has been convicted of a designated
sexual offense, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which
the victim of the offense was less than
16 years of age, or has been categorized as a Level III sex offender under M.S.
§ 244.052 or successor statute.
   DESIGNATED SEXUAL OFFENSE. A conviction, adjudication of delinquency,
commitment under M.S. Chapter 253B, or admission of guilt under oath without
adjudication involving any of the following offenses: M.S. §§ 609.342; 609.343;
609.344; 609.345; 609.352; 609.365; 617.23; 617.246; 617.247; 617.293;
successor statutes; or a similar offense from another state.
   PARK or PLAYGROUND. Any land, including improvements, operated by the city
for the use by the general public as a recreational area.
   PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for
14 or more consecutive days.
   SCHOOL. Any public, private or parochial educational institution that offers
educational instruction to individuals under the age of 18.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for
a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and
which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person
routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or
on consecutive days in any month, and which is not the person's permanent
residence.
(Ord. 11-11-01, passed 11-17-11)
§ 96.03 SEXUAL OFFENDER AND SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCE PROHIBITION; PENALTIES;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any designated
offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,000
feet of any school, licensed day care center, place of worship that provides
regular educational programs, park or playground.
   (B)   Prohibited activity. It is unlawful for any designated offender to
participate in a holiday event involving children under 16 years of age, such
as distributing candy or other items to children on Halloween, wearing a Santa
Claus costume on or preceding Christmas, or wearing an Easter Bunny costume on
or preceding Easter. Holiday events in which the offender is the parent or
guardian of the children involved, and no non-familial children are present,
are exempt from this division.
   (C)   Measurement of distance.  For purposes of determining the minimum
distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight
line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary
residence to nearest outer property line of a school, day care center, park,
playground, place of worship, or other place where children regularly
congregate. The City Clerk shall maintain an official map showing prohibited
locations as defined by this chapter. The Clerk shall update the map at least
annually to reflect any changes in the location of prohibited zones.
   (D)   Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $1,000, or by confinement for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or by both such fine and confinement. Each day a person maintains a residence
in violation of this chapter constitutes a separate violation.
   (E)   Exceptions. A designated offender residing within a prohibited area as
described in §
96.03(A) does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following
apply:
      (1)   The person established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. § 243.166,
§ 243.167, or successor statute, prior to November 17, 2011.
      (2)   The person was a minor when he or she committed the offense and was
not convicted as an adult.
      (3)   The person is a minor.
      (4)   The school, place of worship, park or day care center within 2,000
feet of the person’s permanent residence was designated or opened after the
person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported
and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. § 243.166 or § 243.167.
      (5)   The residence is also the primary residence of the person's
parents, grandparents, siblings, spouse or children.
      (6)   The residence is a property owned by the Minnesota Department of
Corrections.
      (7)   The person's conviction for the designated offense was reversed on
appeal.
      (8)   Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or
otherwise dispose of any real property acquired or owned prior to the
conviction restricting residency under this chapter.
(Ord. 11-11-01, passed 11-17-11)
§ 96.04 PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY TO CERTAIN SEXUAL
OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof,
trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a
permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this
chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other
conveyance, is located within a prohibited location zone described in §
96.03(A).
   (B)   A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section
shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall subject the property
owner to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in §
93.20 of this code.
   (C)   If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a
designated offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to let the
offender reside on the property, the owner or property manager may evict the
offender.
(Ord. 11-11-01, passed 11-17-11)
CHAPTER 97: FAIRVIEW CEMETERY
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Establishment
   
97.03   Lot dimensions
   
97.04   Conditions of license agreement
   
97.05   Handling of funds
   
97.06   Burial permits
   
97.07   Internments
   
97.08   Burial vaults
   
97.09   Funeral supervision
   
97.10   Disinternment and removal
   
97.11   Transfer of lots
   
97.12   City repurchase of unused cemetery lot
   
97.13   Conduct of persons in the cemetery
   
97.14   Monuments and markers
   
97.15   Foundations
   
97.16   Installation of monuments and markers
   
97.17   Decoration of lots
   
97.18   Permanent care
   
97.19   Hours
   
97.20   Exceptions
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURIAL PERMIT. Legal written permission for burial to occur.
   BURIAL VAULT. A container that houses a casket for final interment in the
cemetery.
   CEMETERY. A tract of land used for burials or above-ground interment.
   CITY. The City of Lindstrom, Minnesota.
   INTERMENT. Disposition of human remains or cremains by burial or entombment.
   MARKER. A memorial of granite or other approved material that does not
extend above the surface of the lawn.
   MEMORIAL. A monument, marker bench, or large urn (marked or unmarked).
   MONUMENT.  A memorial of granite or other approved material that extends
above the surface of the lawn.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)
§ 97.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   A cemetery has been established and is continued upon land owned by
the city, and described as Fairview Cemetery. The plat of the cemetery filed
with the County Recorder is adopted as the official plat of the cemetery. No
person shall lay out or establish any cemetery, or use any lot of land within
this city for the burial of dead, except in Fairview Cemetery or some other
tract of land duly designated as a cemetery.
   (B)   Fairview Cemetery is under the direct supervision of the Mayor and the
City Council. It is the aim of the city to make the Fairview Cemetery a quiet
and beautiful cemetery. To continue improvement and to preserve the appearance
of the cemetery requires the cooperation of all lot owners and/or licensees.
   (C)   For the mutual protection of every lot purchaser and/or licensee, the
city hereby adopts the following rules and regulations. All lot owners/
licensees and the use of all cemetery lots shall be subject to the rules and
regulations, amendments or alterations as shall be adopted by the city from
time to time; and the reference to these rules and regulations in the cemetery
license agreement shall have the same force and effect as if set in full
therein.
   (D)   License fees shall be set at such rates as the City Council shall from
time to time designate. The City Council may review charges made for grave
openings and winter and summer interment. If it is deemed advisable, the
Council may adjust prices accordingly.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)
§ 97.03 LOT DIMENSIONS.
   Lots are available in the following dimension:
 
Traditional Lot 4.5 feet by 10 feet
Baby Lot        4.5 feet by 5 feet
Cremation Lot   4.5 feet by 5 feet
 
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14; Am. Ord. 20210715-01, passed 7-15-2021)
§ 97.04 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   It is hereby acknowledged that, prior to adoption of this chapter,
lots were conveyed through the issuance of a cemetery deed. Upon adoption of
this chapter, a license agreement will be issued.
   (B)   Any person paying for a license fee is entitled to a license
agreement. A license agreement gives the licensee only the right of burial
therein, and shall be considered as a license that restricts the use to burial
purposes.
   (C)   All license agreements are subject to reasonable rules and regulations
as the Council may adopt relative to the use of the cemetery.
   (D)   No lot shall be used for any purpose other than the burial of human
remains and the placing of memorials as permitted by this chapter or any
additional regulation that the Council may provide.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)
§ 97.05 HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   (A)   All money received from license fees and other services must be paid
to the city. No license agreement to any cemetery lot shall be issued, nor any
cemetery service performed, until a receipt showing payment to the city of the
cost thereof is exhibited to the person who issues the license agreement or
performs the services.
   (B)   All money received from license fees and performance of services shall
be placed in the cemetery funds, allocated as follows:
      (1)   Twenty percent to the Permanent Care Fund;
      (2)   Fifty percent to the Cemetery Donation & Improvement Fund; and
      (3)   Thirty percent to the General Operating Fund.
   (C)   The city shall keep an account of all receipts and disbursements of
money belonging to the cemetery funds and shall pay money out of the funds as
approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)
§ 97.06 BURIAL PERMITS.
   (A)   Before any interment, a burial permit shall be obtained from the
funeral home or the State Registrar of Vital Statistics.
   (B)   No interment shall be made unless the city is notified and a copy of
the burial permit is filed with the city.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)  Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.07 INTERMENTS.
   (A)   Permission in writing from a lot owner/licensee must accompany all
requests for permission to bury bodies of persons that are not members of the
immediate family of the lot owner/licensee.
   (B)   All excavations shall be made under the direction of the city.
   (C)   When graves are requested to be dug, at least 48 hours notice shall be
given during the months of April through October; and 72 hours notice shall be
given during the months of November through March.
   (D)   The outside dimensions of the case to be used and the location shall
be specified.
   (E)   No interment may be made in the cemetery unless all laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations regarding interments have been complied with, and until
the license fees and all burial fees are paid.
   (F)   Acceptable burials for one traditional lot are:
      (1)   Parent and child in one casket.
      (2)   Two infants in one casket.
      (3)   One casket burial and two cremains burials, if depth allows.
      (4)   Four cremains burials.
   (G)   Two cremains burials are allowed in a single cremation lot.
   (H)   One infant burial and two cremains burials are allowed in a single
baby lot, if depth allows.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14; Am. Ord. 20210715-01, passed 7-15-21; Am. Ord.
20250618-01, passed 6- 18-25) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.08 BURIAL VAULTS.
   (A)   All caskets must be encased in a permanent-type burial case or vault.
   (B)   Fiberglass vaults are prohibited.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.09 FUNERAL SUPERVISION.
   Upon reaching the cemetery, all funerals shall be under the supervision of a
licensed funeral director, or a family member.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.10 DISINTERMENT AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Disinterment and re-interment must comply with M.S. 149A.96, as may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   Before any grave may be opened, written permission and waiver of
liability from the lot owner/licensee and the next of kin shall be filed with
the city, a permit from the county health officer shall be secured and
presented, and the required fees paid. This provision does not apply when
disinterment is ordered by a duly authorized public authority.
   (C)   Removal of a body by the heirs so that the lot may be sold for profit
to themselves, or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the
original lot owner/licensee, is forbidden.
   (D)   A body may be removed from its original lot and placed in a larger or
better lot in the cemetery when there has been an exchange or purchase for that
purpose.
   (E)   The city shall assume no liability for damage to any casket or burial
case.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.11 TRANSFER OF LOTS.
   (A)   When a lot has been sold or conveyed for burial purposes, the lot is
then inalienable, except as provided herein:
      (1)   The original purchaser of the lot/licensee may sell or convey any
part of the lot to the city that is not actually occupied by interments.
      (2)   A person who has inherited the lot may sell or convey any part of
it to the city that is not actually occupied by interments.
      (3)   When, by the consent of the owner/licensee, the lot will be solely
used by some other person as a family burial place, the owner/licensee may
convey it to the person so using it.
         (a)   There must be filed with the city a copy of an agreement of
sale, signed and acknowledged by the owner/licensee (and spouse, if any) and
the proposed purchaser, transferring ownership to the city and requesting that
the city issue a new license agreement to the purchaser, in consideration of
the payment by the purchaser to the owner/licensee of a specified price, which
must not be more than the license fee that would be charged by the city for a
similar lot or space.
         (b)   Upon filing the agreement, a reasonable transfer and service
charge of not more than $15 must be paid to the city, and the city shall then
promptly issue a license agreement to the designated licensee.
   (B)   Lot owners/licensees shall not allow interments in their lots in
return for remuneration of any kind.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.12 CITY REPURCHASE OF UNUSED CEMETERY LOT.
   (A)   The city may use any of its funds to repurchase lots and may hold or
again sell and convey them.
   (B)   A lot owner/licensee may sell his or her unused lot back to the city.
The city will purchase the lot at 50% of the cost of a lot at the time of
repurchase.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)
§ 97.13 CONDUCT OF PERSONS IN THE CEMETERY.
   (A)   No person may discharge any firearm within the cemetery grounds
without written permission of the city. This prohibition shall not apply to
authorized volleys at burial services conducted by recognized military
organizations or associations of the United States of America.
   (B)   No person may remove any object from any place in the cemetery or make
any excavation without the written permission of the city.
   (C)   No person shall injure, deface or destroy any monument, stone,
structure, grave, fence, flower, tree or other thing within the cemetery.
   (D)   No person may drive any vehicle at a speed exceeding five miles per
hour.
   (E)   No ATVs, snowmobiles or go-carts are allowed within the boundaries of
the cemetery.
   (F)   No person may disturb the quiet of the cemetery by noise or improper
conduct of any kind.
   (G)   No motorized vehicles may enter or leave the cemetery except at the
entrances provided.
   (H)   No person shall be allowed in the cemetery between 10:00 p.m. and
sunrise.
   (I)   Children shall not be permitted to engage in playing within cemetery
grounds. Children under ten years of age shall not be admitted to the grounds
unless accompanied by an adult, who shall be responsible for their conduct
while therein.
   (J)    No pets are allowed on cemetery grounds.
   (K)   No tobacco use or alcohol is allowed other than in connection with a
religious service.
   (L)   No advertising or solicitation of any kind is allowed on cemetery
premises.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.14 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   (A)   All monuments and markers shall be placed in the space shown on the
cemetery plat or as directed by the city.
   (B)   No monument or marker may be placed unless the location has been
approved by the city and the full purchase price/license fee of the lot has
been paid.
   (C)   Monuments and markers must be constructed of granite, marble or bronze
material.
   (D)   (1)   In general, the base area of monuments shall not exceed four
feet, five inches in width by 20 inches in length; nor shall the base with the
marker protrude above the surface of the ground.
      (2)   The base area of monuments for cremation lots in the Second
Addition shall not exceed two feet in width by two and one-half feet in length.
   (E)   Only flat headstone and footstone markers are allowed in the First
Addition of the Fairview Cemetery.
   (F)   Only flat headstone markers are allowed in the Second Addition of the
Fairview Cemetery, except for military markers, which are typically footstone
markers.
   (G)   The city is not responsible for damage done to monuments in the
cemetery.
   (H)   Monuments are considered the private property of the relatives of the
deceased and the relatives are, therefore, responsible for their care and
maintenance.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.15 FOUNDATIONS.
   (A)   All monuments and markers shall be placed on foundations of solid
masonry, at a depth and size to be determined by the city.
   (B)   Markers of the base of a monument shall not extend over the
foundations more than one-half inch.
   (C)   The top of all foundations shall not be higher than two inches below
the established grade.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.16 INSTALLATION OF MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   (A)   Upon placement of an order for a monument, the lot owner/licensee or
monument salesperson shall furnish the dimensions of the proposed monument to
the city, which in turn will authorize the construction of the foundation. All
charges must be paid before the monument is placed thereon.
   (B)   Persons engaged in erecting monuments and other structures shall
provide adequate planking to protect turf and shall remove all materials,
equipment, and refuse immediately upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Scattering of materials on adjoining lots, or leaving materials on the
ground longer than absolutely necessary, is prohibited.
   (D)   In all cases, the work is subject to the control of the city and work
must be conducted within the regulations of the cemetery.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.17 DECORATION OF LOTS.
   (A)   All flowers and plants must be contained in plant holders, elevated at
least 18 inches from the ground.
   (B)   One plant stand is permitted per burial lot.
   (C)   In Second Addition lots only, plant holders must be integrated into
the marker.
   (D)   The city is not responsible for the maintenance and care of plants and
plant stands.
   (E)   The city will make water available to for care of flowers and plants
from May 1 to October 31, depending on weather.
   (F)   The city is not responsible for stolen plants or plant stands.
   (G)   Plant stands that are vacant for more than one year are subject to
removal.
   (H)   Wreaths are permitted from November through April and must be mounted
on plant stands.
   (I)   Artificial flowers may be placed in approved plant stands and must be
securely fastened so that they will not fall or be blown from the container.
   (J)   No artificial flowers, flags or decorations of similar nature shall be
placed upon or attached to any grassy area, any tree or shrub, or any monument
or marker.
   (K)   For Memorial Day, flowers may be placed on gravesites one week prior
to Memorial Day and must be removed by June 15.
   (L)   The placing of boxes, shells, toys, metal designs, ornaments, chairs,
settees, glass, wood or iron cases, and similar articles upon lots shall not be
permitted; if such items are placed, the city may remove them.
   (M)   No trees, shrubs or permanent plantings shall be planted on any lot by
any person or persons without the express approval of the city. Existing trees,
shrubs or permanent plantings may be removed by the city if:
      (1)   Deemed in the best interest of the city;
      (2)   Infringing on abutting lots; or
      (3)   Inconvenient to the care and maintenance of the cemetery premises.
   (N)   No person shall do any grading causing the surface of the ground to be
raised above the existing height of the surrounding area.
   (O)   No person shall discharge any chemical or organic fertilizer,
herbicide or other substance on any lot without prior authorization from the
city.
   (P)   No curbs , fences or other similar barriers shall be permitted around
any individual or group of lots without prior written authorization from the
city.
   (Q)   All objects not described above, including balloons, banners, food and
beverages, knick knacks, solar lights and lanterns, stuffed animals, wind
chimes, windmills, windsocks, and statuary not incorporated into a monument,
are prohibited and may be subject to immediate removal.
   (R)   The first five working days in May have been designated for cemetery
cleanup. During this time, any or all flowers may be removed from grave sites.
The city’s intention is to clean up the cemetery for the coming summer and
dispose of all artificial plants that may be unsightly (due to fading or wear)
or falling apart. Removal of plants is at the city’s discretion. If lot owners/
licensees have something in particular they want saved, lot owners should
remove the items prior to this time and replace them afterwards.
   (S)   All flowers and plants must be removed after the first frost.
   (T)   The city reserves the right to remove all monuments, markers, flowers,
plants, trees, decorations or other similar things without liability to the
owner/licensee, whenever any of these objects become unsafe or are deemed to be
unauthorized.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.18 PERMANENT CARE.
   (A)   The city is responsible for permanent care of the cemetery, which
includes mowing, tree trimming, grass trimming and leaf removal.
   (B)   The general preservation of the lots, grounds, walks, roadways,
boundaries and structures shall remain and be reasonably cared for as cemetery
grounds forever.
   (C)   The general care assumed by the city shall in no case mean the
maintenance, repair or replacement of any memorial placed or erected upon lots,
including but not withstanding: any special or unusual work caused by
impoverishment of the soil, the reconstruction of any marble, granite, bronze,
or concrete work on any section or plot, or any portion(s) thereof, on the
cemetery caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals,
strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents,
invasions, insurrections, riots, or by any military or authority, whether the
damage be direct or collateral.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)
§ 97.19 HOURS.
   The cemetery will be open to visitors from sunrise to 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.20 EXCEPTIONS.
   Special cases may arise in which the enforcement of a rule may impose
unnecessary hardship. The city hereby reserves the right to make exceptions,
suspensions or modifications of any rule or regulation. No temporary exception,
suspension or modification shall in any way be construed as a permanent change
to the established rules and regulations.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to fines as set by the court.
(Ord. 94, passed 11-20-14)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
   
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   
112.   AMUSEMENTS, SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
   
113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
   
114.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS
   
115.   TATTOOING
   
116.   PAWN SHOP REGULATIONS
   
117.   LOCAL LODGING TAX
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Applicability
   
110.02   Transfer prohibited
   
110.03   Revocation
   
110.04   Appeal
Business Licensing
   
110.20   Purpose
   
110.21   Applications
   
110.22   Fee and duration
   
110.23   Transfer
   
110.24   Display
   
110.25   Exemptions
   
110.26   Exemptions for previously existing businesses
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this title, all licenses and permits
granted by the city shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall conduct any activity or use any property for which a
license or permit is required by law or this title without a currently valid
license or permit for the activity or use.
   (C)   Every application for a license shall be made to the City
Administrator on a form provided by him or her. It shall be accompanied by
payment to the City Administrator of the prescribed fee. If, after
investigation, the City Administrator is satisfied that all requirements of law
and this title have been met, he or she shall present the application to the
Council for action or, if the license or permit does not require Council
approval, he or she shall issue the license or permit.
(`87 Code, § 501.01)
§ 110.02 TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   No license issued by the city may be transferred from one person to another
without permission of the Council. When the Council permits the transfer of a
license, it may waive any residency requirement, but only for the required term
of the license.
(`87 Code, § 501.02)
§ 110.03 REVOCATION.
   Any license may be revoked by the Council for a violation of the section or
chapter under which it is issued. However, the revocation must follow any
procedure provided in the section or chapter in question.
(`87 Code, § 501.03)
§ 110.04 APPEAL.
   Any person who has made application which has been denied or not acted upon
within 30 days after the application may apply directly to the Council for a
license. The application to the Council shall contain the same information
required in the original application, plus any additional information that the
Council may require or that the applicant may feel is pertinent. The Council
may grant the license, after hearing, if the requirements of this title are
substantially complied with, and, in the opinion of the Council, granting the
license would be in the best interests of the public.
(`87 Code, § 501.04)
BUSINESS LICENSING
§ 110.20 PURPOSE.
   It is deemed in the interest of the public and the residents of the city
that any person, firm, partnership or corporation who engages in any type of
business enterprise allowed within the various zoning districts of the city
shall be licensed with the city as provided herein.
(Ord. 02-06, passed 6-27-2002)
§ 110.21 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for the license shall be made to the City Administrator on a
form provided by the city. Such licensure shall be granted upon a finding that
the business is a duly authorized and specifically listed and approved allowed,
accessory or conditional use for its location pursuant to the zoning ordinances
of the city.
(Ord. 02-06, passed 6-27-2002)
§ 110.22 FEE AND DURATION.
   (A)   The licensing fee shall be $25. All businesses operating within the
city at the date this section is adopted shall be exempt from paying the
initial fee of $25. A duly issued license shall be valid until and unless one
of the following occurs:
      (1)   The ownership of the business changes;
      (2)   The business ceases to operate for a period of six months or more;
      (3)   The products and/or services provided by the business changes and/
or the licensed business relocates such that it is no longer in compliance with
the zoning ordinances.
   (B)   If a license application is rejected for any of the above reasons, the
treasurer shall refund the license fee.
(Ord. 02-06, passed 6-27-2002; Am. Ord. 02-11, passed 11-21-2002)
§ 110.23 TRANSFER.
   Each license shall be issued only to the business and only for the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to any other
person, firm, partnership, business or corporation.
(Ord. 02-06, passed 6-27-2002)
§ 110.24 DISPLAY.
   Each license certificate issued shall be conspicuously posted and displayed
in plain view of the general public on the licensed premise and shall be
exhibited to any person upon request.
(Ord. 02-06, passed 6-27-2002)
§ 110.25 EXEMPTIONS.
   Businesses who are licensed through the state where such license requires
compliance with the zoning ordinances of the city shall be exempt from this
subchapter. A copy of the license shall be provided to the city as proof of the
exemption.
(Ord. 02-06, passed 6-27-2002)
§ 110.26 EXEMPTIONS FOR PREVIOUSLY EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Business currently located in the commercially or industrially zoned
areas of the city upon the date of adoption of this subchapter which are:
      (1)   Not an allowed, accessory or conditional use within that zone; and/
or
      (2)   Do not meet the off-street parking regulations of the city zoning
ordinances may be approved.
   (B)   The business must otherwise be in compliance with the other zoning
regulations.
(Ord. 02-06, passed 6-27-2002; Am. Ord. 20210415-02, passed 4-15-2021)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this subchapter is a misdemeanor. Each day on which this
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 02-06, passed 6-27-2002)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Provisions of state law adopted
   
111.002   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
111.003   Definitions
Municipal Liquor Dispensary
   
111.010   Establishment
   
111.011   Location and operation
   
111.012   Dispensary Fund created
   
111.013    Reserved
   
111.014   Consumption restrictions
3.2% Malt Liquor Licenses
   
111.020   License required
   
111.021   License applications
   
111.022   Fees
   
111.023   Persons ineligible for license
   
111.024   Places ineligible for license
   
111.025   Conditions of license
Intoxicating Liquor Licenses
   
111.040   License required
   
111.041   On-sale liquor licenses
   
111.042   On-sale wine licenses
   
111.043   Eligibility
   
111.044   Application
   
111.045   Fees
   
111.046   Conditions of license
   
111.047   Reduction of restaurant services
   
111.048   Temporary on-sale liquor licenses
Granting of Licenses
   
111.065   Investigation
   
111.066   Wine licenses
   
111.067   License transfer
   
111.068   Alcohol serving/selling training
Revocation of Licenses
   
111.095   Violation
   
111.096   Council authority
   
111.097   Proof of financial responsibility
   
111.098   Presumptive penalties for violations
   
111.099   Multiple violations
   
111.100   Other penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sales, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of
the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Chapter 340A are hereby
adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time
this chapter is adopted.
(`87 Code, §§ 601.01, 603.01) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.002 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. These
terms are in addition to the definitions included in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   RESTAURANT.  An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises and served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum
seating capacity for at least 30 guests at one time.
(`87 Code, § 601.01) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14; Am. Ord. 20250115-01, passed 1-
15-25)
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR DISPENSARY
§ 111.010 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The municipal “on-sale” and “off-sale” dispensary is hereby authorized to be
continued within the city for the sale of intoxicating liquors. The Council
shall have the right to establish additional on-sale and off-sale dispensaries
as it may, from time to time, by motion, determine.
(`87 Code, § 602.01) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.011 LOCATION AND OPERATION.
   (A)   The municipal “on-sale” and “off-sale” dispensaries shall be at the
places as the Council shall determine by motion, and may be either leased or
owned by the city. No premises upon which taxes, assessments or other public
charges are delinquent shall be leased for municipal liquor store purposes.
   (B)    Municipal “on-sale” and “off-sale” dispensaries shall be in the
charge of the person known as the manager, who shall also be selected by the
Council and paid the compensation determined by the Council. The manager shall
have charge of the operation of the dispensary and shall have authority to
purchase supplies as are necessary. No person under age 19 shall be employed in
the municipal dispensaries.
   (C)   All employees, including the manager, shall hold their positions at
the pleasure of Council.
(`87 Code, § 602.02) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.012 DISPENSARY FUND CREATED.
   The Liquor Dispensary Fund is hereby created into which all revenues
received from the operation of the dispensary shall be deposited, and from
which all operating and purchase expenses shall be paid, provided that the
initial costs of rent, fixtures and stock may be paid out of the Dispensary
Fund of the city, but the amounts shall be reimbursed to the Dispensary Fund
out of the first monies coming into the Liquor Dispensary Fund not needed for
carrying on business.
(`87 Code, § 602.03) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.013 RESERVED.
§ 111.014 CONSUMPTION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No business other than that permitted by law shall be carried on by
the dispensary, or by any person employed by the dispensary therein during the
time so employed, or while the dispensary is open to the public.
(`87 Code, § 602.05)
   (B)   No intoxicating liquors shall be sold or furnished to any person
obviously under the influence of intoxicating liquor or to any person to who
sale is prohibited by state statute or federal law.
(`87 Code, § 602.04) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
3.2% MALT LIQUOR LICENSES
§ 111.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent
authorized by law, shall deal in or dispose of by gift, sale or otherwise, or
keep or offer for sale, any 3.2% malt liquor within the city without first
having received a license as hereinafter provided.
      (2)   Licenses shall be of three kinds:
         (a)   Regular “on-sale;”
         (b)   Temporary “on-sale;” and
         (c)   “Off-sale.”
   (B)   Regular “on-sale” licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs,
3.2% malt liquor stores, exclusive “on-sale” liquor stores, bowling centers,
golf courses, restaurants and hotels where food is prepared and served for
consumption on the premises. “On-sale” licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2%
malt liquor for consumption on the premises only.
   (C)   Temporary “on-sale” licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs
and charitable, religious and non-profit organizations predominately active in
the city, for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor for consumption on the premises
only.
   (D)   “Off-sale” licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor at
retail, in the original package, for consumption off the premises only.
(`87 Code, § 603.02) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.021 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   Every application for a license to sell 3.2% malt liquor shall be made to
the City Administrator, on a form supplied by the city and containing the
information as the City Administrator or the City Council may require. It shall
be unlawful to make any false statement in an application.
(`87 Code, § 603.03) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.022 FEES.
   (A)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from
the City Treasurer for payment in full of the required fee for the license. All
fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Upon rejection of any
application for a license, the Treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
   (B)   Every license, except a temporary license, shall expire on the last
day of June in each year. Each license, except a temporary license, shall be
issued for a period of one year, except that if a portion of the license year
has elapsed when the license is granted, the license shall be issued for the
remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing the fee, any unexpired
fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
   (C)   A temporary license shall be issued for a specific period in which a
special event to which the sale is incident is being held and such period shall
be stated on the license.
   (D)   The annual fee for a regular “on-sale” license is $100. The annual fee
for an “off-sale” license is $20. The fee for a temporary “on-sale” license is
$25 per day.
   (E)   No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this chapter
shall be refunded, except in the following instances upon application to the
Council within 60 days from the happening of the event. There shall be refunded
a pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the license, computed
on a monthly basis, when operation of the licensed business ceases not less
than one month before expiration of the license because of:
      (1)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe;
      (2)   The licensee’s illness;
      (3)   The licensee’s death; and
      (4)   A change in the legal status of the city making it unlawful for the
licensed business to continue.
(`87 Code, § 603.04) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.023 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   No license shall be granted to or held/by any person who:
   (A)   Is under 21 years of age;
   (B)   Has, within five years prior to the application for the license, been
convicted of a felony or of violating any law of the state or local ordinance
relating to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or
distribution of intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor and cannot show
competent evidence under M.S. § 364.03, as it may be amended from time to time,
of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a
3.2% malt liquor licensee.
   (C)   Is a manufacturer of 3.2% malt liquor or is interested in the control
of any place where 3.2% malt liquor is manufactured;
   (D)   Is an alien;
   (E)   Is not of good moral character and repute;
   (F)   Is or during the period of this license becomes the holder of a
federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating
liquor at any place unless there has also been issued to him or her a local
license to sell intoxicating liquor at the place; and/or
   (G)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued.
(`87 Code, § 603.06) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.024 PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   No license shall be granted for sale on any premises where a licensee
has been convicted of the violation of this subchapter, of the state liquor
law, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause until one year
has elapsed after the conviction or revocation.
   (B)   No license shall be granted for any place within 300 feet of any
public school or within 150 feet of any church. In applying this restriction,
the distance shall be measured between the main front entrances following the
route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
(`87 Code, § 603.07) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.025 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the
following divisions and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any
other applicable ordinance of the city or state law.
   (B)   No licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquor and
who does not hold a consumption or display permit shall sell or permit the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquors on the licensed premises or
serve any liquids for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor. The
presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of a licensee shall be prima
facie evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the purpose of sale
and the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating
liquors shall be prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is being
permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this subchapter.
   (C)   Any peace officer may enter, inspect and search the premises of a
licensee during business hours without a search and seizure warrant and may
seize all intoxicating liquors found on the licensed premises in violation of
division (B) above.
   (D)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or her
place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order.
(`87 Code, § 603.08) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSES
§ 111.040 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer to the extent authorized
under state license, and the municipal liquor dispensary, shall directly or
indirectly deal in, sell or keep for sale in the city any intoxicating liquor
without a license to do so as provided in this subchapter. Intoxicating liquor
licenses shall be of three kinds: “on-sale,” “temporary on-sale liquor,” and
“on-sale wine.”
(`87 Code, §601.02) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14; Am. Ord. 20180719-01, passed 7-
19-18)
§ 111.041 ON-SALE LIQUOR LICENSES.
   “On-sale” liquor licenses authorize the on-sale of intoxicating liquor and
3.2% malt liquor only for consumption on the licensed premises in conjunction
with the sale of food. One "on-sale" liquor license authorizes the sale of
liquor and 3.2% malt liquor on all days of the week, except Sunday, unless the
city expressly authorizes a licensee to sell liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on
Sunday.
(`87 Code, § 601.25) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.042 ON-SALE WINE LICENSES.
   “On-sale wine” licenses authorize the sale of wine not exceeding 14% alcohol
by volume only for consumption on the licensed premises in conjunction with the
sale of food. An on-sale wine license authorizes the sale of wine on all days
of the week, except Sunday, unless the city expressly authorizes a licensee to
sell wine on Sunday.
(`87 Code, § 601.26) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.043 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   “On-sale” liquor and “on-sale wine” licenses may be issued only to
restaurants, as defined in this chapter.
(`87 Code, § 601.27)
   (B)   No license shall be granted or held by any person made ineligible for
a license by state law.
(`87 Code, § 601.06)
   (C)   No license shall be issued for any restaurant ineligible for a license
under state law.
   (D)   No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and
unpaid.
   (E)   No license shall be granted for a building within 300 feet of any
school or within 150 feet of any church. In applying this restriction, the
distance shall be measured between the main front entrances following the route
of ordinary pedestrian travel.
(`87 Code, § 601.07) (Ord. passed - -2003; Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14; Am. Ord.
20250115-01, passed 1-15-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.044 APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Every application for an “on-sale” or “on-sale wine” license
shall state the type of license the applicant is seeking, and in the case of an
individual, the applicant’s name, place and date of birth, address of personal
residence, representations as to character, with the references as the Council
may require, citizenship status, whether the applicant is owner and operator of
the restaurant.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the
names and addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner
as is required of a single applicant, the listing of a designated managing
partner or partners, and a copy of the partnership agreement shall be provided.
If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate name, state of incorporation,
articles and bylaws, the name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in
charge of the operation and all corporate shareholders, with all information
required of a single applicant, shall be provided.
      (3)   All applicants must provide the name and location of the restaurant
in connection with which the proposed license will operate, along with a sketch
drawing showing the location where alcohol is to be served, a copy of each
summons received by the applicant, partners or shareholders, under M.S. §
340A.802, as it may be amended from time to time, during the preceding year,
and other information as the Council may require from time to time. In addition
to containing the information, the application shall be in the form prescribed
by the State Commissioner of Public Safety, if applicable, and shall be
verified and filed with the City Administrator. No person shall make a false
statement in an application.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall file with the
City Administrator a policy with regard to liability in the amount of at least
$300,000 single combined, or alternately at least $300,000 coverage for one
person and $300,000 for more than one person, and shall comply with the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, relating
to liability insurance policies.
   (C)   The security offered under division (B) above shall be approved by the
City Council and, in the case of “on-sale wine” licenses, also by the State
Commissioner of Public Safety. Liability insurance policies shall be approved
as to form by the City Attorney. Operation of a licensed business without
having on file with the city at all times effective security as required is a
cause for revocation of the license.
(`87 Code, § 601.03) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.045 FEES.
   (A)   The annual license fees shall be as established in the City Fee
Schedule in §
35.01. There is no charge for a Sunday liquor license.
   (B)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from
the City Treasurer for payment in full of the license fee. All fees shall be
paid into the general fund. If an application for a license is rejected, the
Treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
   (C)   Each license, except a temporary on-sale liquor license, shall be
issued for a period of one year, except that if the application is made during
the license year, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a
pro rata fee, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one
month. Every license, except a temporary on-sale liquor license, shall expire
on the last day of June.
   (D)   No refund on any fee shall be made, except as authorized by statute.
(`87 Code, §601.04) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14; Am. Ord. 20180719-01, passed 7-
19-18)
§ 111.046 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every license is subject to the conditions in the following divisions
and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any other applicable
ordinance, state law or regulation.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises authorized to sell intoxicating liquor there is deemed the
act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties
provided by this subchapter and the law equally with the employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, building inspector or
properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter, inspect and
search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a warrant.
   (D)   No licensee shall display intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor or
wine to the public during hours when its sale is prohibited.
   (E)   No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor dealers special
tax stamp or a federal license.
(`87 Code, § 601.05) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.047 REDUCTION OF RESTAURANT SERVICES.
   The on-sale liquor license of any current licensee who reduces the level of
service as to be out of compliance with the “restaurant” provisions of this
subchapter is subject to suspension and revocation, as outlined herein.
(`87 Code, § 601.08) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14; Am. Ord. 20250115-01, passed 1-
15-25)
§ 111.048 TEMPORARY ON-SALE LIQUOR LICENSES.
   Temporary on-sale liquor licenses shall be granted only to a club,
charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at
least three years; a political committee registered under state law; or a state
university, for the sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises
only, in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the
licensee. The license may authorize the on- sale of intoxicating liquor for not
more than four consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on premises other
than premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The license may
provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering
services with the holder of a full year on-sale liquor license issued by the
city. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license fee, imposed by
the city. The licenses issued under this section are subject to all laws and
ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor except M.S. §§ 340A.409
and 340A.504, Subd. 3(d), and the laws and ordinances which by their nature are
not applicable. Temporary licenses must first be approved by the Commissioner
of Public Safety before they become valid. No more than three 4-day, four 3-
day, or six 2-day temporary licenses, in any combination not to exceed 12 days
per year, may be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages to any one
organization or registered political committee, or for any one location within
a 12 month period. Not more than one temporary license may be issued to any one
organization or registered political committee, or for any one location within
a 30 day period.
(Ord. 20180719-01, passed 7-19-18)
GRANTING OF LICENSES
§ 111.065 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   The city shall investigate, or have investigated, the application as
required by statute or as the Council may require. The city may charge an
investigation fee, as authorized by statute, to cover the cost of the
investigation. The fee shall be payable by the applicant whether or not the
application is granted. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard
for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and an
opportunity for any person to be heard, the Council shall, at its discretion,
grant or refuse the application. No applicant has a right to a license under
this chapter.
(`87 Code, § 601.05)
   (B)   The purpose of this section is to establish regulations that will
allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal History
information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks.
      (1)   The Lakes Area Police Department is hereby required, as the
exclusive law enforcement entity within the city, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants for licenses covered by
Chapter 111.
      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official, or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing
authority, including the City Council, the city or other entities involved in
the license approval process.
      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the
information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. 364.09, the city will
not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior
conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the
conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or a misdemeanor with a jail
sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request, the city shall notify
the applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for denial.
         (b)   The applicant’s complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. 364.06.
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license.
         (d)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.066 WINE LICENSES.
   No wine license shall become effective until it, together with the security
furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the State Department of Public
Safety.
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.067 LICENSE TRANSFER.
   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person
or place without City Council approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate
licensee is deemed a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without
prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license.
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.068 ALCOHOL SERVING/SELLING TRAINING.
   Before a license is renewed or granted, each licensed establishment must
certify to the city that it has completed an alcohol serving/selling training
aimed at the prevention of sales to underage and intoxicated persons.
   (A)   The licensed establishment’s owner or manager must offer and attend
the training annually.
   (B)   All employees who have the responsibility of selling or serving an
alcoholic beverage must receive the training. The owner or manager may train
employees if the employee is a new hire or could not attend the training when
offered.
   (C)   Notice of this requirement will be included in the renewal notice sent
to each licensee.
   (D)   Certification received by the city from the licensee must include the
name of the training course, who administered the training, date of training,
and who received the training. Certification must be received prior to the
expiration date of the license.
   (E)   In the case of a temporary license, the municipal liquor store manager
may administer the training.
   (F)   If an employee is trained by an owner or manager, a trainer’s
certification to instruct must be provided, along with the course materials.
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
REVOCATION OF LICENSES
§ 111.095 VIOLATION.
   The violation of any provision or condition of this chapter is ground for
revocation or suspension of the license. The license of any person who holds a
federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp without a license to sell
intoxicating liquors at a place shall be revoked without notice and without
hearing.
(`87 Code, § 603.09) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.096 COUNCIL AUTHORITY.
   The Council shall either suspend for up to 60 days, revoke any liquor
license, or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 for each violation upon a
finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute,
regulation or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages. Except in cases of
failure of financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take
effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing
pursuant to M.S. 14.57 to 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, of
the administrative procedure act.
(`87 Code, § 601.09) (Am. Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.097 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Lapse of required dram shop insurance, or withdrawal of a required deposit
of cash or securities, shall effect an immediate suspension of any license
issued pursuant to this chapter without further action of the Council. Notice
of cancellation, lapse of current liquor liability policy, or withdrawal of
deposited cash or securities shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license, who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or withdrawal of a required
deposit, or of suspension or revocation of a license, may request a hearing. If
a request is made in writing to the Clerk, a hearing shall be granted within
ten days or such longer period as may be requested. Any suspension under this
section shall continue until the Council determines that the financial
responsibility requirements of this section have again been met.
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.098 PRESUMPTIVE PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Adverse penalties for violations shall be presumed as follows:
   (A)   Numbers below indicate consecutive days’ suspension or the multiplier
of a $300 fine. For example, a licensee appearing before the Council who has
not committed any offenses within three years and is determined to be guilty of
selling alcoholic beverages to an underaged person is subject to a presumptive
two-day suspension, or a fine of $600.
   (B)   It is not necessary for the prior offense to be the same offense as
the current charge.
   (C)   The presumptive sentence depends on the total number of prior offenses
within three years.
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
Total Number of Prior Offenses in Three Years: 0 1 2
Offense                                            Penalty
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
Total Number of Prior Offenses in Three Years:             0 1  2
Offense                                                         Penalty
(1)  Commission of a felony related to the licensed        IMMEDIATE REVOCATION
     activity.
(2)  Sale of alcoholic beverages while license is          IMMEDIATE REVOCATION
     suspended.
(3)  Sale of alcoholic beverages to underage person.       2 10 Revocation
(4)  Sale of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated person.    2 10 Revocation
(5)  After hours sale of alcoholic beverages.              2 10 Revocation
(6)  After hours display or consumption of alcoholic       2 10 Revocation
     beverages.
(7)  Refusal to allow city inspectors or police admission  IMMEDIATE REVOCATION
     to inspect premises.
(8)  Illegal gambling.                                     3 13 Revocation
(9)  Failure to take reasonable steps to stop person from  2 10 Revocation
     leaving premises with alcoholic beverage.
(10) Failure to make application for license renewal prior 3 13 Revocation
     to license expiration date.
(11) Sale of intoxicating liquor where only license is for 1 3  Revocation
     wine or 3.2% malt liquor.
(12) Failure to comply with statutory and ordinance        IMMEDIATE REVOCATION
     requirements for liability insurance.
     No person under 18 years of age allowed in liquor
(13) establishment unless employed by establishment and    2 10 Revocation
     working at the time, or with parent or legal
     guardian.
 
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.099 MULTIPLE VIOLATIONS.
   At a licensee’s first appearance before the Council, the Council shall
consider and act upon all the violations that have been alleged and/or
incorporated in the notices sent to the licensee, up to and including the
formal notice of hearing. The occurrence of multiple violations shall be
grounds for an upward departure from such penalties at the Council’s
discretion. Violations occurring after the date of the notice of hearing that
are brought to the attention of the city prior to the hearing date may be added
to the notices by stipulation, if the licensee admits to the facts and shall,
in that case, be treated as though part of the first appearance. In all other
cases, violations occurring after the date of the formal notice of hearing
shall be the subject of a separate proceeding and dealt with as a second
appearance before the Council.
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
§ 111.100 OTHER PENALTIES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall restrict or limit the authority of the
Council to suspend for up to 60 days or revoke a license, to impose a civil
fine not to exceed $2,000, to prosecute an offender in criminal court, or to
impose conditions or take any other adverse action in accordance with the law,
provided that the license holder has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing
in the manner provided for by law.
(Ord. passed 11-20-14)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS, SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
Section
   
112.01   Shows and exhibitions
   
112.02   Public dances
§ 112.01 SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person, except a local school, lodge, society or charitable
organization, none of which are organized or maintained for profit, shall hold,
promote, advertise for or otherwise engage in offering or opening to the public
a circus, theatrical performance, amusement, show or exhibition without first
obtaining from the Council a license therefor.
(`87 Code, § 507.01)
   (B)   The licensee fee shall be the sum of $50 per year or $10 per day for
each day that the activities conducted, offered or held open for the public,
whichever is lesser.
(`87 Code, § 507.02)
   (C)   Any person or persons desiring to engage in activities regulated under
this section shall make application for the license on a blank form furnished
by the City Administrator. The application shall set forth the name and address
of the person, persons, committee or organization which is to conduct the
regulated activity; state the times and places where the activities are to be
held or conducted; and state the nature of the activity for which the license
is sought. The application shall also contain other information as is
reasonably requested by the City Administrator. In the event the license is
issued, the same shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises at
which the activity is conducted.
(`87 Code, § 507.03)
   (D)   (1)   As a condition for the issuance of a license, the applicant
shall deposit with the City Administrator the sum of $100, dedicated to
cleaning up and restoring the area utilized to its state existing prior to the
commencement of the activity licensed. The licensee shall have a period of 24
hours following the termination of the activity within which to cleanup and
restore the area or premises. The City Administrator or other authorized
personnel of the city may examine the area to see if the conditions herein
stated have been complied with.
      (2)   Upon compliance, the City Administrator shall refund the deposit of
$100. The refusal of or failure by the licensee to comply with the conditions
of this section shall constitute a release of any claim to the deposited sum by
the licensee and the sum shall thereafter be forfeited to the city for the
purposes of cleaning up and restoring the area or premises, any balance
remaining thereafter shall be deemed liquidated damages forfeited to the city
for failure to comply with this section.
(`87 Code, § 507.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.02 PUBLIC DANCES.
   (A)   All dances held in the city hereafter shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 624, §§ 624.42 to and including 624.54, as
they may be amended from time to time, regulating the conduct of dances as
heretofore or hereafter amended. The definitions of terms in the first section
of the act are hereby adopted, except that the term “public dance” shall be
taken to apply to any place in which dancing may be or is carried on, other
than a private residence; and the term “public dance” shall be taken to apply
to every dance held in a public dancing place, whether an admission fee is
charged or not.
(`87 Code, § 503.01)
   (B)   No person shall conduct a public dance in this city unless a license
shall have been procured therefor from the City Administrator.
(`87 Code, § 503.02)
   (C)   The license fee shall be $25 per year, provided that any lodge or
society not organized or maintained for profit may conduct public dances upon
the payment of $5 fee per dance.
(`87 Code, § 503.03)
   (D)   (1)   Any person or persons desiring a permit to hold or conduct a
public dance in the city shall make application therefore on blank forms
furnished by the City Administrator. The applications shall set forth the name
and address of the person, persons, committee or organization which is to
conduct the dance; time and place where the dance is to be held, and the area
of the dance floor. The application shall also show affirmatively that each of
the applicants is a person of good moral character and reputation in the
community in which he or she lives, and that none of the applicants has been
convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or of violating any ordinance or law
regulating dances any place in the United States.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall issue the license if in his opinion
the public health or safety will not suffer therefrom. In case the license be
issued, the same shall be posted in a public place in the dance hall described
therein during the time the dance is being given, and the persons named in the
license shall be responsible under the law for the manner in which the dance is
to be held and conducted.
(`87 Code, § 503.04)
   (E)   It shall be a condition of any permit issued under this section that
the applicant shall provide at his or her own expense policing of the immediate
and surrounding area of the building or area in or upon which the dance is held
by a police officer approved by the Chief of Police. The failure to provide the
policing shall constitute grounds for the immediate revocation of the license.
(`87 Code, § 503.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
113.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
113.04   License ineligibility
   
113.05   Suspension and revocation
   
113.06   Transferability
   
113.07   Registration
   
113.08   Prohibited activities
   
113.09   Exclusion by placard
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to- street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personnel property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
“hawker.”
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays, defined by state law,
shall not be counted as REGULAR BUSINESS DAYS.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street- to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for  which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the
same as the term “canvasser.”
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter or empty store front for
the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell
and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property
and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than
14 consecutive days.
§ 113.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person selling
or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise or
other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the
wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, as
shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any
officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
§ 113.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S.
Chapter 329, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient
merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need
not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to §
113.07.
   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. Application for a
license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from
the Office of the City Administrator. All applications shall be signed by the
applicant. All applications shall include the following information:
      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name;
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which the applicant officially answers;
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features and the like);
      (4)   Full address of the applicant’s permanent residence;
      (5)   Telephone number of the applicant’s permanent residence;
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by the applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or
agent;
      (7)   Full address of the applicant’s regular place of business (if any);
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant;
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license;
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license;
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive days);
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses;
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;
      (15)   Proof of any requested county license;
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided;
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council;
      (19)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form
of identification; and
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established by city ordinance, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (E)   Procedure.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the
license fee, the City Administrator, within two regular business days, must
determine if the application is complete. An application is determined to be
complete only if all required information is provided. If the City
Administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the City
Administrator must inform the applicant of the required necessary information
that is missing. If the application is complete, the City Administrator must
order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application.
      (2)   Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application, the City Administrator must issue the license unless there exist
grounds for denying the license under §
113.04, in which case the City Administrator must deny the license. If the City
Administrator denies the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of
the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant’s right to appeal the
denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public
hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal within
20 days of the date of the request.
      (3)   The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can
be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of
certiorari.
   (F)   Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid
for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted under
this chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the
license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of
place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person’s
State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press,
religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person’s
exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
      (3)   Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt
person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this
chapter.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license.
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include, but not be limited to
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant.
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to the existence of
more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Attorney General’s Office or other similar business or consumer
rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints
filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 113.05 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Administrator after consultation with the
police subject to appeal for the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application
form;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity;
      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could
have been denied under § 113.04; and
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the City Administrator within ten
regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed
with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service
shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.
If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall
be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular
business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.06 TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.07 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter under § 113.03, shall be required to register with
the city.
      (2)   Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license
application, but no fee shall be required.
   (B)   Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Administrator shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as
proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be
nontransferable.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure;
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way;
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public;
   (D)   Conducting business before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person;
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement; no peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person; and/or
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign
or placard under this section.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 114: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions and interpretations
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Application procedure
   
114.04   Basis for denial of license
   
114.05   Terms and fees
   
114.06   Display of license
   
114.07   Prohibited sales
   
114.08   Permitted sales
   
114.09   Revocation or suspension
   
114.10   Responsibility
   
114.11   Compliance checks and inspections
   
114.12   Other illegal acts
   
114.13   Violations
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
and electronic delivery devices are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of any
person under the age of 21 who attempts to purchase tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, or electronic delivery devices for educational,
research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by other units of government for the
purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations
relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, and electronic
delivery devices.
   DEMAND MERCHANDISING. As opposed to “self-service merchandising,” the type
of sale by which a customer specifically requests a product that is locked up,
out of reach or otherwise located in a storage unit not accessible to the
customer. The product must then be procured by the employee of a licensed
premise for presentation and sale to the customer.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE.  Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used
by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other
substance through inhalation of vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY
DEVICE includes any component part of such a product, whether or not sold
separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any product that has
been approved or otherwise certified by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for legal sales for use in tobacco cessation treatment or other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING TOBACCO DISPLAY. Each and every separate retail
display of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices that is
directly accessible by all customers, including those under the age of 21,
without the assistance of the licensee or the licensee’s employee.
   SMOKING. Includes inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product, or
inhaling or exhaling vapor from any electronic delivery device. SMOKING
includes carrying a lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, electronic
delivery device, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product
intended for inhalation.
   TOBACCO, TOBACCO PRODUCTS or TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Includes but are not
limited to cigarettes and any product containing, made or derived from tobacco
that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other means, or any
component, part or accessory of a tobacco product; cigars; cheroots; stogies;
perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking
tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; and other kinds
and forms of tobacco. TOBACCO excludes any tobacco product that has been
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for legal sales for
use in tobacco cessation treatment or other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device that dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or
electronic delivery devices, upon the insertion of money, tokens or any other
form of payment or exchange directly into the machine by someone other than an
employee of a licensed establishment.
(`87 Code, § 502.01) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13; Am. Ord. 20200820-01,
passed 8-20-20; Am. Ord. 20201015-01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, corporation or place of business shall directly or
indirectly or by means of any devise keep for retail sale, sell at retail or
otherwise dispose of any tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or
electronic delivery devices at any place within the city unless a license
therefor shall first have been obtained from the city.
(`87 Code, § 502.02) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13)
§ 114.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-
related devices, or electronic delivery devices shall be made on a form
provided by the city. The form shall request the full disclosure of all matters
relating to the applicant and/or the firm, corporation and/or the specific
place and type of business to be licensed, and other information as may be
required by the City Council. The Council may either approve or deny issuance
of any license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or
electronic delivery devices under this chapter. The Council may delay the
issuance of a license if, in its opinion, additional information or
investigation regarding the application is required.
(`87 Code, § 502.03) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13; Am. Ord. 20201015-01,
passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.04 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of
a license under this chapter; however, except as may otherwise be provided by
law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean the city
must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a
premise, it shall be revoked upon discovery that the premise was ineligible for
the license under this section.
   (B)   The issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter may be denied
if the owner or manager of the applicant place of business:
      (1)   Is under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   Has been convicted of any violation of a federal, state or local
law, ordinance provision or other regulation relating to tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices or electronic delivery devices within the
five years of issuance of the license;
      (3)   Has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-
related devices or electronic delivery devices revoked within the 12 months
preceding the date of the application;
      (4)   Fails to provide any information required on the application or
provides false or misleading information; and
      (5)   Is prohibited by federal, state or local law, ordinance or other
regulation, from holding a license.
(`87 Code, § 502.04) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13; Am. Ord. 20200820-01,
passed 8-20-20; Am. Ord. 20201015-01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.05 TERMS AND FEES.
   (A)   Each license shall be valid for up to one year (pro rated), is
nontransferable and nonrefundable. No license shall be issued under this
chapter until the appropriate fee is paid in full. The annual fee for every
license shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
(`87 Code, § 502.05)
   (B)   The annual license fee under this chapter for the city shall be $50.
(`87 Code, § 502.12) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13 ; Am. Ord. 20201015-
01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Any current license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, or electronic delivery devices shall be conspicuously posted and
displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premise, and
shall be exhibited to any person upon request.
(`87 Code, § 502.06) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13) ; Am. Ord. 20201015-
01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.07 PROHIBITED SALES.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to
sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or electronic
delivery device:
   (A)   To any person under the age of 21 years;
   (B)   From a vending machine;
   (C)   From any self-service merchandising display, except if the display is
located within a licensed establishment that restricts access to the
establishment to persons 21 years of age or older;
   (D)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana or other type of deleterious, hallucinogenic or toxic or
controlled substance, except nicotine or lobelia found in tobacco or tobacco
products, including electronic delivery devices; and
   (E)   By any other means, or to any other person, prohibited by federal,
state or other local law ordinance provision or other regulation.
(`87 Code, § 502.07) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13; Am. Ord. 20200820-01,
passed 8-20-20; Am. Ord. 20201015-01, passed 10-15-20) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 PERMITTED SALES.
   Unless otherwise herein provided, the sale of tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, or electronic delivery devices shall be by demand
merchandising only. All tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or
electronic delivery devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other
area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not
left open and accessible to the general public. Any licensee selling tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or electronic delivery devices at
the time of this chapter is adopted shall comply with this section within 90
days of the City Council’s adoption of this chapter.
(`87 Code, § 502.08) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13 ; Am. Ord. 20201015-
01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.09 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended as
provided herein.
(`87 Code, § 502.09) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13 ; Am. Ord. 20201015-
01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.10 RESPONSIBILITY.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, all licensees under this chapter shall be
responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or electronic delivery
devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of an item by an employee shall
be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever
penalties are appropriate under this chapter, state law or other applicable law
or regulation.
(`87 Code, § 502.10) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13 ; Am. Ord. 20201015-
01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.11 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All licensed premises shall be   open to inspection by the city police
or other authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging individuals under the age of 21 years to enter the licensed premise to
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices or
electronic delivery devices pursuant to a specific procedure prescribed by the
city.
   (B)   A copy of that procedure will be given to each licensee at the time of
license issuance.
(`87 Code, § 502.11) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13; Am. Ord. 20200820-01,
passed 8-20-20; Am. Ord. 20201015-01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.12 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter.
   (A)   Illegal sale. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
under the age of 21 to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco-related device, or electronic delivery device. This division
shall not apply to those lawfully involved in duly authorized compliance checks
or who have only temporary possession during a legal sales transaction.
   (B)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
under the age of 21 to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco or
tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or electronic delivery device.
   (C)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person under the age of 21 to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco-related device, or electronic delivery device. It shall also
be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or otherwise provide any
tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or electronic delivery device
to any person under the age of 21. It shall further be a violation for any
person to coerce or attempt to coerce any person under the age of 21 to
illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco-related device, or electronic delivery device. This division shall not
apply to those lawfully involved in duly authorized city compliance checks or
checks otherwise done by the owner of the licensed establishment.
   (D)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person under the age of 21 to attempt to disguise his or her true age
by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is
that of another person, or one on which the age of the person has been modified
or tampered with to represent an age other than the actual age of the person so
depicted.
(`87 Code, § 502.12) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13; Am. Ord. 20200820-01,
passed 8-20-20; Am. Ord. 20201015-01, passed 10-15-20) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.13 VIOLATIONS.
   Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the violator shall either be issued
a citation by the city or, at the option of the violator, be given an
opportunity to pay an administrative penalty. The city reserves the right to
refuse to offer the administrative penalty and instead proceed directly with
the misdemeanor prosecutions for a particular offense.
(`87 Code, § 502.12) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13 ; Am. Ord. 20201015-
01, passed 10-15-20)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the accused violator shall be
issued a citation by the city police and be given notice of his or her right to
be heard on the accusation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation
occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense. Any person found to
be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
the maximum penalty authorized by state law for a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the accused violator may
select the administrative fee option and agree to pay an administrative
penalty. If the accused violator accepts the administrative option, he or she
may pay the appropriate fine amount to the City Administrator. If the
administrative fine is paid within five calendar days of the alleged violation,
the citation will be voided by the city.
   (C)   In addition to any fine or other penalty, violation of this chapter by
a licensee or an employee of a licensee shall be grounds for the suspension or
revocation of the license or a portion thereof. Before any license is suspended
or revoked under this chapter, the licensee shall be given notice of the
accused violation and shall be given the right to request an administrative
hearing on the matter and to appeal the findings of the hearing on suspension
or revocation to the City Council.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, or electronic delivery devices to
any person under the age of 21 as part of a lawfully recognized religious,
spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the
violation of this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of
age as described by state law.
   (E)   (1)   The following fees are administrative fees for violations by the
licensee.
         (a)   First violation: $250;
         (b)    Second violation, within five years: $500 and a two day
suspension of license;
         (c)   Third violation, within five years: $750 and a five day
suspension of license; and
         (d)   Fourth violation: one-year suspension of license.
      (2)   The following fees are administrative fees for violations by the
clerk or underage smoker:
         (a)   First violation: $50; and
         (b)   Second and subsequent violations: $100.
(`87 Code, § 502.12) (Am. Ord. 13-19-02, passed 12-19-13; Am. Ord. 20200820-01,
passed 8-20-20; Am. Ord. 20201015-01, passed 10-15-20)
CHAPTER 115: TATTOOING
Section
   
115.01   Definition
   
115.02   License required
   
115.03   Licensing procedure
   
115.04   Expiration of licenses
   
115.05   Conditions of license
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TATTOOING.  The marking of a person's skin by insertion of permanent colors
through puncture of the skin.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 9-21-03)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A person must not operate an establishment where tattooing is practiced, nor
engage in the practice of tattooing without being licensed under this chapter.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 9-21-03)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.03 LICENSING PROCEDURE.
   Persons seeking a license from the city shall follow the following
procedure:
   (A)   Applications for tattooing licenses must be filed with the Community
Development Department, accompanied by the license fee specified in the city's
fee schedule. The license fee will be pro-rated for licenses issued during the
year but will not be less than $25.
   (B)   Applications must be signed by the applicant and contain the names of
the applicant, if an individual, the names of partners, if a partnership, and
if a corporation, the names of the principal officers of the corporation,
together with a brief description of the location where the business is to be
conducted.
   (C)   Applicants must comply with the requirements for insurance, but are
not required to post a bond.
   (D)   Applicants will be considered and acted upon by the City Council.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 9-21-03)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.04 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Licenses issued under this chapter expire on July 1 of each year.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 9-21-03)
§ 115.05 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A licensee must be of good moral character and free from communicable
disease.
   (B)   A licensee must not engage in the practice of tattooing at a place
other than that described in the application and license.
   (C)   A person having a skin infection, disease of the skin, or a
communicable disease must not be tattooed.
   (D)   A licensee must not tattoo a person under the age of 18 except in the
presence and with the written consent of that person's parent or legal
guardian.
   (E)   A place used for the practice of tattooing must not be used or
occupied for living or sleeping quarters, or for a purpose other that
tattooing.
   (F)   The place where tattooing is conducted must have at least 150 square
feet of floor space and must be lighted and ventilated to comply with standards
approved by the health authority.
   (G)   Every place where tattooing is practiced must be equipped with
conveniently located and approved sewer and water-connected toilet and lavatory
facilities. These facilities must be maintained in good working order at all
times, must be kept free from flies, insects and offensive odors, and must be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (1)   Toilet fixtures and seats must be of a sanitary open front design
and readily cleanable. All toilet rooms must have self-closing doors. Easily
cleanable, covered receptacles must be provided for waste materials.
      (2)   The lavatory must be supplied with hot and cold running water under
pressure tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination faucet. All self-
closing, slow-closing or metered fixtures must be designed to provide a flow of
water for at least 15 seconds. Every lavatory facility must be provided with an
adequate supply of hand cleansing compound and single service sanitary towels
or hand-drying devices.
   (H)   A licensee must provide to its customers a sufficient number of
individually pre-packaged, pre-sterilized and disposable towels. These towels
must be kept in a closed dustproof container. A towel must be used on no more
than one customer and must be discarded in a safe and sanitary manner after its
first use.
   (I)   Tables, chairs and operating furniture must be constructed of
stainless steel and must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (J)   The equipment, including needles, stencils, razors and razor blades,
must be kept in a dustproof glass case when not in use.
   (K)   Needles and operating instruments must be individually pre-packaged,
pre-sterilized and disposable. Each piece of this equipment must be used on no
more than one customer, and must be discarded in a safe and sanitary manner
after its first use.
   (L)   Sterilizing solutions may be used for the purpose of sterilizing
instruments other than needles when sterilizing solutions are approved by the
health authority.
   (M)   Bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with the tattooing
of a person must be individually pre-packaged, pre-sterilized and disposable.
   (N)   A licensee must wear clean, light-colored washable outer garments when
engaged in the practice of tattooing.
   (O)   A licensee must wash his or her hands thoroughly with soap and water
and then dry them with a clean towel before and after each tattooing. The
customer's skin must also be thoroughly cleansed with soap and water and
disinfected by an antiseptic solution approved by the health authority before
the use or application of a tattooing instrument or equipment.
   (P)   Pigments used in tattooing must be sterile and free from bacterial and
noxious agents and substances. The pigments used from stock solutions for each
customer must be placed in a single-service receptacle, and the receptacle and
remaining solution must be discarded in a safe and sanitary manner after use on
a customer.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 9-21-03)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Suspension or revocation. The City Council may suspend or revoke a
license issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in a license
application or a renewal application.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the licensed occupation or business.
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or state law.
      (4)   A licensee's criminal conviction that is directly related to the
occupation or business licensed as defined by M.S. § 364.03.2, provided that
the licensee cannot show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed occupation or business as
defined by M.S. § 364.03.3.
      (5)   Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constituted a menace to the health safety, or general welfare of the community
   (B)   Notice and hearing. A revocation or suspension by the City Council
shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a hearing. The notice
shall give at least eight days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and
shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice shall be
mailed by regular and certified mail the licensee. The notice shall be mailed
by regular and certified mail to the licensee at the most recent address listed
on the license application.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 9-21-03)
CHAPTER 116: PAWN SHOP REGULATIONS
Section
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   License required
   
116.04   Licensing fee
   
116.05   Application required
   
116.06   Bond required
   
116.07   Records required
   
116.08   Daily report to police
   
116.09   Receipt required
   
116.10   Redemption period
   
116.11   Holding period
   
116.12   Police order to hold property
   
116.13   Inspection of items
   
116.14   Label required
   
116.15   Prohibited acts
   
116.16   Denial, suspension or revocation
   
116.17   Business at only one place
   
116.18   Other laws
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that use of services provided by pawnbrokers
provides an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their concealment
because pawn businesses have the ability to receive and transfer property
stolen by others easily and quickly. The City Council also finds that consumer
protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving pawnbrokers. The
City Council further finds that the pawn industry has outgrown the city's
current ability to effectively or efficiently identify criminal activity
related to pawnshops. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent pawn businesses
from being used as facilities for the commission of crimes, and to assure that
such businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby
protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
city.
   (B)   To help the Police Department better regulate current and future pawn
businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the
pawn industry, and increase identification of criminal activities in the pawn
industry through the timely collection and sharing of pawn transactions
information, this chapter also implements and establishes the required use of
the Automated Pawn System (APS).
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker
is a BILLABLE TRANSACTION except renewals, redemptions or extensions of
existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in the licensee's
possession, voided transactions, and confiscations.
   PAWN TRANSACTION. Any loan on security of pledged goods or any purchase of
pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the
pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price
within a fixed period of time.
   PAWNBROKER.  Any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as
principal, agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of
personal property or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back
again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged. Any such person whose business includes buying personal property
previously used, rented or leased, or selling such property on consignment, is
hereby deemed PAWNBROKER.
   PAWNSHOP. The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly
conducts business.
   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION.  Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in
which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade,
or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, or for which a unique
transaction number or identifier is generated by their point-of-sale software,
or an item is confiscated by law enforcement, is reportable except:
      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a
merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of
business, and the retail sale of that merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must
maintain a record of the purchase or consignment that describes each item, and
must make each item in a manner that relates it to that transaction record.
      (2)   Retail or wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by
pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods
have expired.
      (3)   Items purchased from a Minnesota city, county, or other political
subdivision's law enforcement agency as an alternative of disposing of
unclaimed, impounded, seized or confiscated items through public action or
sale, as allowed by state statute or local ordinance.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person may not engage in business as a pawnbroker or otherwise
portray the person as a pawnbroker unless the person has a valid license
authorizing engagement in the business. Any pawn transaction made without
benefit of a license is void.
   (B)   A separate license is required for each place of business.
   (C)   Each license shall remain in full force and effect until surrendered,
suspended, revoked or expired. A license may be suspended or revoked for
failure to comply with this chapter.
   (D)   No expiration, revocation, suspension or surrender of any license
shall impair or affect the obligation of any preexisting lawful contract
between the licensee and any pledgor.
   (E)   The local law enforcement agency shall be notified of any licensee
whose license has expired or been surrendered, suspended or revoked as provided
by this chapter.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.04 LICENSING FEE.
   (A)   Each license under this chapter shall be valid for up to one year
(prorated) and is nontransferable and nonrefundable. No license shall be issued
until the appropriate fee is paid in full. The annual fee for every license
shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of
processing transactions and other related regulatory expenses as determined by
resolution of the City Council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted, if
necessary, every six months. Licensees shall be notified in writing 30 days
before any adjustment is implemented.
   (C)   Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and
payable within 30 days. Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.05 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Application contents. An application form prepared by the City
Administrator must be completed by every applicant for a new license or for
renewal of an existing license. Completed applications must be submitted to the
City Administrator for processing. Every new applicant must provide the
following information.
      (1)   If the applicant is a natural person:
         (a)   The name, place and date of birth, street resident address, and
phone number of the applicant.
         (b)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien.
         (c)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places any other name has been used.
         (d)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name or style other than the name of the applicant, and a
certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S. 333.01.
         (e)   The street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding five years.
         (f)   The type, name and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years, and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if any,
for the preceding five years.
         (g)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
crime, statute or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance If
so, the applicant must furnish information as to the statute, time, place and
offense of all such convictions.
         (h)   A physical description of the applicant, including a photograph.
         (i)   Applicant’s current personal financial statement and true copies
of the applicant's federal and state tax returns for the two years prior to
application.
         (j)   If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business, and all information
concerning any manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business as
required in division (A)(1)(a) through (h) of this section.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership:
         (a)   The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners,
and all information concerning each general partner required in division (A)(1)
of this section.
         (b)   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each
partner in the licensed business.
         (c)   Whether any of the partners have ever been convicted of a
felony, crime, statute or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic
ordinance. If so, the partner must furnish information as to the statute, time,
place and offense of all such convictions.
         (d)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with
the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name pursuant to M.S. 333.01, a certified copy of such certificate must
be attached to the application.
         (e)   If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business, and all information
concerning any manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business as
required in division (A)(1)(a) through (h) of this section.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
         (a)   The name of the corporation or business form, and if
incorporated, the state of incorporation.
         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement, and the by-laws shall be attached to
the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required by M.S. 303.06, must be attached.
         (c)   The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business, and all information concerning any manager(s) or other person(s) in
charge of the business as required in division (A)(1)(a) through (h) of this
section.
         (d)   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess
of 5% in such organization or business form, or who are officers of a
corporation or business form, and all information concerning these persons as
required in division (A)(1) of this section. This division (A)(3)(d), however,
shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is publically traded in a stock
exchange, and is applying for a license to be owned or operated by it.
         (e)   Whether any manager(s), person(s) in charge of the business, or
persons who control or own an interest in excess of 5% in the organization or
business, or officers of the corporation or business have ever been convicted
of a felony, crime, statute or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic
ordinance. If so, the party must furnish information as to the statute, time,
place and offense of all such convictions.
      (4)   For all applicants:
         (a)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal
dealer, or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit.
         (b)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied or had revoked
or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand goods dealer
license from any other governmental unit.
         (c)   The location and legal description of the business premises.
         (d)   If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and
complete copy of the executed lease.
         (e)   Whether all real estate, personal property taxes, and utility
bills due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if
not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid.
         (f)   Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under
construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application must be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans, showing the design of the premises
to be licensed.
         (g)   The current zoning of the property on which the premises is
located.
         (h)   Any such information as the City Council or issuing authority
may require.
   (B)   Manager.  When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or
if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee
must complete and submit the appropriate application within 14 days. The
application must include all appropriate information required in this section.
   (C)   Application execution.  All applications for a license under this
chapter must be signed by the applicant. If the application is that of a
natural person, it must be signed by that person; if that of a corporation, by
an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners;
and if that of an unincorporated associate, by the manager or managing officer
thereof.
   (D)   Investigation.  The Police Department must investigate into the
truthfulness of the statements set forth in the application and shall endorse
the findings thereon. The applicant must furnish to the Police License
Inspector such evidence as the Inspector may reasonably require in support of
the statements set forth in the application. The Police Department
investigative report and/or endorsement of findings must be in writing.
      (1)   An investigation fee of $500 shall be charged if the investigation
is conducted within the state, or the actual cost, not to exceed $10,000, if
the investigation is required outside the state.
      (2)   No license may be issued or renewed if the results of the
investigation show, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that issuance or
renewal would not be in the public interest.
   (E)   Persons ineligible for a license.  No license under this chapter will
be issued to an applicant who is a natural person, a partnership if such
applicant has any general partner or managing partner, a corporation or other
organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor or agent in charge
of the business to be licensed, if the applicant, partner, manager, proprietor
or agent:
      (1)   Fails to operate lawfully and fairly within the purposes of this
chapter;
      (2)   Is under the age of 18 years old at the time the application is
filed;
      (3)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation
licensed as prescribed by M.S. 364.03, Subd. 2, and has not shown competent
evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties
of a licensee under this chapter as prescribed by M.S. 364.03, Subd. 3; or
      (4)   Is not of good moral character or reputation.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.06 BOND REQUIRED.
   Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a $5,000 bond,
on the forms provided by the city, and approved by the City Attorney as to form
and execution. All bonds must be conditioned that the principal will observe
all laws in relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity
thereto, and that the principal will account for and deliver to any person
legally entitled any goods that have come into the principal’s hand through the
principal’s business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the
reasonable value in money to the person. The bond shall contain a provision
that no bond may be canceled except upon 30 days written notice to the city,
which shall be served upon the licensing authority.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.07 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   In addition to the information required by M.S. 325J.01 et seq., at the time
of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions or redemptions,
every licensee must immediately record, in English, the following information
by using ink or other indelible medium, on forms or in a computerized record
approved by the Police Department:
   (A)   Description. A complete and accurate description of each item,
including but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial
number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on the item.
   (B)   Price. The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon or pledged
therefor.
   (C)   Transaction. The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due,
including monthly and annual interest rates, and all pawn fees and charges.
   (D)   Receipt. Date, time and place the item of property was received by the
licensee, and the unique alphabetical and/or numeric transaction identifier
that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee’s records.
   (E)   Description of person. Full name, current residence address, current
telephone number, date of birth and accurate description of the person from
whom the item of property was received, including sex, height, weight, race,
color of eyes and color of hair.
   (F)   Identification of person. The identification number and state of issue
from any of the following forms of identification of the seller:
      (1)   Current valid driver’s license.
      (2)   Current valid photo identification card.
      (3)   Current passport with picture.
   (G)   Signature of person. The signature of the person identified in the
transaction.
   (H)   Color photograph or video recording. Effective 60 days from the date
of notification by the Police Department of acceptable video standards, the
licensee must also provide a color photograph or color video recording of:
      (1)   Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
      (2)   Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
      (3)   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches in length
by two inches in width, and must be maintained in such a manner that it can be
readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to
which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the Chief of Police,
or the chiefs designee, upon request. The major portion of the photograph must
include an identifiable front facial close-up of the person who pawned or sold
the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee must
inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises.
      (4)   If a video recording is made, the video camera must zoom in on the
person pawning or selling the item so as to include an identifiable close-up of
that person's face. Items recorded by videotape must be accurately depicted.
Videotapes must be electronically referenced by time and date so they can be
readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to
which they relate. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being
videotaped, orally and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous
place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for three
months.
   (I)   Digitized photographs.  Effective 60 days from the date of
notification by the Police Department, licensees must fulfill the color
photograph requirements in §
116.07(H) by submitting color photographs as digital images, in a format
specified by the issuing authority, electronically cross-referenced to the
reportable transaction with which they are associated. Notwithstanding digital
images that may be captured from required video recordings, this provision does
not alter or amend the requirements in division (H).
   (J)   Renewals, extensions and redemptions.  For renewals, extensions and
redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier,
the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.
   (K)   Inspection of records.  The records must at all reasonable times be
open to inspection by the Police Department. Data entries shall be retained for
at least three years from the date of transaction. Entries of required digital
images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.08 DAILY REPORT TO POLICE.
   (A)   Automated Pawn System. Effective no later than 60 days after the
Police Department provides licensees with computerized record standards,
licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the Police Department
daily in the following manner:
      (1)   Licensees must provide to the Police Department all information
required in the §
116.07 (A) through (F), and other required information, by transferring it
electronically from their computers to the Automated Pawn System. All required
records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of
business each day, in accordance with standards and procedures established by
the issuing authority, using procedures that address security concerns of the
licensees and the issuing authority. The licensee must display a sign of
sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, informing all patrons
that all transactions are reported to the Police Department daily.
      (2)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required
reports electronically, the licensee must provide the Police Department with
printed copies of all reportable transactions, along with the videotape(s) for
that date, by 12:00 p.m. of the next business day;
      (3)   If the problem is determined to be in the licensee’s system and is
not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the
licensee must provide the required reports as detailed in §
116.08(A)(1), and must be charged a $50 reporting failure penalty, daily, until
the error is corrected; or
      (4)   If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system,
the licensee must provide the required reports in §
116.08(A)(1) and resubmit all such transactions electronically when the error
is corrected.
      (5)   If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the
photographs required in §
116.07(1), the licensee must immediately take all required photographs with a
still camera, cross-reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and
make the pictures available to the Chief of Police or designee upon request.
      (6)   Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that
prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon
correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable
transaction from every business day the problem had existed.
   (B)   Billable transaction fees.  Licensees will be charged for each
billable transaction reported to the Police Department through the Automated
Pawn System.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.09 RECEIPT REQUIRED.
   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every
reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three
years. The receipt must include at least the following information:
   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business.
   (B)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
   (C)   Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction.
   (D)   An accurate description of each item received, including but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying mark on the item.
   (E)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that
conducted the transaction.
   (F)   The amount advanced or paid.
   (G)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and
charges.
   (H)   The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by
the pledger without risk that it will be sold, and the amount necessary to
redeem the pawned item on that date.
   (I)   The full name, current residence address, current telephone number,
and date of birth of the pledger or seller.
   (J)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the following
forms of identification of the seller:
      (1)   Current valid driver’s license.
      (2)   Current valid photo identification card.
      (3)   Current passport with picture.
   (K)   Description of the pledger or seller, including approximate sex,
height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
   (L)   The signature of the pledger or seller.
   (M)   All printed statements as required by M.S. 325J.04, Subd. 2, or any
other applicable statutes.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.10 REDEMPTION PERIOD.
   Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a
minimum of 90 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before
it may be forfeited and sold. During the 90-day holding period, items may not
be removed from the licensed location except as provided in §
116.17. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than
to the person to whom the receipt was issued, to any person identified in a
written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the
receipt, to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the
initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or to an individual with
approval of the Police License Inspector. Written authorization for release of
property to persons other than original pledger must be maintained along with
original transaction record in accordance with §
116.07.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.11 HOLDING PERIOD.
   Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold or
otherwise transferred for 31 days from the date of the transaction. An
individual may redeem an item 72 hours after the item was received on deposit,
excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.12 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
   (A)   Investigative hold.  Whenever a law enforcement official from the
Police Department verbally notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item
must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be
confirmed in writing by the Police Department within 72 hours, and will remain
in effect for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the
investigative order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is
issued, pursuant to §
116.12(B), whichever comes first.
   (B)   Order to hold. Whenever the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee,
notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed
from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Chief or the
Chief’s designee. The order to hold shall expire 90 days from the date it is
placed, unless the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee determines the hold
is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
   (C)   Order to confiscate.  If an item is identified as stolen or evidence
in a criminal case, the Chief or Chief’s designee may:
      (1)   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a
written order from the Chief or the Chief’s designee; or
      (2)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in §
116.12(B), and leave it at the premises for which the license was issued. When
an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon
request of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee with the name and phone
number of the Police Department’s confiscating agency and investigator, and the
case number related to the confiscation. When an order to hold/confiscate is no
longer necessary, the Chief of Police, or Chief’s designee, shall so notify the
licensee.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.13 INSPECTION OF ITEMS.
   At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow the
city's Police Department officials to enter the premises where the licensed
business is located, including all off-site storage facilities as authorized in
§
116.17, during normal business hours, for the purpose of inspecting the
premises and inspecting the items, ware and merchandise and records therein, to
verify compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.14 LABEL REQUIRED.
   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently
recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the
transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the name of the item
and the description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to
the Police Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of
pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be re-used.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.15 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person under the age of eighteen 18 years may pawn or sell or
attempt to pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive
any goods from a person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an
intoxicated person.
   (C)   No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a valid driver’s license, a valid State of
Minnesota identification card, or current valid photo driver’s license or
identification card issued by the state or providence of residency of the
person from whom the item was received.
   (D)   No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered
or obliterated serial number or operation identification number, or any item of
property that has had its serial number removed.
   (E)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any
article of property not their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell,
consign, leave or deposit the property of another, whether with permission or
without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any
article of property in which another has a security interest; with any
licensee. Nor may any licensee receive the same.
   (F)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any
article of property with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name;
nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out-of-date address of
residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered identification,
or the identification of another; to any licensee.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.16 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for one
or more of the following reasons:
   (A)   The proposed use does not comply with any applicable zoning code.
   (B)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building
maintenance or other provisions of this code of ordinances or state law.
   (C)   The applicant or licensee or any of its employees has failed to comply
with one or more provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or is an individual upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct
a background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of
information.
   (E)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a license.
   (F)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application
and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.
   (G)   Violation, within the preceding five years, of any law relating to
theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or
operation of a business.
   (H)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify
for a license under the terms of this chapter.
   (I)   The attempted assignment of the license by the licensee.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.17 BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE.
   (A)   A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its
business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license.
However, upon written request, the Police License Inspector may approve an off-
site locked and secured storage facility. The licensee shall permit inspection
of the facility in accordance with §
116.13. All provisions of this chapter regarding record keeping and reporting
apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be stored in compliance
with all provisions of the city code. The licensee must either own the building
in which the business is conducted, and any approved offsite storage facility,
or have a lease on the business premise that extends for more than six months.
   (B)   Any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed
pawnshop shall require the application for a new license, and the new owner
must satisfy all current eligibility requirements.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.18 OTHER LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter are not intended and should not be construed
as restricting the applicability of any other ordinance, state or federal laws,
including without limitation, state or federal laws regulating the purchase,
storage and sale of firearms. To the extent that such ordinances and laws
cannot be applied consistently with this chapter, the most restrictive
ordinance or law shall be applied.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000 or by imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both, plus
costs of prosecution in either case. This penalty is in addition to, but not in
limitation of, the potential suspension or revocation of the license granted
hereunder.
(Ord. 201414420-01, passed 11-20-14)
CHAPTER 117: LOCAL LODGING TAX
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Imposition of tax
   
117.03   Collections
   
117.04   Exemptions
   
117.05   Advertising no tax
   
117.06   Payments and returns
   
117.07   Examination of returns; adjustments, notices, and demands
   
117.08   Refunds
   
117.09   Failure to file a return
   
117.10   Administration of tax
   
117.11   Examination of records
   
117.12   Use of proceeds and annual report
   
117.13   Appeals
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Lindstrom.
   DIRECTOR. The Finance Director of the city, or designee.
   LODGER. The PERSON obtaining LODGING from an OPERATOR.
   LODGING. The furnishing for consideration of LODGING by a hotel, motel,
rooming house, campground, Airbnb, tourist court, or resort, except where such
LODGING shall be for a continuous period of 30 days or more to the same LODGER.
   OPERATOR. A PERSON who provides LODGING to others, or any officer, agent, or
employee of such person.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or any other
combination of individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision
of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, association, or partnership shall mean the officers or partners
thereof as the case may be.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for LODGING whether
paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services
rendered in connection with furnishing LODGING other than the room charge
itself.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18)
§ 117.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person. The tax shall be stated and charged separately
and shall be collected by the operator from the lodger. The tax collected by
the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator to the city and shall be
extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the tax imposed by
this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator is
authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a lodger.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.03 COLLECTIONS.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the time rent
is paid. The tax collections shall be held in trust by the operator for the
city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for
the lodging.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it
is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be granted except
upon a claim therefore made at the time the rent is collected and such a claim
shall be made in writing under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the
city. All such claims shall be forwarded to the city when the returns and
collections are submitted as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.05 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise, hold out, or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
The operator must collect the tax. In computing the tax to be collected,
amounts of tax less than $0.01 shall be considered an additional $0.01.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.06 PAYMENTS AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the operator to the
city not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the taxes were
collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a return upon such
forms and containing such information as the city may require. The return shall
contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return;
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of an agent
duly authorized in writing;
      (4)   The period covered by the return;
      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging
tax; and
      (6)   A copy of the Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return submitted by
the operator for the period covered by the return.
   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this chapter previously paid
as a result of any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectible
during such reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such
consideration which became uncollectible.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.07 EXAMINATION OF RETURNS; ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES, AND DEMANDS.
   The Director may rely upon the Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return
filed by the operator with the state in determining the accuracy of a return
filed under this chapter. However, the Director shall be authorized to make any
investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making
the return, if the Director reasonably determines that such steps are necessary
for determining the correctness of the return. The tax computed on the basis of
such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be
greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the city within ten days
after receipt of a notice thereof, given either personally or sent by
registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater
than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who
paid the tax to the city within ten days after determination of such refund.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.08 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the Director for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided
that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one year
after such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return,
whichever period is longer. The Director shall examine the claim and make and
file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part
and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to such person at the
address stated upon the return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part,
the Director shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due
under this chapter from the claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any,
shall be paid by the Director to the claimant.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18)
§ 117.09 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return shall fail
to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice
and demand, file such return or corrected return within five days of receipt of
such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis
thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected return, the
Director shall make a return or corrected return for such person from such
knowledge and information as the Director can obtain, and assess a tax on the
basis thereof, which tax, less any payments theretofore made on account of the
tax for the taxable period covered by such return, shall be paid within five
days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment. Any such
return or assessment made by the Director shall be prima facie correct and
valid, and such person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness
or invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including penalties
thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the city
may institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due
plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of any action.
   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the Director may grant an operator one
30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of
taxes as required by this chapter provided that interest during such period of
extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per annum.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.10 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The Director shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of
taxes imposed by this chapter. The Director shall cause to be prepared blank
forms for the returns and other documents required by this chapter, and shall
distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them on application, but
failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any
obligation required of him or her under this chapter.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18)
§ 117.11 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   The Director and those persons acting on behalf of the Director, authorized
in writing by the Director, may examine the books, papers, and records of any
operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this chapter. Every such operator
is directed and required to give to the Director, or such other authorized
agent or employee, the means, facilities, and opportunity for such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.12 USE OF PROCEEDS AND ANNUAL REPORT.
   Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes
pursuant to this chapter shall be used in accordance with M.S. § 469.190, as
the same may be amended from time to time, to fund a local visitors bureau for
the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or convention
center. Any local visitors bureau receiving proceeds shall, for its most recent
calendar year, provide an annual year-end report of its operations and its
financial condition to the City Council in writing and by oral presentation at
a City Council meeting.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18)
§ 117.13 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order, or determination made by
the Director under this chapter may file a petition for review of such notice,
order, or determination detailing the operator's reasons for contesting the
notice, order, or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the
petitioner, the petitioner's address, and the location of the lodging subject
to the order, notice, or determination.
   (B)   The petition for review shall be filed with the city within ten days
after the notice, order, or determination for which review is sought has been
mailed or served upon the person requesting review.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition, the City Manager, or the Manager's
designee, shall set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five
days' prior written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order, or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner's choosing at
petitioner's own expense.
   (E)   The hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager, or the Manager's
designee, provided only that the person conducting the hearing shall not have
participated in the drafting of the order, notice, or determination for which
review is sought.
   (F)   The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact
and conclusion based upon the applicable sections of this chapter and evidence
presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse, or modify the
notice, order, or determination made by the Director.
   (G)   Any decision rendered by the City Administrator or Clerk, or the
Manager's designee, pursuant to this section may be appealed to the City
Council. A petitioner seeking to appeal the decision must file a written notice
of appeal with the city within ten days after the decision has been mailed to
the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as
soon as it is practical. The Council shall then review the findings of fact and
conclusions to determine whether they are correct. Upon a determination by the
Council that the findings and conclusions are incorrect, the Council may
modify, reverse, or affirm the decision of the City Manager, or the Manager's
designee, upon the same standards as set forth in division (F) of this section.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time herein
specified for the payment, or an extension thereof, there shall be added a
specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid. The amount of tax
not timely paid, together with any penalty provided by this section, shall bear
interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the time such tax should have been
paid until it is paid. Any interest and penalty shall be added to the tax and
be collected as part thereof.
   (B)   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
chapter; who shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment; who
shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by
this chapter, after written demand for such payment; who shall refuse to permit
the city to examine the books, records, and papers under his or her control; or
who shall willfully make any incomplete, false, or fraudulent return, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 20180621-03, passed 6-21-18)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
   
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Weapons
   
130.02   Curfew
   
130.03   Cannabis and hemp public use prohibition
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 WEAPONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      WEAPON. Any firearm, air gun, pellet gun, B.B. gun, bow and arrow,
crossbow or slingshot.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 14 years of age to
handle, possess or control, except while accompanied by or under the immediate
charge of his or her parent(s) or guardian(s), any weapon within the city. Any
person aiding or knowingly permitting any minor, as mentioned above, to violate
the same, shall also be in violation of this section.
   (C)   No person shall, within the city, aim or otherwise point any weapon of
any kind, whether loaded or not, at or towards another human being or an
animal.
   (D)   No person shall discharge any weapon, except:
      (1)   At a duly authorized range while the range is supervised;
      (2)   While under reasonable apprehension of harm to protect person or
property against anyone committing or attempting to commit a felony; or
      (3)   After permission to do so granted by the Council, to protect
property against damage by rodent, animals or destructive fowl.
(`87 Code, § 803.01)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02 CURFEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock of the Police Dispatcher.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the minor. The
person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Minors 16 years and younger. No minor of the ages of 16 or younger
shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 10:00p.m. and 5:00a.m. the following day, official city time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession or occupation or to a minor traveling directly to or from the
location of the business trade, profession or occupation and the minor’s
residence; (Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work.)
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor’s
parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor;
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew;
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly or freedom of religion;
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence; and/or
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian or
other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor or unless one of the
exceptions to this section apply.
(Am. Ord. 06-07-02, passed 7-20-06)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.03 CANNABIS AND HEMP PUBLIC USE PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Definitions. The definitions in M.S. § 342.01 apply to this section.
In this section:
      CANNABIS FLOWER. The harvested flower, bud, leaves, and stems of a
cannabis plant. CANNABIS FLOWER includes adult-use cannabis flower, and medical
cannabis flower. CANNABIS FLOWER does not include cannabis seed, hemp plant
parts, or hemp-derived consumer products.
      CANNABIS PRODUCT. Any of the following:
         (a)   Cannabis concentrate;
         (b)   A product infused with cannabinoids, including but not limited
to tetrahydrocannabinol, extracted or derived from cannabis plants or cannabis
flower; or
         (c)   Any other product that contains cannabis concentrate.
         (d)   CANNABIS PRODUCT includes adult-use cannabis products, including
but limited to edible cannabis products and medical cannabis products.
      CERTAIN CANNABINOID PRODUCTS. Any product legalized under M.S. § 151.72.
      LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. Any product that:
         (a)   Is intended to be eaten or consumed as a beverage by humans;
         (b)   Contains hemp concentrate or an artificially derived
cannabinoid, in combination with food ingredients;
         (c)   Is not a drug;
         (d)   Consists of servings that contain no more than five milligrams
of delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, 25 milligrams of cannabidoil, 25 milligrams of
cannabigerol, or any combination of those cannabinoids that does not exceed the
identified amounts;
         (e)   Does not contain more than a combined total of 0.5 milligrams of
all other cannabinoids per serving;
         (f)   Does not contain an artificially derived cannabinoid other than
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol;
         (g)   Does not contain a cannabinoid derived from cannabis plants or
cannabis flower; and
         (h)   Is a type of product approved for sale by the Office of Cannabis
Management or is substantially similar to a product approved by that office,
including but not limited to products that resemble nonalcoholic beverages,
candy, and baked goods.
      HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCT. A product intended for human or animal
consumption, does not contain cannabis flower or cannabis concentrate, and:
         (a)   Contains or consists of hemp plant parts; or
         (b)   Contains hemp concentrate or artificially derived cannabinoids
in combination with other ingredients.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental
unit and private property that is regularly and frequently open to or made
available for use by the public in sufficient numbers to give clear notice of
the property’s current dedication to public use but does not include: a
person’s dwelling house or premises, including the person’s curtilage or yard;
private property not generally accessible by the public, unless the person is
explicitly prohibited from consuming cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-
potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products on the property by the
owner of the property; or the premises of an establishment or event licensed to
permit on-site consumption.
   (B)   Prohibited activity. No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower- potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived consumer products, or
certain cannabinoid products in a public place.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor
punishable to the maximum extent authorized in M.S. §§ 412.231 and 609.0332.
(Ord. 20230817-01, passed 8-17-23)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of this section may
be adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to the dispositional
alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as amended.
      (2)   Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced up to the maximum penalty
authorized by state law for a misdemeanor.
      (3)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section
that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
   
151.   ZONING
   
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
   
153.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
   
154.   DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 151. ZONING
Section
Division 01: Introductory Provisions
Part 1. Authority
   
151.01.11   Purpose
   
151.01.12   Title
   
151.01.13   Applicability and effect of chapter
   
151.01.14   Effective date and authority to adopt
   
151.01.15   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.01.16   Severability and non liability
Part 2. Administration
   
151.01.21   Administrative Officer
   
151.01.22   Zoning Administrator
Part 3. Interpretation
   
151.01.31   Relationship to Comprehensive Plan
   
151.01.32   Conflicting regulations or provisions
   
151.01.33   Use of graphics, illustrations, figures, photos, and cross-
references
Part 4. Nonconformities
   
151.01.41   Purpose and intent
   
151.01.42   Continuation rights
   
151.01.43   Maintenance and alterations
   
151.01.44   Expansion
   
151.01.45   Restoration
   
151.01.46   Change in use
   
151.01.47   Discontinuance
Part 5. Establishment of Districts
   
151.01.51   Establishment of zoning districts
   
151.01.52   Official Zoning Map
   
151.01.53   District boundaries
   
151.01.54   Annexation and detachment
Division 02: Base Zoning Districts
Part 1. General Provisions
   
151.02.11   Purpose statements
Part 2. Uses
   
151.02.21   General provisions
   
151.02.22   Principal uses table
   
151.02.23   Accessory uses table
Part 3. Lot and Site Dimensions
   
151.02.31   General provisions
   
151.02.32   Lot dimension standards
   
151.02.33   Site dimensions
Part 4. District Standards
   
151.02.41   Central Business District
Division 03: Overlay Districts
Part 1. Planned Unit Development District
   
151.03.11   Purpose
   
151.03.12   Classifications; permitted uses
   
151.03.13   Development standards
   
151.03.14   PUDs in shoreland areas
Part 2. Shoreland Overlay District
   
151.03.21   General provisions
   
151.03.22   Requirements for sewered and unsewered areas
   
151.03.23   Shoreland alterations
   
151.03.24   Roads, driveways, and parking areas
   
151.03.25   Docks, lifts, and other mooring structures or facilities
   
151.03.26   Use standards
   
151.03.27   Public and private utilities
   
151.03.28   Subdivisions
   
151.03.29   Administration and enforcement
Part 3. Floodplain Overlay District
   
151.03.31   General provisions
   
151.03.32   Floodway Overlay District (FW)
   
151.03.33   Flood Fringe Overlay District (FF)
   
151.03.34   General Floodplain Overlay District (GF)
   
151.03.35   Subdivisions
   
151.03.36   Utilities, railroads, roads, and bridges
   
151.03.37   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles
   
151.03.38   Nonconforming uses
   
151.03.39   Administration and enforcement
Division 04: Development Standards
Part 1. General Provisions
   
151.04.11   Building restrictions
Part 2. Parking and Loading
   
151.04.21   General provisions
   
151.04.22   Stall, aisle, and driveway design
   
151.04.23   Standards for parking lots with five or more spaces
   
151.04.24   Number of required spaces
   
151.04.25   Joint facilities
   
151.04.26   Off-lot parking
   
151.04.27   Loading facilities
Part 3. Fencing and Screening
   
151.04.31   General fencing/wall provisions
   
151.04.32   Fence placement
   
151.04.33   Fence height
   
151.04.34   Fence material
   
151.04.35   Retaining walls
   
151.04.36   Screening
Part 4. Landscaping
   
151.04.41   General provisions
   
151.04.42   Off-street parking area landscaping
Part 5. Tree Preservation
   
151.04.51   Purpose
   
151.04.52   Scope
   
151.04.53   Process
   
151.04.54   Tree protection measures
   
151.04.55   Allowable tree removal
   
151.04.56   Required reforestation
   
151.04.57   Desirable species
   
151.04.58   Tree replacement
Part 6. Lighting
   
151.04.61   General provisions
   
151.04.62   Specific standards
   
151.04.63   Exceptions
Division 05: Use-Specific Standards
Part 1. Principal Uses – Residential, Family Living
   
151.05.11   Dwelling, single-family detached
   
151.05.12   Dwelling, manufactured home
   
151.05.13   Dwelling, attached (twinhome, townhouse, or rowhouse)
   
151.05.14   Dwelling, apartment
   
151.05.15   Dwelling, apartment mixed use
   
151.05.16   Dwelling, live/work
   
151.05.17   Dwelling, apartment with residential support services
   
151.05.18   Cottage courtyard development
   
151.05.19   Manufactured home park
Part 2. Principal Uses – Residential, Group Living
   
151.05.21   Bed and breakfast facility
Part 3. Principal Uses – Commercial
   
151.05.31   Adult oriented entertainment business
   
151.05.32   Animal boarding, shelter, or daycare center
   
151.05.33   Child care center
   
151.05.34   Marina, commercial
   
151.05.35   Outdoor recreational facility, commercial
   
151.05.36   Storage facility, personal
   
151.05.37   Cannabis retail business
   
151.05.38   Lower-potency hemp edible retail
Part 4. Principal Uses – Industrial
   
151.05.41   Open and outdoor storage
Part 5. Accessory Uses, A-M
   
151.05.51   Accessory dwelling units (ADUs)
   
151.05.52   Accessory structures
   
151.05.53   Antennas and support structures
   
151.05.54   Child care
   
151.05.55   Drive-through establishment
   
151.05.56   Home occupations
   
151.05.57   Keeping of bees
   
151.05.58   Keeping of chickens
   
151.05.59   Membrane structure
Part 6. Accessory Uses, N-Z
   
151.05.61   Open and outdoor storage, sales, service, and rental
   
151.05.62   Outdoor dining
   
151.05.63   Outdoor parking or seasonal storage of recreational vehicles
   
151.05.64   Short term vacation rental
   
151.05.65   Small-scale solar energy generation system
   
151.05.66   Small-scale wind energy conversion system (SWECS)
   
151.05.67   Swimming pools
Division 06: Procedures
Part 1. General Provisions
   
151.06.11   Common procedures and requirements
   
151.06.12   Site plan permit
   
151.06.13   Variance
   
151.06.14   Conditional use permit
   
151.06.15   Interim use permit
   
151.06.16   Zoning Code or Map amendment
   
151.06.17   Establishment of a planned unit development (PUD)
   
151.06.18   Amendment to a PUD
   
151.06.19   Appeal of Zoning Code interpretation
Part 2. Impact Study
   
151.06.21   Traffic
Division 07: Signage
Part 1. General Provisions
   
151.07.11   Purpose
   
151.07.12   Definitions
   
151.07.13   Prohibited signs
   
151.07.14   Exempt signs
   
151.07.15   Temporary signs
   
151.07.16   Permitted signs
   
151.07.17   General requirements
DIVISION 01: INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
PART 1. AUTHORITY
§ 151.01.11 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted for the purpose of:
   (A)   Protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
community;
   (B)   Conserving and protecting property and property values;
   (C)   Securing the most appropriate use of land;
   (D)   Facilitating adequate and economical provisions for public
improvements;
   (E)   Implementing the Comprehensive Plan; and
   (F)   Providing a method of administration and to prescribe penalties for
violation of provisions hereafter described.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.12 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “City Zoning Chapter,” except as referred
to herein, where it shall be known as “this chapter.”
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.13 APPLICABILITY AND EFFECT OF CHAPTER.
   Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises
shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof or other structure
shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered,
except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located, such regulations including, but not limited to, the
following:
   (A)   The use of buildings, structures or land, including performance
standards for the control of any "dangerous and objectionable elements", as
defined in this chapter, in connection with such use; the height, size,
dimensions of buildings or structures, the size or dimensions of lots, yards
and other open spaces surrounding buildings;
   (B)   The provision, location, size, improvement and operation of off-street
parking, loading and unloading spaces.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.14 EFFECTIVE DATE AND AUTHORITY TO ADOPT.
   (A)   The effective date of this chapter is January 20, 2022. This chapter
hereby supersedes and replaces in its entirety,
Chapter 154 of the Lindstrom, Minnesota Code on the effective date hereof.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development plans
(general, revised, or final) filed on or after January 20, 2022. Plans on file
before January 20, 2022 shall be reviewed for compliance with the Zoning
Chapter effective at the time of filing.
      (2)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all permits filed on
or after January 20, 2022. Permit applications on file before January 20, 2022
shall be reviewed for compliance with the Zoning Chapter effective at the time
of filing.
   (B)   The authority to adopt this chapter within the City of Lindstrom is
derived from M.S. Chapter 462, including but not limited to M.S. §§ 462.357 and
462.358, as well as other applicable state statutes and rules. Whenever the
charter or other applicable state laws or rules referenced in this chapter have
been amended or superseded, this chapter shall also be considered amended
accordingly.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.15 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. However, whenever this chapter imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.16 SEVERABILITY AND NON LIABILITY.
   (A)   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
   (B)   If any application of this chapter to a particular structure, land, or
water is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other structure,
land, or water not specifically included in said judgment.
   (C)   The city does not guarantee, warrant, or represent that only those
areas designated as flood lands will be subject to periodic inundation and
hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the City of Lindstrom,
its agencies, or employees for any flood damages, sanitation problems, or
structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.01.21 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator
who shall be appointed by the Council. The Zoning Administrator may delegate
specific responsibility to any individual city employee, but shall remain
responsible for all decisions made by those employees.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.22 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall administer, interpret,
and enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall perform the following
duties:
   (A)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including but
not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional uses, variances, appeals, and
applications therefore; and
   (B)   Institute, in the name of the city, any appropriate actions or
proceedings against a violator, as provided by law.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 3. INTERPRETATION
§ 151.01.31 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Lindstrom or “Comprehensive Plan,”
including amendments adopted by the City Council, is the guiding policy
document for the city. A primary intent of this chapter is to implement the
policies, goals and actions of the Comprehensive Plan while remaining
consistent with all applicable requirements of federal and state laws.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.32 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS OR PROVISIONS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Wherever this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or
by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter
shall govern except as otherwise provided in state statutes or rules.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.33 USE OF GRAPHICS, ILLUSTRATIONS, FIGURES, PHOTOS, AND CROSS-
REFERENCES.
   (A)   Graphics, illustrations, figures, and photos are provided for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as regulations. Where a
conflict may occur between the text and any graphic, illustration, figure, or
photo, the text shall control.
   (B)   In some instances, cross-references between chapters, divisions,
parts, sections, and subsections are provided that include the chapter,
division, part, section, or subsection number along with the name of the
reference. Where a conflict may occur between the given cross-reference number
and name, the name shall control.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 4. NONCONFORMITIES
§ 151.01.41 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify those requirements,
circumstances and conditions under which nonconforming buildings, structures
and uses will be operated and maintained.
   (B)   This chapter establishes separate districts, each of which is an
appropriate area for the location of uses which are permitted in that district.
It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of these districts that
nonconforming buildings, structures and uses not be permitted to continue
without restriction.
   (C)   Furthermore, it is the intention of this section that all
nonconforming uses shall be eventually brought into conformity.
   (D)   All nonconforming water supply, sewage disposal and waste treatment
facilities and systems located within the Shoreland Overlay District shall be
brought into conformance with the provisions hereof.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.42 CONTINUATION RIGHTS.
   (A)   Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this
chapter shall not be enlarged, but may be continued at the size and in the
manner of operation existing upon the date, except as hereinafter specified or
subsequently amended.
   (B)   Any proposed structure which will, under this chapter, become
nonconforming but for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior
to the effective date of this chapter, may be completed in accordance with the
approved plans, provided construction is started within 60 days of the
effective date of this chapter. The structure and use shall thereafter be a
legally nonconforming structure and use.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.43 MAINTENANCE AND ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   Normal maintenance and alteration of a building or other lawful
nonconforming use is permitted through the building permit process provided:
      (1)   The alterations do not expand the foundation and/or building
volume, unless specifically allowed by this chapter;
      (2)   The alterations do not increase the building occupancy capacity or
parking demand; and
      (3)   The alteration does not increase the nonconformity of the building
or the use.
   (B)   Alterations may be made to a building or other lawful nonconforming
residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they
will not increase the number of dwelling units or size or volume of the
building.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the placing of a structure in
safe condition when the structure is declared unsafe by the Zoning
Administrator providing the necessary repairs shall not constitute more than
50% of fair market value of the structure. The value shall be determined by the
County Assessor.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.44 EXPANSION.
   No nonconforming building, structure or use shall be moved to another lot or
to any other part of the parcel upon which the same was constructed or was
constructed at the time of this chapter adoption unless the movement shall
bring the nonconformance into compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.45 RESTORATION.
   (A)   Any legal, non-conforming building or structure which has been damaged
by fire or other peril to the extent of more than 50% of its fair market value,
as determined by the County Assessor, shall not be restored, except in
conformity with the regulations of this chapter, and as specifically provided
in subsection (B) of this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or state statutes, any
nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises
existing at the time of the adoption of an additional control under this
chapter, may be continued, including through repair, replacement, restoration,
maintenance, or improvement, but not including expansion, unless:
      (1)   The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more
than one year.
      (2)   The nonconforming use or building is destroyed by fire or other
peril to the extent of greater than 50% of its estimated market value, as
indicated in the records of the County Assessor at the time of damage, and no
building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is
damaged.
   (C)   Any subsequent use, building or structure not meeting the standards
established in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall be only occupied
in a conforming manner.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.46 CHANGE IN USE.
   (A)   A lawful nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be
changed to lessen the nonconformity of use. Once a nonconforming structure or
parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter be so altered to
increase the nonconformity.
   (B)   When any lawful nonconforming use of a structure or land in any
district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be
changed to any nonconforming use.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.47 DISCONTINUANCE.
   Whenever a lawful nonconforming use of a structure or land is discontinued
for a period of one year, any future use of the structure or land shall be made
to conform with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 5. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
§ 151.01.51 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The following base zoning districts are established within the city:
      (1)   A-O, Agriculture-Open Space District;
      (2)   R-1, Low Density Detached Residential District;
      (3)   R-2, Low Density Attached and Detached Residential District;
      (4)   R-3, Mixed Density Residential District;
      (5)   R-4, Medium/High Density Residential District;
      (6)   R-M, Manufactured Home Park District;
      (7)   CBD, Central Business District;
      (8)   B-1, General Business District;
      (9)   B-2, Business Park District;
      (10)   I-1, Industrial District; and
      (11)   D-H, Development Holding District.
   (B)   The following overlay zoning districts are established within the
city:
      (1)   PUD Planned Unit Development District;
      (2)   S, Shoreland Overlay District; and
      (3)   F, Floodplain Overlay District.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.52 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The effective date of the Official Zoning Map is January 20, 2022.
This map hereby supersedes and replaces in its entirety the former zoning map
for the City of Lindstrom on the effective date hereof.
   (B)   The City of Lindstrom is hereby divided into zoning districts as shown
upon a map designated as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Lindstrom as
may be updated periodically and all applicable amendments thereto and made a
part of this chapter.
   (C)   The Official Zoning Map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and shall have the same
force and effect as if the matters and information set forth by said Map were
fully described herein.
   (D)   The Official Zoning Map shall be properly attested and kept on file
along with the text of this chapter in the office of the Zoning Administrator
of the City of Lindstrom.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.53 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The district boundaries shall be determined by measurement from and as
shown on the Zoning Map, and in case of any questions as to the interpretation
of such boundary lines, the Planning Commission shall interpret the map
according to the reasonable intent of this chapter.
   (B)   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Boundaries indicated, as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
      (2)   Boundaries indicated, as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed to following such lot lines.
      (3)   Boundaries indicated, as approximately following city boundaries
shall be construed as following municipal boundaries.
      (4)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
      (5)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in the preceding shall be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the Zoning Map shall be the scale of the map.
   (C)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in a single
ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the extension of the
regulations for either portion of the lot beyond the district line into the
remaining portion of the lot may be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator
upon request of the owner.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.01.54 ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT.
   (A)   In the event of changes in the city limits by removing territory from
the city, district boundaries shall be construed as moving with the city
limits.
   (B)   Annexations of new areas to the city subsequent to the effective date
of this chapter shall be placed in the D-H Development Holding District at the
time of annexation.
      (1)   No building permits shall be issued for parcels within the D-
H District.
      (2)   Any development occurring on these parcels shall occur subsequent
to rezoning the land out of the D-H District and shall follow all requirements
of the new district.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 02: BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.02.11 PURPOSE STATEMENTS.
   The following are the purpose statements for each of the city’s base zoning
districts:
   (A)   R-1, Low Density Detached Residential District. The purpose of the R-
1 District is to provide for the preservation of existing single-family
residential neighborhoods. This district is intended to apply to areas of
existing single-family development and is not meant to be expanded further.
   (B)   R-2, Low Density Attached and Detached Residential District. The
purpose of the R-2 District is to support a mixture of detached and attached
single-family dwellings, as well as smaller multiple-family buildings. This
district is intended to be located in existing residential areas near downtown
and in areas of potential infill and redevelopment throughout the city to serve
as a transition between higher density residential and/or commercial districts
and lower density residential neighborhoods. Neighborhoods in this district are
generally expected to be more dense than those found in the R-1 District and
should be characterized by a walkable grid or connected street pattern, a range
of housing types, and convenient access to goods and services.
   (C)   R-3, Mixed Density Residential District. The purpose of the R-
3 District is to encourage the creation of residential neighborhoods with a
mixture of residential uses including single-family detached and attached
dwellings, attached townhouses and rowhouses, and multiple-family buildings.
This district is intended to be located in new development areas of the city
where public sewer and water are available. It is intended that the overall
density of a residential development will meet the underlying Comprehensive
Plan designation. Neighborhoods should be designed with a connected street
pattern, range of housing types, and interspersed parks and green spaces.
   (D)   R-4, Medium/High Density Residential District. The purpose of the R-
4 District is to accommodate a variety of medium to high density housing types
including townhouses, apartments, and senior housing to meet the diverse and
evolving housing needs of Lindstrom. Developments within this district should
be walkable and should provide convenient access to goods and services.
   (E)   RM, Manufactured Home Park District. The purpose of the R-M District
is to provide for manufactured home uses in an appropriate, safe, sanitary and
attractive environment.
   (F)   CBD, Central Business District. The purpose of the CBD District is to
provide for the establishment of a downtown which stresses the interaction of
people and businesses within a compact central area. This district should
contain a mix of cultural, civic, entertainment, residential, retail, service,
and office uses. Consideration for pedestrian and bicycle access shall be
integrated.
   (G)   B-1, General Business District. The B-1 District is intended for
retail and service-oriented businesses which are oriented toward motorists and
rely on higher volumes of traffic.
   (H)   B-2, Business Park District. The B-2 District is intended to provide
accessible opportunities near transportation corridors for industries that may
benefit from the accommodation of both office and light industrial uses on-
site. Uses in this district are limited to those that are compatible with lower
intensity residential and business uses and which have limited amounts of truck
traffic in comparison to higher intensity industrial uses.
   (I)   I-1, Industrial District. The purpose of the I-1 District is to
provide for industrial, manufacturing, and warehouse uses.
   (J)   AO, Agriculture Open Space. The AO District is intended to provide a
district which will allow suitable areas of the city to be retained and
utilized in open space, parks, recreational, and/or agricultural uses and
prevent scattered non-farm uses from developing improperly.
   (K)   DH, Development Holding. The DH District is intended to be a holding
district for those parcels which are annexed into the city where existing uses
may continue without changes. At the time of annexation, parcels will be zoned
DH unless special action is taken to place it in another district. A parcel
will be rezoned from DH to the appropriate city zoning district at the time of
development following review and approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. USES
§ 151.02.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   In any district, whenever a use is neither specifically permitted nor
denied, the use shall be considered prohibited, except in the CBD, B-1, and B-
2 Districts. In the CBD, B-1, and B-2 Districts, the Zoning Administrator may
determine that a proposed use is very similar to any allowed use in that
district. In such case, the proposed use shall be allowed in the CBD, B-1, or
B-2 District. If the proposed use is either not an allowed use or is not very
similar to an allowed use in the CBD, B-1, or B-2 Districts, the Council or the
Planning Commission, on their own initiative or upon request, may conduct a
study to determine if the use is acceptable and if so what zoning district
would be most appropriate and the determination as to conditions and standards
relating to development of the use. The Council, Planning Commission or
property owner shall, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to this chapter to
provide for the particular use under consideration or shall find that the use
is not compatible for development within the city.
   (B)   When a property is located within the boundaries of one or more
overlay districts, the most restrictive use provision among the overlay and
base zoning districts shall apply.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.02.22 PRINCIPAL USES TABLE.
   (A)   
Table 151.02.01 lists land uses and indicates whether they are permitted,
permitted with standards, conditional, or prohibited. The table also includes
references to whether additional use specific standards are applicable to that
use. The following definitions shall be referenced when using
Table 151.02.01:
      (1)   Permitted uses – a “P” in a cell of the use table indicates that
the land use is allowed by right in the base zoning district.
      (2)   Permitted with standards uses – a “PS” in a cell of the use table
indicates that the land use is allowed when standards identified in
Division 151.05 Use-Specific Standards are met. Uses permitted with standards
are also subject to all other applicable requirements of this chapter. Any
request to vary from the standards set forth for a permitted with standards use
shall be processed as a variance.
      (3)   Conditional uses – a “C” in a cell of the use table indicates that
the land use is allowed in the base zoning district only upon approval of a
conditional use permit as described in
Division 151.06 Procedures and in compliance with any use-specific standards
identified in
Division 151.05 Use-Specific Standards. Uses subject to a conditional use
permit are also subject to all other applicable requirements in the City Code.
      (4)   Prohibited uses – a blank cell in the use table indicates that the
land use is prohibited in that base zoning district.
   (B)   Table 151.02.01 Principal Uses Table.
Principal Use Zoning District
              R-1 R-2 R- 3 R- 4 RM CB D B-1 B-2 I-1 A- O D- H
Principal Use                   Zoning District
                                R-1 R-2 R- 3 R- 4 RM CB D B-1 B-2 I-1 A- O D- H
Residential
Family Living
Dwelling, single-family         PS  PS  PS                            P    P
detached
Dwelling, manufactured home     PS  PS  PS        P                   P    P
Dwelling, twinhome                  PS  PS
Dwelling, existing single-                   P    P  P    P   P       P    P
family detached
Dwelling, two- to four-family       P   P
Dwelling, conversion to two-,       P
three-, or four-family
Cottage courtyard development           PS   PS
Dwelling, attached townhouses       PS  PS   PS
or rowhouses
Dwelling, apartment (5 or more          PS   PS      PS
units)
Dwelling, apartment mixed use                        PS
Dwelling, live/work                          C       PS
Dwelling, apartment with                PS   P       PS
residential support services
Manufactured home park              C   C    C    P
Group Living
Assisted living facility                     P
Long-term or transitional care               P
facility
Continuing care senior facility              P
Residential care, licensed in-  P   P   P
home (6 or fewer persons)
Residential care, licensed in-          P    P       P
home (7 to 16 persons)
Lodging
Bed and breakfast                   P   P            PS   PS
Hotel                                                P    P
Motel                                                     P
Public, Social, or Health Care
Cemetery                        P   P   P            P    P           P
Child care center                                    PS   PS
Clinic and offices, including                             P   P
medical, dental or therapeutic
Club, lodge, or meeting place   P   P   P            P    P
of a non-commercial nature
Funeral home or mortuary                                  P
Hospital                                                  P
Municipal, county, state or
federal administrative or                            P    P           P
services building
Municipal social, cultural, or  P   P   P            P    P           P
recreational facility
Place of worship                P   P   P                 P
School, college/university/                               P
trade/business
School, elementary or secondary P   P   P                 P
Commercial
Food or Beverage Services
Bar or drinking place                                P    P
Brewpub                                              P    P
Restaurants                                          P    P
Specialty food or coffee shop                        P    P
Retail Sales or Services
Animal boarding, shelter or                                           C
daycare center
Animal/veterinary clinic or                               P
hospital
Automobile fueling and service                       P    P
station
Automobile repair and service,                            P
minor
Automobile repair and service,                                    P
major
Automobile sales, leasing and                             P
service
Auto-related retail                                       P
establishments
Cannabis retail business                                  PS      PS
Commercial center                                    P    P
Lower-potency hemp edible                            PS   PS      PS
retail
Retail with office above street                      P
level
Retail with residential above                        P
street level
Standalone store, retail or                          P    P
service
Storage facility, personal                                C   C   P
Business & Technical Services
Professional offices                                 P    P   P
Studio or gallery                                    P    P
Industrial
Brewery, winery or distillery                        P    P   P   P
Cannabis manufacturing                                            P
Construction contractor yard                                      P
Lower-potency hemp edible                                         P
manufacturing
Manufacturing, heavy                                              PS
Manufacturing, light                                          P   P
Scrap or salvage storage yard                                     C
Storage and sale of machinery                                     P
and equipment
Warehouse and distribution                                        P
facility
Wholesale trade establishment                                     P
Arts, Entertainment or
Recreation
Adult oriented entertainment                                      C
business
Indoor recreational facility,                             P
commercial
Indoor recreational facility,   P   P   P                 P
public
Marina, commercial                                   C    C
Marina, public                                                        P
Outdoor recreational facility,                            P           PS
commercial
Outdoor recreational facility,  P   P   P                 P           P
public
Park or playground              P   P   P    P       P    P           P
Theater, dance or music                              P
performance facility
Natural Resources & Agriculture
Agriculture - raising of crops                                        P    P
Agriculture - raising of                                              P    P
livestock
Cannabis cultivation                                                  P
Commercial greenhouse, nursery,                           P           P    P
or tree farm
General agricultural uses, not                                        P    P
including feed lots
Utilities & Transportation
Ambulance or medical carrier                              P       P
service
Essential services              P   P   P    P    P  P    P   P   P   P    P
Parking facility                                     P    P   P
Public works facility                                             P
Telecommunication structure or                       P    P   P   P   P
tower
Miscellaneous
Structures combining
residential and nonresidential                       P
uses
 
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20241120-02, passed 11-20-24)
§ 151.02.23 ACCESSORY USES TABLE.
   (A)   
Table 151.02.02 lists accessory uses and indicates whether they are permitted
or permitted with standards. The table also includes references to whether
additional use specific standards are applicable to that use. The following
definitions shall be referenced when using
Table 151.02.02.
      (1)   Permitted uses – a “P” in a cell of the use table indicates that
the accessory land use is allowed by right in the base zoning district.
      (2)   Permitted with standards use – a “PS” in a cell of the use table
indicates that the accessory land use is allowed when standards identified in
Division 151.05 Use-Specific Standards are met. Uses permitted with standards
are also subject to all other applicable requirements of the City Code.
      (3)   Conditional uses – a “C” in a cell of the use table indicates that
the land use is allowed in the base zoning district only upon approval of a
conditional use permit as described in
Division 151.06 Procedures and in compliance with any use-specific standards
identified in
Division 151.05 Use-Specific Standards. Uses subject to a conditional use
permit are also subject to all other applicable requirements in the City Code.
      (4)   Prohibited uses – a blank cell in the use table indicates that the
accessory land use is prohibited in that base zoning district.
   (B)   Table 151.02.02 Accessory Uses Table.
Accessory Use Zoning District
              R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM CB D B- 1 B-2 I-1 A- O D- H
Accessory Use                   Zoning District
                                R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RM CB D B- 1 B-2 I-1 A- O D- H
Accessory dwelling unit         PS  PS  PS
Accessory structure             PS  PS  PS  PS  PS PS   PS   PS  PS  PS   PS
Antenna and support structure   PS  PS  PS  PS  PS PS   PS   PS  PS  PS   PS
Child care, family              PS  PS  PS
Child care, group family        PS  PS  PS
Community garden                P   P   P          P    P            P
Drive-through establishment                        PS   PS
Home occupation                 PS  PS  PS  PS  PS      PS
Keeping of bees                 PS  PS  PS  PS  PS PS   PS   PS  PS  PS   PS
Keeping of chickens             PS  PS  PS                           PS   PS
Membrane structure              PS  PS  PS      PS               PS  PS   PS
Non-commercial, agricultural-                                        P    P
type accessory structures
Off-street parking and loading      P   P   P   P  P    P    P   P
facilities
Open and outdoor storage                                         C
Open and outdoor sales, service                                  I   I    I
and rental as an accessory use
Outside parking or seasonal
storage of recreational travel  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS
vehicles
Piers and docks                 P   P   P          P    P    P   P
Short term vacation rental      PS  PS  PS  PS     PS                PS   PS
Small-scale solar energy        PS  PS  PS  PS  PS PS   PS   PS  PS  PS   PS
generation system
Small-scale wind energy                                              PS
generation system
Swimming pools, tennis courts
and other recreational          PS  PS  PS  PS  PS PS               PS   PS
facilities
 
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20230615-01, passed 6-15-23)
PART 3. LOT AND SITE DIMENSIONS
§ 151.02.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Lot of record.
      (1)   A lot of record existing July 1, 1987 which does not meet the
minimum area or lot width requirements of this chapter, may be utilized
providing that the measurements of the area or width are within 70% of the
requirements of this chapter. This provision shall not apply to a lot of record
in the Shoreland Overlay District, for which M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 1e shall
apply.
      (2)   However, if in a group of two or more contiguous lots of record
under a single ownership, any individual lot does not meet the minimum lot area
or width requirements of this chapter, the individual lot cannot be considered
as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or development, but must
be combined with adjacent lots under the same ownership so that the
combinations of lots will equal one or more parcels of land each meeting the
lot width or area requirements of this chapter. This provision shall not apply
to a group of two or more contiguous lots of record under a common ownership in
the Shoreland Overlay District, for which M.S. § 462.357, subd. 1e shall apply.
      (3)   A lot of record in a residential district which is not within the
70% of the area and width requirements of this chapter and is not located
contiguous to lots under a single and same ownership, may have a single-family
detached dwelling and accessory buildings constructed without a variance
provided the use complies with all other requirements of the City Code,
including but not limited to setbacks and impervious surface requirements. This
provision shall not apply to a lot of record in the Shoreland Overlay District,
for which M.S. § 462.357, subd. 1e shall apply.
   (B)   Impervious surface.
      (1)   In an effort to reduce the quantity and improve the quality of
runoff in all areas of the city, no lot shall be covered by more than 50%
impervious surface.
         (a)   In residential districts, properties may use pervious pavers to
meet impervious surface requirements if approved by the City Council through a
variance process in accordance with the city pervious paver policy, which shall
be incorporated herein.
         (b)   This standard shall not apply to uses in the CBD, B-1, B-2, and
I-1 Districts if the proposed use either causes no increase in surface water
discharge or if all discharges are accommodated by a surface water management
system or program approved by the city.
         (c)   Properties located within the Shoreland District shall be
subject to impervious surface limits as specified in §
151.03.22.
      (2)   Pervious pavers. Any use of pervious pavers or pavement shall only
be allowed on residential properties in accordance with the pervious paver
policy adopted by the City Council, commercial properties, and industrial
properties under the following conditions:
         (a)   All pervious pavers must be designed and professionally
installed in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications.
         (b)   Pervious paver installations must be certified by the contractor
when complete and shall be subject to the city’s approval. After the first year
(365 days from the date of the first certification), the pervious pavers must
be recertified every three years or any time the property is sold or
transferred to a new owner in order to ensure that the pervious pavers are
being properly maintained.
         (c)   All pervious pavers or pavement must be properly maintained. The
owner of the property shall be required to provide the city with a maintenance
plan to ensure that the use of the pervious pavers or pavement conforms to the
manufacturer’s guidelines. The maintenance plan shall include the frequency and
type of maintenance that must be performed to properly maintain the pervious
pavers or pavement.
      (3)   Certification process. Each property using pervious pavers to meet
impervious surface requirements through a variance is required to maintain an
active certification with the city as outlined above. The certification and
recertification process is described below:
         (a)   All installations require at least one observation port made
from a perforated pipe (preferably PVC) wrapped in fabric that allows water to
enter from the underlying storage layer (sand or gravel).
         (b)   After the installation is complete, the designer/installer shall
perform a simulated infiltration test on the pervious pavers or pavement by
running a water hose across the surface for a 15-minute period. The city staff
shall observe this process and record the length of time it takes for water to
reach the observation port. If the water shows up with an allowable variance
from the original installation (original time plus 25%), then it passes.
Alternatively, the city, in its discretion, may use the manufacturer’s
recommended standards or verification process to determine if the pervious
pavers or pavement may be certified.
         (c)   After three years, the property owner shall conduct the same 15
minute saturation test and measure how long it takes water to enter the
observation port. If the water shows up with an allowable variance from the
original installation (original time plus 25%), then it passes, and another
certification is conducted in three years. Each recertification must pass the
saturation test with original time plus 25%. If it does not pass, then the
surface must be rehabilitated (i.e. cleaned/vacuumed) based on the
manufacturer’s recommendations, then rechecked upon completion of
rehabilitation. Alternatively, the city, in its discretion, may use the
manufacturer’s recommended standards or verification process to determine if
the pervious pavers or pavement may be certified. Subsequently, the property
must be recertified one year from the date that the pervious pavers or pavement
were rehabilitated. Thereafter, if the property passes the inspection, the
property shall be recertified three years from the date of that inspection.
         (d)   Notwithstanding the certification schedule described above,
pervious pavers or pavement must be recertified any time the property is sold
or transferred to a new owner.
      (4)   Administrative penalty. Any person who violates any provision of
this section or fails to certify or recertify pervious pavers or pavement shall
face a presumptive administrative civil penalty of $100 for a first violation,
$300 for second violation, and $500 for each violation thereafter. Appeals of
an administrative civil penalty issued pursuant to this section shall be heard
in accordance with the procedure set forth in §
10.98 of this code.
      (5)   Other penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section or fails to certify or recertify pervious pavers or pavement is guilty
of a misdemeanor offense and upon conviction shall be according to the
Minnesota Statute for misdemeanor offenses. The imposition of an administrative
penalty does not prevent the city from exercising its discretion to initiate
criminal charges or civil court actions.
   (C)   Story calculations. The following standards shall apply for all
apartment, mixed-use, and non-residential structures in the R-3, R-4, and CBD
Districts:
      (1)   Ground floor height must be no less than 12 feet.
      (2)   Ground floor height is limited to 20 feet, above which it counts as
an additional story.
      (3)   Stories above the ground floor are limited to 14 feet in height.
Figure 151.02.01. Building Story Height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2261.png]
 
   (D)   Principal structures.
      (1)   Only one principal structure shall be located, erected, or moved
onto a lot in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Zoning Districts.
      (2)   More than one principal structure shall be allowed on a lot for
manufactured home park, medium density residential, medium/high density
residential, business, industrial, and planned unit development uses as long
as:
         (a)   The use specific standards and the standards of the applicable
zoning district can be met.
         (b)   A minimum separation of 10 feet per building is maintained.
         (c)   Individual buildings are not sold independently.
         (d)   Any future subdivision can only occur if setbacks of the zoning
district can be met and easements established as needed.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20230216-01, passed 2-16-23; Am.
Ord. 20240515-01, passed 5-15-24)
§ 151.02.32 LOT DIMENSION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The minimum area and lot width requirements to be allowed for in each
zoning district shall be listed in the table below:
   (B)   Table 151.02.03 Lot Dimensions.
District Lot Area (square feet) Lot Width (feet)
District                         Lot Area (square feet)     Lot Width (feet)
R-1                                                         
Dwelling, single-family detached 12,000                     100
Dwelling, manufactured home      12,000                     100
R-2                                                         
Dwelling, single-family detached 10,000                     70
Dwelling, manufactured home      10,000                     70
Dwelling, twinhome               8,000 for entire structure 55 per unit
Dwelling, two- to four-family    4,500 per unit             75
Dwelling, attached townhouses or 3,500 per unit             26 per unit
rowhouses
R-3                                                         
Dwelling, single-family detached Average of 8,000           55
                                 Minimum of 5,500
Dwelling, manufactured home      Average of 8,000           55
                                 Minimum of 5,500
Dwelling, twinhome               6,500 for entire structure 50 per unit
Dwelling, two- to four-family    4,000 per unit             65
Cottage courtyard development    15,000 per development     100 per development
Dwelling, attached townhouses or 3,500 per unit             26 per unit
rowhouses
Dwelling, apartment (5 or more   3,000 per unit             100
units)
R-4                                                         
Cottage courtyard development    15,000 per development     100 per development
Dwelling, attached townhouses or 3,500 per unit             26 per unit
rowhouses
Dwelling, apartment (5 or more   3,000 per unit             65
units)
Dwelling, apartment with         3,000 per unit             65
residential support services
Manufactured home park           1 acre                      
RM                                                          
Dwelling, manufactured home      10,000                     70
Manufactured home park           1 acre                      
CBD                                                         
All uses                         N/A                        N/A
B-1                                                         
All uses                         N/A                        N/A
B-2                                                         
All uses                         N/A                        N/A
I-1                                                         
All uses                         N/A                        N/A
AO                                                          
All uses                         2.5 acres                  350
DH                                                          
All uses                         N/A                        N/A
 
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20240515-01, passed 5-15-24)
§ 151.02.33 SITE DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to outline minimum yard, area and
building size requirements to be provided for each zoning district.
   (B)   Table 151.02.04 Site Dimensions.
District Setbacks (feet)                           Height
         Street Interior Side Corner Side Rear OHW
District Setbacks (feet)                           Height
         Street Interior Side Corner Side Rear OHW
RR       30     10            30          35   4   35 ft.
R-1      30     10            30          35   4   35 ft.
R-2      251    10            30          35   4   35 ft.
R-3      251    10/5/2        30          25   4   3 stories
R-4      30     10            30          35   4   4 stories
RM       30     20            30          20   4   25 ft.
CBD      See                                   3   3 stories
         151.02.41
B-1      20     10            30          20   3   35 ft.
B-2      0      0             30          0    3   50 ft.
I-1      20     10            30          20   3   35 ft.
AO       30     30            30          50   3   50 ft.
DH       Existing Conditions
1 – Setback for living area is 20 feet.
2 – Living area setback is 10 feet; garage setback is 5 feet.
3 –  A deck as defined under §
154.01.11 may have a setback of 20 feet from the rear lot line of the
subject lot; however, decks in the Shoreland Overlay District shall
follow the ordinary high water (OHW) setback standards.
4 - OHW setback is determined by lake type and availability of public
sewer facilities. See Table 151.02.05 below to determine OHW setback
distance. To determine lake type, see §
151.03.21.
 
   (C)   Table 151.02.05 OHW Setback.
 
Setback (feet) from Ordinary High Water Level (OHW)
Class of Public Waters1       Structures        Sewage Treatment System
                              Unsewered Sewered
General Development Lake      75        50      50
Recreational Development Lake 100       75      75
Natural Environment Lake      150       100     150
1 To determine lake type, see §
151.03.21.
 
   (D)   Yard.
      (1)   No lot, yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or
dimension so as to make the lot, yard or open space less than the minimum
required by this chapter, and if the existing yard or other open space as
existing is less than the minimum required it shall not be further reduced.
      (2)   The minimum yard setback distances in feet as indicated in
Table 151.02.04 shall be measured from the appropriate lot line. For lots in
the Shoreland District, the minimum setback from the ordinary high water level
as specified in
Table 151.02.05 shall also apply.
      (3)   On a lot fronting on two parallel streets, both street lines shall
be front lot lines for the purpose of applying the yard regulations of this
chapter.
      (4)   The following shall not be considered as encroachment into yard
setback requirements:
         (a)   Building eaves extending not more than two feet into the
required yard setback;
         (b)   Terraces, steps or similar features provided they do not extend
above the height of the principal structure or to a distance less than three
feet from any lot line;
         (c)   For riparian lots, piers, docks and boathouses; and
         (d)   Fences and screening devices in accordance with
Part 151.04.3 Fencing and Screening.
   (E)   Building height. The building height limits established shall not
apply to belfries, cupolas, domes, spires, monuments, flag poles, chimneys or
flues or structures erected to facilitate essential services.
   (F)   Building placement. All buildings shall be so placed so that they will
not obstruct future streets which may be constructed by the city in conformity
with existing streets and according to the system and standards employed by the
city.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20230420-01, passed 4-20-23; Am.
Ord. 20231221-02, passed 12-21-23; Am. Ord. 20240515-01, passed 5-15-24)
PART 4. DISTRICT STANDARDS
§ 151.02.41 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   The following standards shall apply to new development, redevelopment,
and building expansions greater than 50% of the floor area of an existing
building unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator or City Council.
      (1)   Buildings shall be set back no more than 15 feet from a street
property line. Rear and side property line setbacks shall be based on building
code requirements.
      (2)   Building street frontage.
         (a)   The minimum percentage of a lot street frontage that must be
occupied by a building façade, as measured in the area up to 15 feet from a
street property line, shall be 60%.
         (b)   For a corner lot, this requirement shall apply to one street
property line.
         (c)   Recesses in a building façade do not qualify as meeting the
minimum building street frontage standard.
Figure 151.02.02. Building Street Frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2271.png]
 
      (3)    Parking lot entrances and exits shall be located on streets other
than Highway 8.
      (4)    Building entrances.
         (a)    One or more prominent entries are required on any building
façade fronting on a public street, park, or plaza.
         (b)   Prominent entries should be designed with a canopy, portico,
arch, display windows, architectural molding, or other details to announce its
location.
      (5)   Horizontal building façade articulation.
         (a)   A building façade fronting on a public street, park, or plaza
shall have an architectural feature along the top of the ground story and along
the bottom of the top story.
         (b)   A horizontal architectural feature is composed of a decorative,
three-dimensional, horizontal element that projects out or is recessed in from
the exterior façade of a building at least two inches.
      (6)   Vertical building façade articulation.
         (a)   Any ground story façade fronting on a public street, park, or
plaza that exceeds 48 feet in width shall be visually divided into smaller
sections through articulation of the façade, every 48 feet at a minimum.
         (b)    For upper stories, façade articulation shall occur for façades
exceeding 72 feet in width on a public street, park, or plaza, every 72 feet at
a minimum.
         (c)   Articulation techniques include vertical recesses or projections
of the building façade, window bays, balconies, and changes in exterior
materials.
      (7)   Rooftop or ground mounted mechanical equipment and exterior trash
and recycling storage areas shall be screened or enclosed with materials
compatible with the principal structure.
      (8)   Exterior building materials.
         (a)   The standards of this section shall apply to the façades of all
new buildings, building additions, or building expansions.
         (b)   Exterior materials shall be divided into the following three
classes:
            1.   Class I shall be considered high-quality building materials
that are long-lasting and durable. These materials are considered
architecturally desirable and are designed for a typical life expectancy of 40
years of more. Class I materials include:
               a.   Full veneer fired clay brick masonry walls;
               b.   Thin veneer fired clay brick (adhered);
               c.   Full veneer natural stone;
               d.   Thin veneer, manufactured, or cast stone (adhered);
               e.   Architectural grade cementitious panel rainscreen systems;
               f.   Architectural grade ceramic panel rainscreen systems; and
               g.   Glass, bird-friendly glass, glass curtain wall, and/or
glass cladding systems.
            2.   Class II shall be considered standard building materials.
These materials are considered architecturally desirable and are designed for a
typical life expectancy of 20 years or more. Class II materials include:
               a.   Exterior grade finished wood;
               b.   Masonry stucco;
               c.   Metal wall panel systems (insulated or rainscreen
assemblies with hidden fasteners). This shall not include metal siding and
corrugated or ribbed metal sheets of any type;
               d.   Integrally colored textural concrete panels;
               e.   Integrally colored specialty concrete block, such as
textured, burnished block, or split-face block, or concrete brick; and
               f.   Fiber cement lap siding (residential applications).
            3.   Class III shall be considered lower-cost and trim grade
materials. These materials are considered aesthetically inappropriate as a
primary building material or are materials which are typically more prone to
damage or degradation of quality from weatherization resulting in a typical
life expectancy of less than 20 years. Class III materials include:
               a.   Vinyl siding or panels;
               b.   Painted wood;
               c.   Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS);
               d.   Corrugated or ribbed metal wall panels;
               e.   Smooth or scored concrete block;
               f.   Smooth concrete tilt-up panels;
               g.   Fiber cement lap siding or trim (commercial applications);
               h.   Translucent wall panel systems; and
               i.   Glass block.
         (c)   Front façades and façades facing a public right-of-way shall be
composed of at least 50% Class I materials and no more than 10% Class III
materials. Side and rear façades shall be composed of at least 40% Class I
materials and no more than 20% Class III materials.
         (d)   Each façade must utilize a minimum of two types of Class I
materials.
         (e)   Brick or stone exteriors shall not be painted.
         (f)   Exterior building material regulations shall not apply to
single-family homes located within the Central Business District.
         (g)   The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the
Planning Commission, may approve additional building materials on a case-by-
case basis, provided that such materials exhibit the quality and durability
desired and do not detract from the aesthetic character of the building and the
surrounding area.
         (h)   Construction shall follow the approved architectural plans. At
the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, a request to change up to 5% of the
originally approved building materials may be reviewed administratively.
Requests for more significant changes, and requests determined by the Zoning
Administrator to need additional review, shall follow the site plan permit
process identified in §
151.06.12.
      (9)   Building façade transparency.
         (a)   Tinted windows shall be no darker than 20% tint.
         (b)   Reflective glass is prohibited for windows and doors on ground
story façades fronting on a public street, park, or plaza. Non-tinted, clear
low-e window coatings are permitted.
         (c)   Glass block is prohibited on all façades, ground and upper
stories, fronting on a public street, park, or plaza.
         (d)   For multi-family uses, a minimum of 15% of the area of the
ground story front façade shall provide unobstructed views into and out of the
building. For all other uses, a minimum of 30% shall be provided. Transparency
shall not be blocked by storage, shelving, mechanical equipment, or other
visual barriers.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20241120-03, passed 11-20-24)
DIVISION 03: OVERLAY DISTRICTS
PART 1. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 151.03.11 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Planned Unit Development District is to provide a
district that will encourage the following.
   (A)   Flexibility in land development and redevelopment in order to utilize
new techniques of building design, construction and land development;
   (B)   Provision of life cycle housing to all income and age groups;
   (C)   Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building designs
and sitings and the clustering of buildings and land uses;
   (D)   Preservation of desirable site characteristics and open space and
protection of sensitive environmental features, including, but not limited to
steep slopes, trees, wetlands and the like;
   (E)   More efficient and effective use of land, open space and public
facilities through mixing of land uses and assembly and development of land
into larger parcels;
   (F)   High quality of design and design compatible with surrounding land
uses, including both existing and planned;
   (G)   Sensitive development in transitional areas located between different
land uses and along significant transportation or scenic corridors within the
city; and
   (H)   Development which is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.12 CLASSIFICATIONS; PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Upon rezoning for a PUD, the district shall be designated by the
letters “PUD” followed by the alphanumeric designation of the underlying zoning
district which is most closely associated with the types of uses and
development standards proposed in the PUD. The designation may be either the
prior zoning classification or a new classification. The designation must be in
compliance with the Comprehensive Plan in cases of mixed use PUDs, the Council
may rezone the PUD to “PUD Mixed.”
   (B)   Regulations governing uses and structures in PUDs shall be the same as
those governing the underlying zoning district subject to the following:
      (1)   Regulations, except shoreland regulations listed in Part 151.03.2
Shoreland Overlay District, may be modified expressly by conditions imposed by
the Council at the time of rezoning to PUD or by the adoption of development
plans that establish standards for the PUD; and
      (2)   In the case of districts rezoned to “PUD Mixed,” the Council shall
specify regulations applicable to uses and structures in various parts of the
district.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.13 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum area. A PUD shall have a minimum area of one acre, excluding
wetlands, land lying below the ordinary high water level of any lake, and
existing rights-of-way unless. At the discretion of the City Council, the city
may consider a PUD with less than one acre if one of the following conditions
exist:
      (1)   There are unusual physical features of the property or of the
surrounding neighborhood such that development as a PUD will conserve a
physical or terrain feature of importance to the neighborhood or community;
      (2)   The property is directly adjacent to or across a public right-of-
way from property that previously was developed as a PUD and the new PUD will
be perceived as and function as an extension of that previously approved
development; or
      (3)   The property is located in a transitional area between different
land uses and development will be used as a buffer between the uses.
   (B)   Overall density.
      (1)   Within a PUD, overall density for residential developments shall be
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the Shoreland Overlay District
regulations.
      (2)   Individual buildings or lots within a PUD may exceed these
standards, provided that density for the entire PUD does not exceed the
permitted standards. Dwelling units or sites may be clustered into one or more
groups.
   (C)   Allowed uses. Each PUD shall be used for the use for which the site is
designated in the Comprehensive Plan. A PUD may not contain uses which,
according to the city’s underlying districts, are not allowed anywhere in the
city. The city may permit up to 25% of the gross floor area of all buildings in
a PUD to be used for land uses for which the site is not designated in the
Comprehensive Plan if the City Council finds that such use is in the best
interests of the city and is consistent with the requirements of this section.
   (D)   The various setback and height regulations of the most closely related
underlying zoning district shall be considered presumptively appropriate, but
may be departed from in order to accomplish the purposes described in this
section.
   (E)   The city may allow more than one principal building to be constructed
on each platted lot within a PUD as long as the buildings are separated by at
least 15 feet.
   (F)   Open space. PUDs must contain open space meeting all of the following
criteria. PUDs located in the Shoreland Overlay District must meet the criteria
identified in §
151.03.14 PUDs in Shoreland Areas.
      (1)   Each residential PUD shall provide at least 300 square feet per
unit of usable open space.
      (2)   PUDs without residential uses shall provide central area(s) or
feature(s) such as a patio with seating, pedestrian plaza with benches, water
features, and/or other designated areas or focal points. The size of this area
shall be no smaller than 3% of the total PUD area. All such areas shall be
openly accessible to the public, connected to any public or private sidewalk
system, and designed with materials compatible with the building and remainder
of the site. The central area(s) or feature(s) shall be maintained over the
life of the development.
      (3)    For PUDs with both residential and non-residential uses,
subsection (F)(1) of this section shall apply to the residential portion of the
PUD while subsection (F)(2) of this section shall be used to calculate the
appropriate amount of open space for the non-residential portion.
      (4)   Road rights-of-way or land covered by road surfaces, parking areas,
structures or footprints reserved for future structures are developed areas and
shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space.
      (5)   Open space must include areas with physical characteristics
unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing
significant historic sites such as unplatted cemeteries.
      (6)   Open space may include pervious outdoor recreation facilities for
use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by customers/guests in commercial
PUDs and by the general public.
   (G)   Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent
easements, public dedication and acceptance or other equally effective and
permanent means must be provided to ensure long term preservation and
maintenance of open space.
   (H)   Impervious surface requirements. The impervious surface requirements
of PUDs shall not exceed that of the underlying zoning district or §
151.03.22 if the PUD is in a shoreland area.
   (I)   All property to be included within a PUD shall be under unified
ownership or control and subject to legal restrictions or covenants as may be
necessary to ensure compliance with the approved development plan and site
plan.
   (J)   The uniqueness of each PUD requires that specifications and standards
for streets, utilities, public facilities and the approval of land subdivision
may be subject to modifications from the city ordinances generally governing
them. The City Council, may, therefore, approve streets, utilities, public
facilities and land subdivisions which are not in compliance with usual
specifications or ordinance requirements.
   (K)   Homeowners association. Unless an equally effective alternative
community framework is established and approved by the city, all residential
PUDs that include common ownership or common maintenance elements must use an
owners’ association with the following features:
      (1)   Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site
purchaser and owner.
      (2)   Each member must pay a pro rata share of the association’s
expenses. Unpaid assessments shall become liens on units or sites.
      (3)   Assessments must be adjustable for changing conditions.
      (4)   The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes and
maintenance of all commonly-owned property and facilities.
      (5)   All stormwater management facilities within the PUD shall be owned
and maintained by the homeowners association. The homeowners association must
have a signed maintenance agreement on file at the city outlining the minimum
maintenance activities for all stormwater management devices.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.14 PUDS IN SHORELAND AREAS.
   (A)   Types permissible. PUDs located within 1,000 feet of any lake within
the city are allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of
previously built sites or conversions of existing buildings and land.
   (B)   Processing. PUDs in the Shoreland Overlay District must meet the
following requirements in addition to all those outlined elsewhere in city’s
zoning and subdivision regulations. When there is a conflict in requirements,
the more stringent of the requirements shall be applied.
      (1)    In order for a residential PUD in a shoreland area to be
processed, the proposed project must have at least five dwelling units or have
a total project area of at least 50,000 square feet for a general development
lake; 75,000 square feet for a recreational development lake; and 100,000
square feet for a natural environment lake. Determination of allowable
densities shall be determined by subsections (C) and (D) of this section.
      (2)   PUDs must be processed as conditional uses. Approval cannot occur
until the appropriate environmental review is complete, if applicable.
      (3)   A property owner’s association agreement (for residential PUDs)
with mandatory membership must be submitted and approved by the city prior to
final approval of the proposal. The agreement shall be in compliance with all
provisions of this section.
      (4)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other
instruments shall be created and approved by the city that:
         (a)   Properly address future vegetative and topographic alterations,
construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft and construction
of commercial buildings in PUDs where allowed; and
         (b)   Ensure the long term preservation and maintenance of open space
in accordance with the criteria and analysis, specified in §
151.03.13 Development Standards.
   (C)   Site “suitable area” evaluation. Proposed new or expansions to
existing PUDs must be evaluated using the following procedures and standards to
determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/dwelling site density
evaluation in subsection (D) of this section.
      (1)   The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating one or
more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high
water level (OHW) at the following intervals and proceeding landward:
Table 151.03.01 Shoreland Tier Dimensions
 
Shoreland Tier Dimensions
General Development Lake      First Tier      200 feet
General Development Lake      All other tiers 200 feet
Recreational Development Lake All tiers       267 feet
 
      (2)   The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding
from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs or land below the OHW of public waters.
This suitable area and the proposed project are then subjected to either the
residential or commercial PUD density evaluation steps to arrive at an
allowable number of dwelling units or sites.
   (D)   Density evaluation. The procedures for determining the “base” density
of a PUD and density increase multipliers are as follows.
      (1)   Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to another
tier further from the water body, but must not be transferred to any other tier
closer to the waterbody.
      (2)   When a PUD is a combined commercial and residential development,
the site plan and/or plat must indicate and distinguish which buildings and
portions of the project area are residential, commercial, or a combination of
the two.
      (3)   Residential PUD “base” density evaluation.
         (a)   The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single
residential lot size standard to yield a base density of dwelling units or
sites for each tier.
         (b)    Proposed locations and numbers of the base number of dwelling
units or sites for the residential PUD are then evaluated to determine whether
the tiers and suitable area can support these units while meeting the required
design criteria in subsections (F) and (G) of this section.
      (4)   Commercial PUD “base” density evaluation.
         (a)   Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling units
or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and sites
(computation of inside living area sizes need not include decks, patios,
stoops, steps, garages, porches, or basements unless the basements are a
habitable space);
         (b)   Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following
table:
Table 151.03.02 Commercial Floor Area Ratios
Commercial Floor Area Ratios*
Average Unit Floor Area General Development Lake Recreational Development Lake
Commercial Floor Area Ratios*
Average Unit Floor Area General Development Lake Recreational Development Lake
200 sq. ft.             0.040                    0.020
300 sq. ft.             0.048                    0.024
400 sq. ft.             0.056                    0.028
500 sq. ft.             0.065                    0.032
600 sq. ft.             0.072                    0.038
700 sq. ft.             0.082                    0.042
800 sq. ft.             0.091                    0.046
900 sq. ft.             0.099                    0.050
1,000 sq. ft.           0.108                    0.054
1,100 sq. ft.           0.116                    0.058
1,200 sq. ft.           0.125                    0.064
1,300 sq. ft.           0.133                    0.068
1,400 sq. ft.           0.142                    0.072
1,500 sq. ft.           0.150                    0.075
*For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios
listed for 200 sq. ft. For areas greater than shown, use the ratios listed for
1,500 sq. ft. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at 400 sq.
ft. Manufactured home sites in recreational camping areas shall use a ratio
equal to the ratios listed for 1,000 sq. ft.
 
         (c)   Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area
ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling
units or sites;
         (d)    Divide the total floor area by tier computed in subsection (D)
(4)(c) of this section by the average inside living area size determined in
subsection (D)(4)(a) of this section (this yields a base number of dwelling
units and sites for each tier); and
         (e)   Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for
commercial PUDs are then evaluated to determine whether the tiers and suitable
area can support these units while meeting the required design criteria in
subsections (F) and (G) of this section.
   (E)   Density increase multipliers.
      (1)   The allowable density increase in subsection (E)(2) of this section
will only be allowed if structure setbacks from the OHW are increased to at
least 50% greater than the minimum setback, or the impact on the waterbody is
reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography, or
additional means, and the setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum
setback.
      (2)   Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density increases for
residential or commercial PUDs:
Table 151.03.03 Density Increases
 
Maximum Density Increase by Tier
First  50%
Second 100%
Third  200%
Fourth 200%
Fifth  200%
 
   (F)   Maintenance and design criteria,
      (1)   Maintenance and administration requirements. Before final approval
of a PUD in a Shoreland District, adequate provisions must be developed for
preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued
existence and functioning of the development.
      (2)   Open space criteria. PUDs in shoreland areas must contain open
space, which shall meet all of the following criteria:
         (a)   Open space must constitute at least 50% of the total project
area and must include:
            1.   Areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development
in their natural state.
            2.   Areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted
cemeteries.
            3.   Portions of the Shore Impact Zone preserved in its natural
state or existing states as follows:
               a.   For existing residential PUDs, at least 50% of the Shore
Impact Zone.
               b.   For new residential PUDs, at least 70% of the Shore Impact
Zone.
               c.   For all commercial PUDs, at least 50% of the Shore Impact
Zone.
         (b)   Open space may include:
            1.   Outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of dwelling
units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwellings or sites, and by the
general public;
            2.   Subsurface sewage treatment systems if the use of the space is
restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems; and
            3.   Wetlands that are not designated public waters.
         (c)   Open space shall not include:
            1.   Structures, portions of a structure, or other shelter designed
as short or long-term living quarters for one or more persons. This includes
all residential dwellings and rental or timeshare accommodations such as motel,
hotel, and resort rooms, and cabins; or
            2.   Road rights-of-way or land covered by road surfaces and
parking areas; or
            3.   Land below the OHW of public waters; or
            4.   Commercial facilities or uses; or
            5.   Locations or sites used for residential use by one or more
persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational
vehicle sites; or
            6.   Footprints or designated portions of the site intended for
future structure, road, or parking development if the PUD is phased.
         (d)   The appearance of open space areas, including topography,
vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of restrictive deed
covenants, permanent easements, public dedication, and acceptance or other
equally effective and permanent means.
   (G)   General design standards.
      (1)   All habitable structures within the PUD shall be serviced by one of
the following:
         (a)   City-owned water and sewer systems.
         (b)   Community, on-site water supply and sewage treatment systems.
These must be centralized and meet the standards of §
151.03.27 Public and Private Utilities. Sewage treatment systems must meet the
setback requirements of §
151.03.22 Requirements for Sewered and Unsewered Areas.
      (2)    Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one or more groups
and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be designed and
located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant
shoreland classification: setback form the OHW, setbacks from bluffs, elevation
above the surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the OHW
must be increased in accordance with subsection (E) of this section for
developments with density increases.
      (3)   Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed
if they meet or exceed design standards contained in §
151.03.22 and are centralized.
      (4)   Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming
areas, docks and watercraft mooring areas, and launching ramps, must be
centralized and located in suitable areas approved by the city. Evaluation of
suitability must include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation,
soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, compatibility with adjacent land uses
and other relevant factors.
      (5)   One launching ramp facility may be provided for use only by
occupants of dwelling units in the PUD. A launching ramp is a conditional use
and is dependent upon site characteristics as well as numbers of launching
ramps on the body of water. Where shore recreation facilities including
launching ramps and docks have been installed, the requirements of this section
shall not preclude continued use of such launching ramp or docks subject to
approval of a conditional use permit.
      (6)   Lake access outlots which meet or exceed the following standards
are intended as controlled accesses to public waters or recreation areas for
use only by owners of nonriparian lots within the PUD:
         (a)   Lake access outlots or access easements must meet the width and
size requirements for residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses
of lake access outlots or access easements. Docking or mooring of watercraft is
allowed at an access outlot or access easement, subject to provisions of §
151.03.25(B);
         (b)   Lake access outlots must be jointly owned by all purchasers of
lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of nonriparian lots in the
subdivision who are provided riparian access rights on the controlled access
lot;
         (c)   Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments may be
developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the lake access
outlot or access easement and what activities are allowed. The activities may
include watercraft loading, beaching, mooring, or docking. They may also
include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly
conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment of normal
property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of the non-significant
conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The covenants
may limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total
number of watercraft allowed to be moored or docked, and may require
centralization of all common facilities and activities in the most suitable
locations on the lot to minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. The
covenants may also require all parking areas, storage buildings, and other
facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as much as practical from
view from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. In no case
shall covenant provisions be less restrictive than provisions of this section
or any other city ordinance;
         (d)   Dock lighting shall be allowed provided such lighting is not
directed toward the lake in such a manner that it impairs the vision of or
confuses operators of watercraft. No oscillating, rotating, flashing, or moving
sign or light may be used on any dock. No light shall shine on neighboring lots
in excess of 0.4 footcandles; and
         (e)    The Planning Commission and City Council may waive or vary any
of the requirements in subsection (G)(6) of this section based on the nature of
the property or a demonstrated unique need associated with the property.
      (7)   Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shore lands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color or other means, assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening must be
preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided.
   (H)   Conversions. Existing resorts, mobile home courts or other land uses
and facilities may be converted to residential PUDs if all of the following
standards are met:
      (1)   Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the same
procedures for residential PUDs involving all new constructing. Inconsistencies
between existing features of the development and these standards must be
identified.
      (2)   Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment, structure
visibility, impervious surface coverage, open space, and shore recreation
facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the
conditional use permit.
      (3)   Shore and Bluff Impact Zone deficiencies must be evaluated and
reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These improvements must
include, where applicable, the following:
         (a)   Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities that
no longer need to be located in shore or Bluff Impact Zones;
         (b)   Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve
vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from
the water;
         (c)   If existing dwelling units are located in shore or Bluff Impact
Zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that preclude
exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial alterations; or
         (d)   The conditions must also provide for future relocation of
dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and
elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced.
      (4)    Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed
standards in subsections (D) or (E) of this section may be allowed to continue
but must not be allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in
the future. Efforts must be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high
densities by requiring seasonal use, improving vegetative screening,
centralizing shore recreation facilities, or other means.
   (I)   Exemptions. If less than 10% of the land in a proposed PUD project is
located in the city's Shoreland Overlay District and does not abut any public
waters, the State Department of Natural Resources may, in writing, determine
that the city's Shoreland PUD requirements need not be applied to the
development.
   (J)   Fee. The processing fee for a PUD shall be set by a motion adopted by
the Council and reviewed annually.
   (K)   Evaluation criteria. In addition to the guidelines provided elsewhere
in the city ordinances, the City Council shall evaluate a PUD in the shoreland
area using the following criteria:
      (1)   Existing recreational use of the surface water and likely increases
in use associated with planned unit developments;
      (2)   Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density;
      (3)   Suitability of lands for the planned unit development approach;
      (4)   Level of current development in the area; and
      (5)   Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped lands.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 151.03.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The city finds that the uncontrolled use of shorelands
affects the public health, safety, and general welfare. The Shoreland Overlay
District is established to preserve, protect, and enhance the environmental,
recreational and aesthetic functions of the city's public waters. The Shoreland
Overlay District is an overlay district that applies regulations and standards
to public waters and adjacent land to control lot sizes, placement of
structures, and alterations.
   (B)   Statutory authorization. This section is adopted pursuant to the
authorization and policies contained in M.S. Chapter 103F; Minn. Rules, Parts
6120.2500-6120.3900; and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S.
Chapter 462.
   (C)   Districts. The shorelands within the city are hereby designated as
Shoreland Overlay Districts and the requirements set forth in this part shall
govern development and other activities within these districts. The
classification of the shoreland areas shall govern the use, alteration and
development of these areas, according to the classification.
   (D)   Application. The S District shall be applied to and superimposed upon
all zoning districts, as contained herein, as existing or amended by the text
and map of this chapter. The regulations and requirements imposed by the S
District shall be in addition to those established for districts by other
sections of this chapter. Where the regulations and requirements imposed by the
S District and other sections of this chapter conflict the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
   (E)   Boundaries.
      (1)    The boundaries of the Shoreland Overlay District are established
within 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level (OHW) of the lakes listed
herein.
Table 151.03.04. Surface Water Identification; DNR Lake
ID No. Lake Name Classification OHW Regional Flood
                                    (NAVD 88)
ID No. Lake Name            Classification           OHW   Regional Flood
                                                           (NAVD 88)
13-12  Chisago Lake         General Development      900.2 901.3
13-13  Kroon Lake           Recreational Development 902.6 905.97
13-35  North Lindstrom Lake General Development      900.2 901.3
13-27  South Center Lake    General Development      900.2 901.3
13-32  North Center Lake    General Development      900.2 901.3
13-28  South Lindstrom Lake General Development      900.2 901.3
13-29  Wallmark Lake        General Development      898.0 901.5
13-14  Linn Lake            Natural Environment      900   Unknown
13-31  Sunrise Lake         Natural Environment      875.2 876.4
 
      (2)   The boundaries of the district may be reduced as indicated on the
city's Shoreland Overlay District Map, if approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources.
   (F)   Classification. The surface waters affected by this chapter and which
require controlled development of their Shoreland Overlay District are shown on
the map designated as the Shoreland Overlay District Map which is properly
approved and made a part thereof. Surface waters generally greater than ten
acres, and given an identification number by the state are listed herein. Other
surface waters affected by this part, generally having less than ten acres, are
classified as wetland systems and thus regulated by Chisago County. Where the
boundaries of the district are in question, the Board of Adjustment shall make
the necessary interpretation. If any boundary is disputed, the burden of proof
shall rest with the applicant.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.22 REQUIREMENTS FOR SEWERED AND UNSEWERED AREAS.
   Lots and development within the Shoreland Overlay District shall meet the
following development standards:
   (A)   Uses. The land uses allowable for the Shoreland Overlay District shall
follow the permitted, interim, accessory, and conditional use designations as
defined and outlined in the underlying zoning district.
   (B)   Lot areas and width standards. All lakes within the city’s
jurisdiction are either general development, recreational, or natural
environmental waters as indicated by the DNR Classification Chart included in
Table 151.03.04. Therefore, the following minimums apply to all lots within the
Shoreland Overlay District:
Table 151.03.05. Shoreland Dimensional Standards
Sewered Areas
 Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
 Area Width    Area Width
Sewered Areas
        Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
        Area    Width Area    Width
General Development
Single  15,000  75    10,000  100
Duplex  26,000  135   17,500  135
Triplex 38,000  195   25,000  190
Quad+   49,000  255   32,500  245
Recreational Development
Single  20,000  100   15,000  100
Duplex  35,000  135   26,000  135
Triplex 50,000  195   38,000  190
Quad+   65,000  255   49,000  245
Natural Environment
Single  40,000  125   20,000  125
Duplex  70,000  225   35,000  220
Triplex 100,000 325   52,000  315
Quad+   130,000 425   65,000  410
Unsewered Areas
General Development
Single  20,000  100   40,000  150
Duplex  40,000  180   80,000  265
Triplex 60,000  260   120,000 375
Quad+   80,000  340   160,000 490
Recreational Development
Single  40,000  150   40,000  150
       Area    Width Area    Width
Unsewered Areas
Recreational Development (Cont’d)
Duplex  80,000  225   80,000  265
Triplex 120,000 300   120,000 375
Quad+   160,000 375   160,000 490
Natural Environment
Single  80,000  200   80,000  200
Duplex  120,000 300   160,000 400
Triplex 160,000 400   240,000 600
Quad+   20,000  500   320,000 800
 
   (C)   Height. The maximum building structure height shall follow the
individual district requirements of the base zoning district.
   (D)   Placement of structures and sewage treatment systems on lots. When
more than one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be
located to meet all setbacks.
      (1)    Buildings, including all structures such as decks, must have a
setback of 30 feet from the top of any bluff and a setback from the ordinary
high water level (OHW) as follows:
Table 151.03.06. Setbacks (in feet) from Ordinary High Water Level
 
                              Structures
Class of Public Waters        Unsewered Sewered Sewage Treatment System
Recreational Development Lake 100       75      75
General Development Lake      75        50      50
Natural Environment Lake      150       150     150
 
      (2)   No structure, except stairways and landings, may be placed within
Bluff Impact Zones.
   (E)   Setbacks from roads/rights-of-way. Any structure abutting a county or
state highway must meet the setback required by the controlling county or state
authority for that parcel. The building setback in residential districts shall
be a minimum of 30 feet from state, federal, or county roads and city street
rights-of-way.
   (F)   Design criteria for structures.
      (1)   High water elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance with
all floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not
exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed
or flood-proofed must be determined as follows:
         (a)    The lowest floor shall be no lower in elevation than a level at
least three feet above the OHW of any riparian lake or the highest known
elevation of any other riparian water body.
         (b)   Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor
placed lower than the elevation determined in subsection (F)(1)(a) of this
section if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to the
elevation, electrical, and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation
and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to
withstand ice action, wind driven waves, and debris.
      (2)   Water oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have one water-
oriented accessory structure not meet normal structure setback set forth in
this chapter provided the water-oriented accessory structure complies with the
following provisions:
         (a)   The structure or facility shall not exceed ten feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square
feet. The structure or facility may include detached decks not exceeding eight
feet above grade at any point or at-grade patios.
         (b)   The structure or facility is not in the Bluff Impact Zone.
         (c)   The setback of the structure or facility from the OHW must be at
least ten feet.
         (d)   The structure is not a boathouse or a boat storage structure.
         (e)   The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility
as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the city, assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions.
         (f)   Roofs of structures may be used as an open-air deck with safety
rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area.
         (g)   The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human
habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
         (h)   The owner or occupant of any riparian lot may have one fish
house in addition to the one water-oriented accessory structure allowed by the
provisions of this division without obtaining a variance. The fish house must
display a current state fish house license issued to that fish house in order
to qualify for this exemption. Only one of the two structures may be located in
the Shoreland Impact Zone.
      (3)   Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and lifts are the
preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up
and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet
the following design requirements:
         (a)   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public
open space recreational properties and planned unit developments.
         (b)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used
for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties, and
planned unit developments.
         (c)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or
landings.
         (d)   Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above
the ground on posts or pilings or placed into the ground, provided they are
designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
         (e)   Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.
         (f)   Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths for physically
disabled persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided
that the dimensional and performance standards of this section are met and the
facilities comply with Minn. Admin. Rules Chapter 1341.
      (4)   Decks. Except as provided herein, decks must meet the structure
setback standards. Decks that do not meet setback requirements from public
waters may be allowed without a variance to be added to structures existing on
the date the shoreland structure setbacks were established by ordinance, if all
of the following criteria and standards are met:
         (a)   A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no
reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing OHW setback of
the structure;
         (b)   The deck encroachment toward the OHW does not exceed 15% of the
existing shoreline setback of the existing structure from the OHW or does not
encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and
         (c)   The deck is constructed primarily of wood and is not roofed or
screened.
      (5)   Access lots. Access lots, which are intended as controlled accesses
to public waters or recreation areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots
within subdivisions must meet or exceed the following standards:
         (a)   They must meet the width and size requirements for residential
lots and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access lots.
         (b)   They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the
subdivision or by all purchasers of non-riparian lots in the subdivision who
are provided riparian access rights on the access lot.
         (c)   Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments may be
developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot
and what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft
launching, loading, beaching, mooring or docking. They may also include other
outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly conflict with general
public use of the public water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by
adjacent property owners. Examples of the non-significant conflict activities
include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The covenants may limit the total
number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total number of watercraft
allowed to be moored or docked and may require centralization of all common
facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize
topographic and vegetation alterations. They may also require all parking
areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or
topography as much as practical from view from the public water, assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions. In no case shall covenant provisions be less
restrictive than provisions of this section or any other city ordinance.
      (6)   Placement, design, and heights of structures. When more than one
setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be located to meet
all setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a
proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to
conform to the adjoining setbacks from the OHW, provided the proposed building
site is not located in a Shore Impact Zone or in a Bluff Impact Zone.
Structures may not be located closer than 30 feet to the top of any bluff.
      (7)   Steep slopes. The Building Official must evaluate possible soil
erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a
permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways,
structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary,
conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion, significant
viewscape impact, and to preserve existing vegetative screening from
structures, vehicles and other facilities as viewed to and from the surface of
public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
      (8)   Impervious surface. No lot shall be covered by more than 25%
impervious surface. This standard shall not apply for uses in the CBD, B-1, B-
2, or I-1 Districts if the proposed use either causes no increase in surface
water discharge or if all discharges are accommodated by a surface water
management system or program approved by the city.
   (G)   Certification upon completion.
      (1)   Upon completion of any structure which was constructed or cited in
a designated flood hazard area, the permittee shall provide the Zoning
Administrator with certification of the as-built first floor elevation data and
maintain an on-going record thereof.
      (2)   All A-zones as shown on the flood insurance rate map of the city
are hereby designated as the flood hazard areas of the city.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20220421-01, passed 4-21-22)
§ 151.03.23 SHORELAND ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   Vegetative alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography must
be controlled by local governments to prevent erosion into public waters, fix
nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent
bank slumping and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
      (1)   Exemptions. Vegetative alterations and excavations or grading and
filling necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment
systems under validly issued permits for these facilities are exempt from the
vegetative alteration standards in this section and separate permit
requirements for grading and filling. However, the grading and filling
conditions of this section must be met for issuance of permits for structures
and sewage treatment systems. Public roads and parking areas, as regulated
hereby are exempt from the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Removal or alterations of vegetation. Except for forest management
or agricultural uses as provided for herein, removal or alterations of
vegetation is allowed according to the following standards:
         (a)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the Shore and Bluff Impact
Zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing outside
of these areas is allowed if the activity is consistent with the forest
management standards herein.
         (b)   Limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings,
picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and watercraft
access areas and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities,
as well as providing a view to the water from the principal dwelling site, in
Shore and Bluff Impact Zones and on steep slopes is allowed, provided that:
            1.   The screening of structures, vehicles or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not
substantially reduced;
            2.   Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved;
            3.   The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs or branches that are dead, diseased or pose safety hazards; and
            4.   The city's tree preservation regulations in Part 151.03.5 must
be followed.
         (c)   Use of fertilizer and pesticides in the Shoreland Overlay
District must be done in a way as to minimize runoff into the Shore Impact Zone
or public water by the use of earth, vegetation or both.
   (B)   Grading or filling. Before grading or filling on steep slopes or
within Shore or Bluff Impact Zones involving the movement of more than ten
cubic yards of material or anywhere else in a shoreland area involving movement
of more than 50 cubic yards of material, it must be established by local
official permit issuance that all of the following conditions will be met. The
following conditions must also be considered during land use, subdivision, and
building permit reviews.
      (1)   Before authorizing any grading or filling activity in any Type 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 wetland, local officials must consider how extensively the
proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the
wetland:
         (a)   Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
         (b)   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
         (c)   Fish and wildlife habitat;
         (d)   Recreational use;
         (e)   Shoreline or bank stabilization; or
         (f)   Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic
significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals or others.
      (2)   This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the
wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews or approvals by
other local, state or federal agencies such as a watershed district, Chisago
County, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or the United States Army
Corps of Engineers.
      (3)   Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures
only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time
possible.
      (4)   Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for
temporary bare soil coverage and a permanent vegetation cover must be
established as soon as possible.
      (5)   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they
reach any surface water feature must be used.
      (6)   Areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation districts and the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
      (7)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope.
      (8)   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be
reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and must not
create finished slopes of 30% or greater.
      (9)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in Bluff Impact
Zones.
      (10)    Any alterations below the OHW of public waters must first be
authorized by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
      (11)   Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent
or nearby properties.
      (12)   Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of
the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket is permitted if the finished
slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward
extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the OHW, and the height of the
riprap above the OHW does not exceed three feet.
      (13)   All activity must also comply with
Division 152.04 Stormwater Management.
   (C)   Connections to public waters. Excavations where the intended purpose
is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons and
harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for
excavations may be given only after the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources has approved the proposed connection to public waters.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.24 ROADS, DRIVEWAYS, AND PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas. Public
and private roads, driveways, and parking areas must be designed to take
advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening
from view from public waters. They must be designed and constructed to minimize
and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical
guides of the local soil and water conservation district or other applicable
technical materials.
   (B)   Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and
must not be placed within Bluff and Shore Impact Zones, when other reasonable
and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may
be placed within these areas and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
   (C)   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads and access-
related parking areas may be placed within Shore Impact Zones provided the
vegetation, screenings and erosion control conditions of this section are met.
For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions hereof must also be
met.
   (D)   Paving permit required.
      (1)   Purpose. In order to facilitate this section, the city shall
require an impervious surface permit demonstrating that projects involving the
installation of impervious materials are in compliance with the provisions of
the impervious surface requirements as stated in §
151.02.31 General Provisions.
      (2)   Permit required. No person, firm, corporation, company or other
entity (public or private) shall cause the placement of asphalt, concrete or
other impervious material within the city without first obtaining a paving
permit and/or all other required permits from the city and other appropriate
entities.
      (3)   Application. Unless otherwise regulated herein, any person, firm,
corporation, company or public entity shall fill out an application, provided
by the city, for a permit to place impervious materials for driveways,
sidewalks, pathways, parking areas and other uses within the city. The
application shall be reviewed by the city. If the project is found to be in
compliance with the impervious surface requirements, the city may issue a
permit allowing the work to be accomplished.
      (4)   Liability. Any project approved should be constructed as to have
minimal impact on adjacent property. Efforts shall be taken to keep all runoff
from the project area on the subject property until it can outflow to a public
drainageway.
      (5)   Fees. The fee for the application shall be set by motion of the
City Council. For minor projects, the fee may be waived.
      (6)   Projects not covered. A permit is not required for the normal care
and maintenance of an existing impervious surface so long as the square footage
of the surface is not increased.
   (E)   Parking lots, excluding entrance/exit drives, may not be constructed
closer than three feet from the property line.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.25 DOCKS, LIFTS, AND OTHER MOORING STRUCTURES OR FACILITIES.
   Docks, lifts, other mooring structures or facilities, and marinas other than
those owned or operated by the state or a political subdivision, may be
constructed or placed when allowed in accordance with state law, other
provisions of this Code and the following provisions:
   (A)   Single-family lots. Docks, lifts, or other mooring structures located
on single-family lots do not need a permit from the city, but must meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   Only one dock, lift, or other mooring structure is permitted on
each lot;
      (2)   Structures may be no wider than six feet, which shall be measured
at the width of the major running length of the dock;
      (3)   Docks shall be located so that moored watercraft and equipment are
at least five feet from the extended property line;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2287.png]
 
Figure 151.03.01 Dock Placement
      (4)   Must not impede navigation or create a hazard;
      (5)   Mooring is limited to four restricted watercraft (of which no more
than one may be registered to other than a family member);
      (6)   Rental of slips is not allowed;
      (7)   Must be removed before freeze-up;
      (8)   In no case shall easements be allowed for docks or mooring
structures. Docks or mooring facilities are allowed only on approved single-
family lots;
      (9)   It is not the intent of this section to discontinue use of docks
after they have been removed for the winter. However, the landowner shall make
every effort to comply with the requirements of this section. In no case shall
a landowner not be allowed to place his or her dock back in the water; and
      (10)   Except as modified by the above requirements, all other provisions
of Minn. Admin. Rules 6115.0210 shall apply.
   (B)   PUDs.
      (1)   The number of allowable dwelling sites in the first tier as
determined by §
151.03.14(C) shall be used as a basis for determining the number of mooring
slips allowed as follows:
         (a)   If the number of dwelling sites allowed in the first tier is
four or fewer, the PUD is allowed one centralized dock, lift, or mooring
structure with a maximum of four mooring slips.
         (b)   If the number of dwelling sites allowed in the first tier is
more than four, the PUD is allowed to have up to the same number of mooring
slips as the maximum number of dwelling sites allowed in the first tier. These
mooring slips shall be centralized into common docks.
      (2)   All docks, lifts, and mooring structures in a PUD are subject to
the following:
         (a)   Docks shall be located so that moored watercraft and equipment
are at least five feet from the extended property line as shown in
Figure 151.03.01;
         (b)   Must be no wider than six feet, which shall be measured at the
width of the major running length of the dock;
         (c)   Must not impede navigation or create a hazard;
         (d)   Must be removed before freeze-up. For extenuating circumstances
or difficult terrain, a dock may be moved as close to the lakeshore as
possible. Any dock left in the water over the winter must be marked with a
reflective material and orange fence for visibility on each side. The
reflective material must measure a total of not less than nine square inches
every six feet on each side of the dock; and
         (e)   Except as modified by the above requirements, all other
provisions of Minn. Rules Part 6115.0210, as may be amended from time to time,
shall apply.
      (3)    Provided the requirements in subsection (B)(2) of this section can
be met, an applicant may apply for an additional dock, lift, or mooring
structures at the time of initial platting or subsequent to plat approval. If
owners apply for additional docks, lifts, or other mooring structures after
initial platting, the conditional use permit process outlined in §
151.06.14 shall apply. It is at the discretion of the Planning Commission and
City Council as to whether to approve additional docks, lifts, or other mooring
structures, and the City Council may place additional conditions on such
facilities as they deem appropriate.
      (4)   Marinas are allowed with a conditional use permit and Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Public Waters Permit and are subject to
the requirements in subsection (B)(1) of this section.
      (5)   Overnight beaching, docking, or continuous mooring of watercraft
may be allowed with a conditional use permit.
      (6)   In no case shall easements be allowed for docks or other mooring
structures.
      (7)   Except as modified by the above requirements, all provisions of
Minn. Rules Part 6115.0210, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
apply. Considerations of a conditional use permit must include considerations
of lot width, lot depth, land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to
ground water and bedrock, compatibility with adjacent land uses and/or other
relevant factors.
      (8)   It is not the intent of this section to discontinue use of docks
after they have been removed for the winter. However, the landowner shall make
every effort to comply with the requirements of this section. In no case shall
a landowner not be allowed to place his or her dock back in the water.
   (C)   Non single-family lots.
      (1)   One dock, lift, or mooring structure may be located on lots other
than single-family residential lots and PUDs with a permit and subject to the
following:
         (a)   Docks shall be located so that moored watercraft and equipment
are at least five feet from the extended property line as shown in
Figure 151.03.01;
         (b)   Must be no wider than six feet, which shall be measured at the
width of the major running length of the dock;
         (c)   Must not be used for more than six restricted watercrafts;
         (d)   Must not impede navigation or create a hazard;
         (e)   Must be removed before freeze-up. For extenuating circumstances
or difficult terrain, a dock may be moved as close to the lakeshore as
possible. Any dock left in the water over the winter must be marked with a
reflective material and orange fence for visibility on each side. The
reflective material must measure a total of not less than nine square inches
every six feet on each side of the dock; and
         (f)   Except as modified by the above requirements, all other
provisions of Minn. Rules Part 6115.0210, as may be amended from time to time,
shall apply.
      (2)    Provided the requirements in subsection (C)(1) of this section can
be met, an applicant may apply for an additional dock, lift, or mooring
structures at the time of initial platting or subsequent to plat approval. If
owners apply for additional docks, lifts, or other mooring structures after
initial platting, the conditional use permit process outlined in this chapter
shall apply. It is at the discretion of the Planning Commission and City
Council as to whether to approve additional docks, lifts, or other mooring
structures, and the City Council may place additional conditions on such
facilities as they deem appropriate.
      (3)    Marinas are allowed with a conditional use permit and Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Public Waters Permit and are subject to
the requirements in subsection (C)(1) of this section.
      (4)   Overnight beaching, docking, or continuous mooring of watercraft
may be allowed with a conditional use permit.
      (5)   In no case shall easements be allowed for docks or other mooring
structures.
      (6)   Except as modified by the above requirements, all provisions of
Minn. Rules Part 6115.0210, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
apply. Considerations of a conditional use permit must include considerations
of lot width, lot depth, land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to
ground water and bedrock, compatibility with adjacent land uses and/or other
relevant factors.
      (7)   It is not the intent of this section to discontinue use of docks
after they have been removed for the winter. However, the landowner shall make
every effort to comply with the requirements of this section. In no case shall
a landowner not be allowed to place his or her dock back in the water merely
because the dock has been removed for the winter.
   (D)   Commercial marinas. Commercial marinas shall be subject to the
following:
      (1)   Proof of a Minnesota Department of Natural Resources Public Waters
Permit;
      (2)   Winter storage of slip rental customers and business owned boats
will be allowed during non-boating season only (typically from October 30 to
April 30);
      (3)   Boats stored for the winter must be parked in an orderly fashion
and covered with similar covers;
      (4)   Docks must not impede navigation or create a hazard;
      (5)   Docks must be removed before freeze-up. For extenuating
circumstances or difficult terrain, a dock may be moved as close to the
lakeshore as possible. Any dock left in the water over the winter must be
marked with a reflective material and orange fence for visibility on each side.
The reflective material must measure a total of no less than nine square inches
every six feet on each side of the dock; and
      (6)   Except as modified by the above requirements, all provisions of
Minn. Rules Part 6115.0210, as may be amended from time to time, shall apply.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.26 USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Agricultural, forest, and extractive uses. To the extent that these
uses are allowed or permitted within shoreland areas, the following standards
or conditions apply for the particular use.
      (1)   Agriculture.
         (a)   The Shore Impact Zone for parcels with permitted agricultural
land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high
water level (OHW).
         (b)   General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, sod farming and wild crop harvesting, if allowed by this
chapter, must be conducted in a manner to ensure that steep slopes and Shore
and Bluff Impact Zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under
an approved conservation plan consistent with the field office technical guides
of the local soil and water conservation districts or the U.S. Soil
Conservation Service.
         (c)   Animal feedlots, as defined by the State Pollution Control
Agency, where allowed by zoning district designations, must be reviewed as
conditional uses and must meet the following standards:
            1.   New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland of
watercourses or in Bluff Impact Zones and must meet a minimum setback of 300
feet from the OHW of all public waters basins;
            2.   Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are
located within 300 feet of the OHW or within a Bluff Impact Zone are allowed if
they do not further encroach into the existing OHW setback or encroach on Bluff
Impact Zones; and
            3.   A certificate of compliance, interim permit or animal feedlot
permit, when required by state law, must be obtained by the owner or operator
of an animal feedlot.
         (d)   Use of fertilizer, pesticides or animal wastes within shorelands
must be done in a way as to minimize impact on the Shore Impact Zone or public
water by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
      (2)   Forest management. The harvesting of timber and associated
reforestation or conversion of forested use to a non-forested use must be
conducted consistent with the following standards:
         (a)   Timber harvesting and associated reforestation must be conducted
consistent with the provisions of the State Nonpoint Source Pollution
Assessment Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management
Best Management Practices in Minnesota.
         (b)   To the extent permitted by this part or state law, forest land
which is converted to another use requires issuance of a conditional use permit
and adherence to the following standards:
            1.   A Shore or Bluff Impact Zone must not be intensively cleared
of vegetation; and
            2.   An erosion and sediment control plan is developed and approved
by the local soil and water conservation district before issuance of a
conditional use permit for the conversion.
         (c)   Use of fertilizer, pesticides, or animal wastes within
shorelands must be done in a way as to minimize impact on the Shore Impact Zone
or public water by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
      (3)   Extractive uses. Processing machinery must be located consistent
with setback standards for structures from OHW of public waters and from
bluffs. An extractive use site development and restoration plan must be
developed and approved by the city, and followed over the course of operation
of the site. The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges,
hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic
alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to
mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion and must clearly
explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.
   (B)   Commercial, industrial, public, and semi-public uses.
      (1)   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or
semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters
may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Uses without
water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters
frontage or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must
either be set back double the normal OHW setback or be substantially screened
from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions.
      (2)   Those with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards:
         (a)   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks and
other zoning standards, the uses must be designed to incorporate topographic
and vegetative screening and parking areas and structures.
         (b)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must
centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation
and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need.
         (c)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs
and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the
following general standards:
            1.   No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be
placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages
may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit
issued by the County Sheriff.
            2.   Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the Shore Impact
Zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey
needed information. They must only convey the location and name of the
establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs
must not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices,
must not be located higher than ten feet above the ground, and must not exceed
32 square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be
shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters.
            3.   Other outside lighting may be located within the Shore Impact
Zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential
safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct
illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of
navigational lights.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.27 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE UTILITIES.
   (A)   Water supply and sewage treatment.
      (1)   Regulation required. In order to ensure safe and healthful
conditions, to prevent pollution and contamination of surface and ground water
and to guide development compatible with the natural characteristics of
shorelands and related water resources, individual private water supply and
private waste treatment systems and all waste disposal systems and sites shall
be regulated by the provisions of this section and applicable state and federal
regulations.
      (2)   Permit required. No person, firm, or corporation shall install,
alter, repair or extend any private well or sewage treatment system without
first obtaining a permit from the city Zoning Administrator for the specific
installation, alteration, repair or extension.
      (3)   Water supply. Any public or private supply of water for domestic
purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota
Department of Health, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and the city’s
Public Works Design Manual.
      (4)   Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:
         (a)   The city sewer system must be used where available.
         (b)   All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed the
latest Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s standards for individual sewage
treatment systems. Individual Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems, Minn. Rules
Chapter 7080, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be included in
this part.
         (c)   On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back from the OHW
of any riparian waterbody in accordance with §
151.03.22.
         (d)   Suitability:
            1.   All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems
shall be evaluated in accordance with the evaluation criteria listed below.
            2.   If the determination of a site’s suitability cannot be made
with the publicly available existing information, it shall then be the
responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings and
percolation tests from on-site field investigations.
               a.   Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table
or bedrock;
               b.   Soil conditions, properties and permeability;
               c.   Slope; and
               d.   Existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock
outcrops.
      (5)   Nonconforming sanitary systems. All nonconforming water supply,
sewage disposal, and waste disposal facilities and systems shall be brought
into conformance with the provisions of this section as a condition of
receiving any permit, variance, or approval required by state law or local
ordinance.
   (B)   Stormwater management. Stormwater management, as regulated by
Division 152.04, must be considered with all reviews, approvals, and permit
issuances tendered under this part.
      (1)   The following are general standards:
         (a)   When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.
         (b)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities erosion potential and
reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and
protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment
on the site.
         (c)   When development density, topographic features and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff
using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities
such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and
ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage,
vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and
facilities.
      (2)   The following are specific standards:
         (a)   When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management,
they must be designed and installed consistent with the field office technical
guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.
         (b)   New construction of stormwater outfalls to public waters must
provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface
debris before discharge.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.28 SUBDIVISIONS.
   In addition to
Chapter 153 of this Code of Ordinances, all subdivisions and developments in
the Shoreland Overlay District of the city shall comply with the following
provisions:
   (A)   Land suitability. Each lot created through subdivision must be
suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration.
Suitability analysis by the city shall consider susceptibility to flooding,
existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for
development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water
supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near shore aquatic conditions
unsuitable for water-based recreation important fish and wildlife habitat,
presence of significant historic sites or any other feature of the natural land
likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of future residents of
the proposed subdivision or of the community.
   (B)   Platting. All subdivisions that create five or more lots or parcels
that are two and one-half acres or less in size must be platted in accordance
with M.S. Chapter 505. No person may record parcels or receive building,
sewage, or other permits for lots that are not part of an officially platted
subdivision.
   (C)   Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions must conform to all
other official controls adopted by the city. In areas not served by publicly-
owned sewer and water systems, subdivisions may not be created unless domestic
water supply is available and soil absorption sewage treatment can be provided
for every lot. A lot shall meet the minimum lot size and must include at least
a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is free of limiting factors (location and
type of water supply, soil type, depth to groundwater or impervious layer,
slope, flooding potential and other limiting factors), sufficient for the
construction of two standard soil treatment systems. Lots that would require
use of holding tanks may not be approved.
   (D)   Information requirements. Developers must provide adequate information
to make a determination of land suitability. The information shall include at
least the following:
      (1)   Topographic contours at ten foot intervals or less from U.S.
Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site
characteristics;
      (2)   The surface water features required in M.S. Chapter 505 to be shown
on plats, obtained from U.S. Geological Surveys quadrangle topographic maps or
more accurate sources;
      (3)   Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building
and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current
existing sources or from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation
tests or other methods;
      (4)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply, extent of
anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations, near-shore aquatic
conditions, including depths, (types of bottom sediments and aquatic vegetation
and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and erosion, both during
and after construction activities);
      (5)   The location of regional floodplain areas from existing maps or
data; and
      (6)    A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level
(OHW), the “toe” and the “top” of the bluffs, and the minimum building setback
distances from the top of the bluff and the lake.
   (E)   Dedications. The developer shall provide, where required by the city,
the fee transfer or easement dedication for natural drainage or ponding areas
for management of stormwater and wetlands.
   (F)   Planned unit developments. Planned unit developments in the Shoreland
Overlay District shall also be regulated by §
151.03.14 PUDs in Shoreland Areas.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.29 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city shall administer and enforce shoreland management controls as
provided in the Zoning Chapter.
   (B)   In addition to other standards and criteria for variances provided in
§
151.06.13 Variance or state law, the city will apply the following criteria:
      (1)   Variances for properties within the Shoreland Overlay District will
only be granted in accordance with M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6 and may not
circumvent the general purposes and intent of the official controls.
      (2)   No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is
prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
      (3)   The city must also consider:
         (a)   Whether property owners have reasonable use of the land without
the variance(s);
         (b)   Whether any existing sewage treatment systems on the property
need upgrading before additional development is approved;
         (c)   Whether the property is used seasonally or year-round;
         (d)   Whether the variance is being requested solely on the basis of
economic considerations; and the characteristics of development on adjacent
properties.
      (4)   Conditions may be imposed in the granting of variances to ensure
compliance and to protect adjacent properties and the public interest.
   (C)   In addition to any existing standards the city has for reviewing
conditional uses as listed in §
151.06.14 Conditional Use Permit, the following standards must be used for
reviewing conditional uses located in shoreland areas:
      (1)   A thorough evaluation of the topographic, vegetation and soils
conditions on the site to ensure:
         (a)   Prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public
waters, both during and after construction;
         (b)   Limiting visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed
from public waters; and
         (c)   Adequacy of the site for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment.
      (2)   An assessment of the types, uses and numbers of watercraft that the
development or use will generate in relation to the suitability of public
waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.
      (3)   The city may impose conditions when granting conditional use
permits that specify increased setbacks from public waters; vegetation allowed
to be removed or required to be established; sewage treatment system location;
design; the use's location and design; and use requirements for watercraft
launching or docking, and for vehicular parking, structure or other facility
design, use and location; phasing of construction; and other conditions
considered necessary.
   (D)   In addition to other standards and criteria for nonconformities
provided in this chapter or state law, the city will apply the following
criteria:
      (1)   The city will require the upgrading or replacement of any existing,
on-site sewage treatment system identified as a nonconformity under a program
established under state law as Minn. Rules Part 6120.3400. Systems installed
according to all applicable local shoreland management standards in effect at
the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are
determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits,
seepage pits or other deep disposal methods or systems with less soil treatment
area separation above groundwater than required by Minn. Rules Chapter 7080,
shall be considered nonconforming.
      (2)   All nonconformities other than on-site sewage treatment systems
must be managed according to applicable state statutes and local government
official controls.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 3. FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 151.03.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Statutory authorization.
   (B)   This floodplain ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization and
policies contained in M.S. Chapter 103F; Minn. Rules, Parts 6120.5000 –
6120.6200; the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 - 78; and the planning and
zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 462.
   (C)   Purpose.
      (1)   This part regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the
city. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
that results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures or flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      (2)   This part is adopted to maintain the community's eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
      (3)   This part is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics
and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and
stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic
and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits, and enhance community and economic development.
   (D)   Lands to which this part applies. This part shall apply to all lands
within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the official zoning map, and/or
the attachments thereto, as being located within the boundaries of the
Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Floodplain Overlay Districts.
   (E)   Establishment of Official Zoning Map.
      (1)   The Official Zoning Map, together with all materials attached
thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this part.
      (2)   The attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study,
Chisago County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas dated 4/17/12, Flood Insurance
Rate Map panels therein numbered 27025C0275D, 27025C0288D, 27025C0289D,
27025C0290D and 27025C0380D, all dated April 17, 2012, and prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The official zoning map shall be on file in the Office of the
County Auditor and the Zoning Administrator.
   (F)   Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
   (G)   Interpretation.
      (1)   The Floodway, Flood Fringe, and General Floodplain Overlay
Districts are overlay districts superimposed over existing zoning districts.
The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other
requirements in this chapter. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive
standards shall apply.
      (2)   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated
on the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions, the regional flood
elevations shall be the governing factor in locating the outer boundaries of
the regional flood floodplain.
      (3)   The regulatory limits of the district boundaries shall be further
extended outward based on the horizontal extension of the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2293.png]
 
Figure 151.03.02. Horizontal Extension of the RFPE.
      (4)   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the City Council and to
submit technical evidence.
   (H)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this part
to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this part imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this part shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this part are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   (I)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This part does not imply that
areas outside the Floodplain Overlay Districts or land uses permitted within
the districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This part shall not
create liability on the part of the city, or any officer or employee thereof,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this part or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   (J)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
part is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this part shall not be affected thereby.
   (K)   Definitions. See
Chapter 154.
   (L)   Annexations. The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference
may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of
the city at the time of adoption of this part. If any of these floodplain land
areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of this part, the
newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this part
immediately upon the date of annexation into the city.
   (M)   Establishment of districts.
      (1)   Districts.
         (a)   Floodway Overlay District. Those areas within Zone AE delineated
within floodway areas as shown on the flood insurance rate maps and flood
boundary and floodway maps adopted in this section that were determined to be
located in the floodway based on delineation methods outlined in §
151.03.34(B).
         (b)   Flood Fringe Overlay District. Those areas within Zone AE as
shown on the flood insurance rate map and flood boundary and floodway maps
adopted in this section, but located outside of the floodway based on the
delineation methods outlined in §
151.03.34(B). This district also includes any additional area encompassed by
the horizontal extension of the regulatory flood protection elevation, as
specified in subsection (G)(3) of this section.
         (c)   General Floodplain Overlay District. Those areas within Zone AE
that do not have a floodway delineated as shown on the flood insurance rate
maps adopted in this section. This district also includes any additional area
encompassed by the horizontal extension of the regulatory flood protection
elevation, as specified in subsection (G)(3) of this section.
      (2)   General requirements.
         (a)   A permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator to
verify if a development meets all applicable standards outlined in this part
prior to conducting the following activities:
            1.   The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or
alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal maintenance
and repair also requires a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction
with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in
Chapter 154 Definitions.
            2.   The construction of a dam, on-site septic system, or any fence
not meeting the definition of an agricultural fence defined in
Chapter 154 Definitions.
            3.   The change or extension of a nonconforming use.
            4.   The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood,
fire, tornado, or any other source.
            5.   The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage
of materials or equipment within the floodplain.
            6.   Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including
stabilization projects or the construction of new or replacement culverts and
bridges), unless a public waters work permit has been obtained by the
Department of Natural Resources.
            7.   Any other type of “development” as defined in this chapter.
         (b)   Minimum development standards. All new development must be:
            1.   Designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
            2.   Constructed with materials and equipment resistant to flood
damage;
            3.   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage;
            4.   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
            5.   Reasonably safe from flooding and consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; and
            6.   Assured to provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards, and not be detrimental to uses in adjoining areas.
            7.   Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the
hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has
not been specified on the official zoning map.
         (c)   Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system.
         (d)   Materials that, in time of flooding, are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life shall be
stored at or above the flood protection elevation, floodproofed, or protected
by structural measures consistent with the standards set forth herein.
Furthermore, storage of materials likely to cause pollution of the waters, as
defined in M.S. § 115.01, if subject to flooding are prohibited unless adequate
safeguards approved by the state water pollution control agency are provided.
         (e)   Critical facilities, as defined in
Chapter 154 Definitions, are to be located so that the lowest floor is not less
than two feet above the regional flood elevation, or the 0.2% annual chance
flood elevation, whichever is higher.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.32 FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT (FW).
   (A)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses listed below are only allowable in
the floodway if not prohibited by any other underlying zoning district
classifications of the city, and if not prohibited by any applicable state or
federal law:
      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, farm fences, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting;
      (2)   Loading areas, parking areas, streets, trails, airport landing
strips, railroads, bridges, culverts, utility transmission lines and pipelines;
      (3)   Open space uses including but not limited to private and public
golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds,
boat-launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves,
game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing areas, and
recreational trails;
      (4)   Residential yards, lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas,
provided these uses do not include associated accessory structures; and
      (5)   Grading or land alterations associated with stabilization projects.
      (6)   Accessory structures.
   (B)   Standards for permitted uses.
      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
velocities, stages, or flood damages, as certified by a registered professional
engineer.
      (4)   The use shall not involve structures.
      (5)   Development that will change the course, current, or cross section
of protected wetlands or public waters is required to obtain a public waters
work permit in accordance with M.S. § 103G.245 or a utility crossing license in
accordance with M.S. § 84.415 from the Department of Natural Resources, or
demonstrate that no permit is required, before applying for a local permit.
      (6)   Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public
must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth
(in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a
product of four upon occurrence of the regional flood.
      (7)   Accessory structure standards:
         (a)   Structures are not intended for human habitation;
         (b)   Structures will have a low flood damage potential;
         (c)   Structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a
minimal obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
         (d)   Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry
floodproofed and watertight to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Certifications consistent with §
151.03.39 shall be required.
         (e)   As an alternative, an accessory structure may be floodproofed in
a water to accommodate internal flooding. To allow for the equalization of
hydrostatic pressure, there shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two
sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. The openings shall have a minimum net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, have a net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, and shall allow automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A floodproofing certification
consistent with §
151.03.39 shall be required.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The conditional uses listed below are only allowable
in the floodway if not prohibited by any other underlying zoning district
classifications of the city, and if not prohibited by any applicable state or
federal law.
      (1)   Grading, extraction, fill, and storage of sand, gravel and other
materials for purposes other than stabilization projects;
      (2)   Marinas, boat rentals, permanent docks, piers, wharves,
navigational facilities, and water-control structures;
      (3)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines;
      (4)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials; and
      (5)   Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows.
   (D)   Standards for conditional uses.
      (1)   All uses. No fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit,
obstruction or other use may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause
any increase in the stage of the regional flood, or cause an increase in flood
damages in the reach or reaches affected.
      (2)   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures
and standards contained in §
151.06.14.
      (3)   The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district if one exists.
      (4)   Fill; storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   Fill, dredge, spoil and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         (c)    As an alternative, and consistent with subsection (D)(2) of
this section, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow
temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials that would have caused an
increase to the stage of the regional flood, but only after the city has
received an appropriate plan that assures the removal of the materials from the
floodway, based upon the flood-warning time available.
         (d)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning, and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body. The
storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable,
explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited.
      (5)   The conditional use permit must be title-registered with the
property in the Office of the County Recorder.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.33 FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (FF).
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as
permitted uses in the underlying zoning district(s). If no preexisting,
underlying zoning districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential
structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted use in the Flood
Fringe District, provided the use does not constitute a public nuisance.
      (2)    All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for flood
fringe permitted uses listed in subsection (B) of this section and the
standards for all flood fringe uses listed in subsection (E) of this section.
   (B)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.
      (1)    All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated
on fill so that the lowest floor, including the basement floor, is at or above
the regulatory flood protection elevation or must adhere to the alternative
listed in subsection (B)(2) of this section.
         (a)   The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower
than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation. The fill for
residential structures shall extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet
beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2297.png]
 
Figure 151.03.03. Overview of Fill Standards for Residential Structures
      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, enclosed accessory
structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 576
square feet in size may be floodproofed in accordance with the following
standards:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall only be used for parking and storage.
         (b)   Accessory structures must allow for the equalization of
hydrostatic pressure by accommodating for the inundation of floodwaters. There
must be a minimum of two openings in the outside walls of the structure, having
a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least two sides
of the structure, and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. The openings shall allow
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention.
      (3)    The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess
of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only
as a conditional use, unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a
structure in accordance with subsection (B)(1) of this section.
      (4)   All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover, or other acceptable method.
      (5)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above
an elevation no more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation, or must have a flood warning/emergency evacuation plan acceptable to
the city.
      (6)   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may
be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.
However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must be
designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth multiplied
by the velocity would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional
flood.
      (7)    The provisions of subsection (E) of this section shall apply.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   The placement of floodproofed nonresidential basements below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (2)   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill
when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with
subsection (B)(1) of this section.
      (3)   The use of methods other than the fill standards in subsection (B)
(1) of this section to elevate the lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
   (D)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.
      (1)   Alternative elevation methods. Alternative elevation methods other
than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may
include the use of stilts, pilings, filled stem walls, parallel walls and the
like, or internally-flooded, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces, attached
garages, or tuck-under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above-grade, and not a structure’s basement or lowest floor, if:
         (a)   The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the
structure;
         (b)   It is designed to internally flood; and
         (c)   It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards:
            1.   Internally-flooded, fully enclosed areas, such as crawl spaces
or tuck-under garages, must be designed to internally flood and include a
minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure. The bottom of
all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade, and have a minimum
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect
certifies that a smaller net area would suffice.
            2.   Floodproofing certifications consistent with §
151.03.39 shall be required. The structure shall be subject to a deed-
restricted nonconversion agreement with the issuance of any permit.
      (2)   Basements. Basements, as defined in
Chapter 154 Definitions, shall be subject to the following:
         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
         (b)   Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation, provided the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with this part.
      (3)   Dry floodproofing. All areas of nonresidential structures,
including basements, to be placed below the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the structurally dry
floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry
floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classification in the
State Building Code, and this shall require making the structure watertight,
with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the
FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.
      (4)   Erosion/sedimentation control plan. When at any one time more than
1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for
the activities as on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations,
landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works,
an erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the community is
enforcing a state-approved shoreland management ordinance.
      (5)   Storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      (6)    The provisions of subsection (E) of this section shall also apply.
   (E)   Standards for all flood fringe uses.
      (1)   Vehicular access. All new principal structures must have vehicular
access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory
flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the
Planning Commission must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy
of the structure for times of flooding, and only after determining that
adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures
exist.
      (2)   Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad
tracks and parking lots, may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for the facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that, when multiplying the depth (in
feet) times velocity (in feet per second), the product number exceeds four upon
occurrence of the regional flood.
      (3)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations, especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses, such as yards
and parking lots, may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
subsection (B) of this section. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in floodplain areas.
      (4)   Fill compaction and side slope protection standards. Fill shall be
properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of
riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency
Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard
area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the
regional flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill
compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot
developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of
site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be
requested.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles. Standards for recreational vehicles are
contained in §
151.03.37.
      (6)   Manufactured homes. Standards for manufactured homes are contained
in §
151.03.37.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.34 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT (GF).
   (A)   Permitted uses. 
      (1)   The uses listed in §
151.03.32 Floodway Overlay District are allowed with a permit.
      (2)   All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe criteria
specified below. Section
151.03.32 applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Floodway
District. Section
151.03.33 applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Flood Fringe
District.
   (B)   Procedures for determining floodway boundaries and base flood
elevations.
      (1)   Requirements for detailed studies. Developments greater than 50
lots or five acres, or as requested by the Zoning Administrator, shall be
subject to a detailed study to determine the regulatory flood protection
elevation and the limits of the Floodway District. The determination of the
floodway and flood fringe must be consistent with accepted hydrological and
hydraulic engineering standards, and must include the following components, as
applicable:
         (a)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
         (b)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
         (c)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the base flood
without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage
increase than one-half foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both
sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway
boundaries, unless development or geographic features warrant other analysis,
as approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      (2)   Alternative methods. For areas where a detailed study is not
available or required, the regional flood elevation must be determined using
best available data. Until a floodway determination can be completed, the
entire floodplain must be treated as floodway, with allowable activities
restricted to those identified in §
151.03.32.
         (a)   Development allowed in floodways (e.g. bridges, culverts,
grading, filling, stabilization projects) must not cumulatively increase flood
stages more than one-half foot during a base flood event, as determined by a
professional engineer or by using accepted engineering practices approved by
the Department of Natural Resources. A stage increase less than one-half foot
must be used if increased flood damages would result.
         (b)   Development prohibited in floodways (e.g. buildings) require a
floodway/flood fringe determination to verify the development is within the
flood fringe. The floodway/flood fringe determination must be done by a
professional engineer or utilize other accepted engineering practices approved
by the Department of Natural Resources. Any such proposal must assume a one-
half foot stage increase for the purposes of determining the regulatory flood
protection elevation to accommodate for future cumulative impacts.
      (3)    For areas in and along lakes, wetlands, and other basins that are
not affected by velocities, where the floodway has not been determined, an
alternative to subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section is:
         (a)   All areas that are at or below the ordinary high water level
(OHW) will be considered floodway, and all areas below the base flood elevation
but above the OHW will be considered flood fringe, provided that within 25 feet
of the OHW, or within the Shore Impact Zone as identified in the community’s
shoreland ordinance, whichever distance is greater, land alterations shall be
restricted to:
            1.   The minimum required to accommodate beach and access areas,
and accessory structures as permitted, not to exceed a volume greater than ten
cubic yards; projects involving volumes exceeding ten cubic yards require
engineering analysis as provided in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this
section, whichever is applicable; and
            2.   The minimum required to accommodate shoreline stabilization
projects to correct an identified erosion problem as identified by the Chisago
Soil & Water Conservation District.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information and
assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood
Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of
previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning Administrator may seek technical
assistance from an engineer or other expert person, or agency, including the
Department of Natural Resources.
   (D)   Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been
determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.35 SUBDIVISIONS.
   No land shall be subdivided that is unsuitable for the reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, water supply, or sewage treatment facilities. Manufactured
home parks and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are considered
subdivisions under this division.
   (A)   All lots within the Floodplain Overlay Districts shall be able to
contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (B)   All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that
comply with the provisions of this part and have road access, both to the
subdivision and to the individual building sites, no lower than two feet below
the regulatory flood protection elevation unless a flood warning emergency plan
for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional flood
prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual has been
approved by the city.
   (C)   For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required
elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.36 UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   Utilities. All utilities and facilities, such as gas, electrical,
sewer and water supply systems, to be located in the floodplain shall be
elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation or located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   (B)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges
to be located within the floodplain shall comply with this part. These
facilities must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation where
failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in
danger to the public health or safety, or where the facilities are essential to
the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may
be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of
transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
   (C)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public
utilities are not provided:
      (1)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are subject to the
provisions in Minn. Rules, Part 4725.4350, as amended; and
      (2)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems, and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and shall not be
subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are
subject to the provisions in Minn. Rules, Part 7080.2270, as amended.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.37 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in
compliance with §
151.03.33 and must be securely anchored to a system that resists flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not
limited to, use of the over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
      (2)   New manufactured home parks and expansion of existing manufactured
home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by this
part.
      (3)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in
Floodplain Overlay Districts will be treated as a new structure, and may be
placed only if elevated in compliance with this part. If vehicular road access
for existing manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with this
part, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the
property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the
governing body.
   (B)   Recreational vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds
and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are
prohibited in any Floodplain Overlay District. Recreational vehicles placed in
existing recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds, or lots of record must
either:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes above; or
      (2)   Be travel ready, meeting the following criteria:
         (a)   Have current licenses required for highway use.
         (b)   Are highway-ready, meaning they:
            1.   Are on wheels or the internal jacking system;
            2.   Are attached to the site only by quick, disconnect-type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks; and
            3.   Have no permanent, structural-type additions attached.
         (c)   The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible
in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.38 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Conformity; unlawful repair or existence. A structure or the use of a
structure or premises that was lawful before the passage or amendment of this
part, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this part, may be
continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined
in
Chapter 154 Definitions, shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Expansion, changes, and the like prohibited. No use or structure shall
be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way that increases its flood
damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as provided
below. Expansion or enlargement of uses, structure, or occupancies within the
Floodway District is prohibited.
   (C)   Alterations and additions. Any alteration or addition to a
nonconforming structure or nonconforming use that would result in increasing
the flood damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the
regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation
on fill or floodproofing techniques allowable in the State Building Code (i.e.,
FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications), except as further restricted
below.
   (D)   Discontinuance of structure or use. If any nonconforming use is
discontinued for more than 12 consecutive months, any future use of the
building premises shall conform to this part. The assessor shall notify the
Zoning Administrator, in writing, of instances of nonconforming uses that have
been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
   (E)   Destruction; reconstruction prohibited.
      (1)   If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in
Chapter 154 Definitions, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this part. The applicable provisions for establishing
new uses or new structures will apply depending upon whether the use or
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
      (2)   If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive
loss, it shall be considered substantially damaged and must not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this part.
   (F)   Conformity. If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in
Chapter 154 Definitions, then the entire structure must meet the requirements
of this part for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. If the proposed development,
including maintenance and repair during the previous 365 days, plus the costs
of any previous alterations and additions since the first flood insurance rate
map exceeds 50% of the market value of any nonconforming structure, the entire
structure must meet the requirements of this part for new structures.
   (G)   Structures within the regulatory floodplain, as identified in §
151.03.31(G)(3), but outside of the 1% annual chance floodplain, are exempt
from  subsections  (E) and (F) of this section.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.03.39 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Administration.
      (1)   Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator or other official
designated by the governing body shall administer and enforce this part. If the
Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this part, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for the violation in
accordance with the procedures stated in §§
10.90 and
10.98  of this Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Permit, certification, and record-keeping requirements.
         (a)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this part shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof;
prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land; prior to
the construction of a dam, fence or on-site septic system; prior to the change
or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that
has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado or any other source; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials or the storage of materials or
equipment within the floodplain.
         (b)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator, on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator, and shall include the following where applicable:
            1.   A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions, existing or
proposed buildings, structures, and significant natural features having an
influence on the permit.
            2.   Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the
stream channel.
            3.   Copies of any required municipal, county, state, or federal
permits or approvals.
            4.   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning
Administrator as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
         (c)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or
processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary
state and federal permits.
         (d)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered or
nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until
a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator, stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this part.
         (e)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this part. Floodproofing
measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered
architect as being in compliance with applicable floodproofing standards in the
State Building Code. Accessory structures designed in accordance with §
151.03.33 are exempt from certification, provided sufficient assurances are
documented. A registered professional engineer is required to certify that any
development in established floodways must not cause any increase in flood
elevations, and development in the general Floodplain Overlay District will not
cumulatively increase flood stages more than one-half foot, or less if
increased damages would result.
         (f)   Recordkeeping.
            1.   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain records in perpetuity
documenting all certifications referenced in  subsection  (A)(2)(e) of this
section as applicable.
            2.   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain records in perpetuity
documenting elevations complying with §
151.03.33. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures and alterations to structures are constructed or
floodproofed.
         (g)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. In riverine
situations, the Zoning Administrator shall notify adjacent communities prior to
the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the
applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 103G, as amended, this shall suffice as adequate
notice. A copy of the notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago
Regional Office of FEMA.
         (h)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease
the regional flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes
by submitting a copy of the technical or scientific data.
      (3)   Amendments.
         (a)   Floodplain designation. The floodplain designation on the
official zoning map shall not be removed from floodplain areas, unless it can
be shown that the designation is in error, or that the area has been filled to
or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may
be permitted by the Department of Natural Resources if it is determined that,
through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
         (b)   Required approval. All amendments to this part, including
amendments to the official zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the
Department of Natural Resources prior to adoption.
         (c)   Map revisions. The Floodplain Overlay District regulations must
be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in this part.
      (4)   Appeals and variances; duties of the Board of Adjustment.
         (a)   Application. An application for a variance to the provisions of
this part shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable state
statutes and §
151.06.13.
         (b)   Submittal of hearing notices. The Zoning Administrator shall
submit hearing notices for proposed variances to the Department of Natural
Resources sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days’ notice of the
hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the area
hydrologist.
         (c)   Adherence to state floodplain management standards. A variance
shall not allow a use that is now allowed in that district, permit a lower
degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for
the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state
law.
         (d)   Additional criteria. The following additional variance criteria
of FEMA must be satisfied:
            1.   Variances shall not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
regional flood discharge would result.
            2.   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon:
               a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
               b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
               c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
            3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         (e)   Flood insurance notice.
            1.   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a
variance that:
               a.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the regional flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance; and
               b.   Such construction below the regional flood level increases
risks to life and property.
            2.   Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions.
         (f)   General considerations. The community may consider the following
variables, and consider imposing conditions on variances and conditional uses:
            1.   The potential danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
            2.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
            3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and
the ability of these systems to minimize the potential for disease,
contamination, and unsanitary conditions;
            4.   The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
            5.   The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed
use to the community;
            6.   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
            7.   The availability of viable alternative locations for the
proposed use that are not subject to flooding;
            8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
            9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Land
Use Plan and floodplain management program for the area;
            10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
         (g)   Submittal of final decision. A copy of all decisions granting
variances shall be forwarded to the Department of Natural Resources within ten
days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to
the area hydrologist.
         (h)   Recordkeeping. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record
of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program when requested by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (5)   Conditional uses.
         (a)   Review. An application for a conditional use permit under the
provisions of this part shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with §
151.06.14.
         (b)   Factors used in decision-making. In passing upon conditional use
applications, the city shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this chapter, and those factors specified in  subsection  (A)(3)(b)
of this section.
         (c)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. In addition to
the standards identified in §
151.06.14, the City Council shall attach conditions to the granting of
conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purpose of this
part. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation;
            2.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions; and
            3.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
         (d)   Submittal of hearing notices. The Zoning Administrator shall
submit hearing notices for proposed conditional uses to the Department of
Natural Resources sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days’ notice
of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the
area hydrologist.
         (e)   Submittal of final decisions. A copy of all decisions granting
conditional uses shall be forwarded to the Department of Natural Resources
within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or
U.S. mail to the area hydrologist.
   (B)   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this part
or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or
conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
defined by law.
      (2)   Other remedies. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this chapter and will be
prosecuted accordingly.
      (3)   Enforcement. Violations of the provisions of this chapter will be
investigated and resolved in accordance with the provisions of §§ 10.90 and
10.98 of the Zoning Ordinance. In responding to a suspected ordinance
violation, the city may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available
to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-
the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures, or a request to the National
Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the
guilty party. The city must act in good faith to enforce these official
controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not
to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 04: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.04.11 BUILDING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   In situations where a commercially zoned parcel is used for
residential purposes and the use is a legal nonconforming use, R-2 District
standards for setback, impervious surface, accessory structure and off-street
parking requirements, and other similar provisions shall apply to the parcel
and the structure thereon until the use of the property is brought into
compliance with the provisions of the applicable commercial zoning district.
   (B)   No fence, plantings, or structures which obstruct view, except for
shade trees, shall be located within 25 feet of any corner formed by the
intersection of a street or driveway as measured from the intersecting property
lines.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. PARKING AND LOADING
§ 151.04.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Changes of buildings or land. No change of use of land or of use of
any building shall be made until there is sufficient parking, loading and
garage spaces as required by this part.
   (B)   Reduction of existing spaces. No parking, loading or garage spaces
existing upon the effective date of this chapter shall subsequently be reduced
below the requirements of this part unless said number of spaces exceed the
requirement set forth herein.
   (C)   Calculating space.
      (1)   Where calculations result in requiring a fractional space or any
fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half
or more shall require one space.
      (2)   The term “floor area,” for the purpose of calculating the number of
off-street parking spaces required, shall be determined on the basis of the
exterior floor area dimensions of the building structure or use times the
number of floors, minus 10%.
      (3)   Should a building or structure contain two or more types of uses,
each should be calculated separately for determining the off-street parking
space or garage capacity required.
   (D)   Use of space. Required parking, loading or garage spaces shall not be
used for snow storage, storage of goods, or for storage of vehicles that are
inoperable or for sale or rent.
   (E)   Maintenance. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the
lessee and/or owner of the principal use, uses or building to maintain in a
neat and adequate manner, the parking area, striping, garages, landscaping and
screening.
   (F)   Signs. Signs located in parking areas necessary for orderly operation
of traffic movement shall be permitted in addition to others as regulated by
Division 151.07 Signage.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.22 STALL, AISLE, AND DRIVEWAY DESIGN.
   (A)   All properties shall be entitled to at least one curb cut.
      (1)   Any additional curb cuts must be approved by the City Engineer
based on street type, traffic counts, and visibility.
      (2)   Single-family uses shall be limited to one curb cut access per
property.
   (B)   All parking spaces shall be served by access aisle or driveway
connections to a public right-of- way.
   (C)   No more than three vehicles may be parked or stored outside an
enclosed building on a lot that contains a single-family residence. For a lot
with a duplex, six vehicles may be parked or stored outside. If there are more
than three persons residing at a single-family dwelling, inclusive of an
accessory dwelling unit or boarder, who have valid state driver’s licenses
showing the residence address(es) on the lot, then the total number of vehicles
allowed to be parked outside is increased to a number equal to the number of
licensed drivers residing at the property, not to exceed five vehicles. The
provisions of this division shall not apply during snow emergencies.
   (D)   All off-street parking lots shall be no closer than five feet to a
non-residential side lot line, right-of-way line, or rear lot line.
   (E)   Garages no less than 400 square feet in size and meeting the
requirements of §
151.05.52 Accessory Structures shall be required for all single-family, two- to
four-family, twinhome, and townhouse uses.
   (F)   Except in the case of single-family, two- to four-family, twinhome,
and townhouse units, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation
between parking aisles or driveways occurs within the designated parking lot
and does not depend upon a public street or alley and the design does not
require backing into the public street. No parking spaces shall conflict with
pedestrian movement along adjoining sidewalks or pedestrian ways.
   (G)   No parking area of more than two spaces shall be designed as to
require any vehicle to back into a public street unless approved by the City
Council.
   (H)   Tandem parking (one vehicle behind another) layouts are not permitted
except for single- and two-family dwellings.
   (I)   Except in the case of single-family dwellings, two- to four-family
dwellings, twinhomes, and townhouses, parking areas shall comply with the
following standards:
Table 151.04.01: Parking Area Dimensions
 
Angle of Parking       Stall Width Stall Depth Driveway Width
0 degrees (along curb) 10 feet     10 feet*    12 feet
30 degrees             10 feet     19 feet     11 feet
45 degrees             10 feet     21 feet     13 feet
60 degrees             10 feet     22 feet     18 feet
90 degrees             9 feet      19 feet     24 feet
*Parallel parking: 22 feet in length
 
   (J)   In addition to any other requirements relating to parking spaces
contained in this Code of Ordinances, handicapped parking must conform to ADA
and Minnesota Statute requirements.
   (K)   Driveway design.
      (1)   Driveways shall be designed to provide an adequate means of access
to a public alley or street and shall be so located as to cause the least
interference with traffic movement.
      (2)   All driveways must be paved with asphalt, concrete or other
material as approved by the City Engineer, except for properties whose main
access is on a non-paved roadway.
         (a)   All residential driveways accessing an adjacent street shall,
within one year of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, be paved with
asphalt, concrete, or other material as approved by the City Engineer at a
minimum of the full width of the garage door.
         (b)   The paved area of the driveway that is located on the lot shall
be included in impervious surface calculations. The paved area that is located
in the right-of-way shall not be included in impervious surface calculations
for the lot.
      (3)   Driveway dimensions.
         (a)   Driveways for residential uses shall not exceed 24 feet in width
at the curb line and property line.
         (b)   Driveways for commercial, office or industrial uses shall not
exceed 32 feet in width at the curb line and property line.
      (4)   Driveways must be located at least three feet from the extension of
the side lot line from the property line to the curb to accommodate the
driveway apron.
      (5)   All residential driveways shall meet the required side yard setback
for the adjacent structure. For example, a driveway that serves an attached
garage must meet the principal structure side yard setback; a driveway that
serves a detached garage must meet a five foot side yard setback.
      (6)   Driveways abutting a public street must have a minimum of a five
foot landscaped separation between any adjacent driveways. That area between
the property line and the curb line or edge of pavement shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to pave and maintain.
Figure 151.04.01. Residential Driveway Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2305.png]
 
Figure 151.04.02. Non-Residential Driveway Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2307.png]
 
(Ord. 20220120- 01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.23 STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOTS WITH FIVE OR MORE SPACES.
   (A)   All applications for a building permit for uses requiring five or more
off-street parking or loading spaces shall submit a site plan drawn to scale
and dimensioned indicating the location and design of all off-street parking
and loading spaces and driveway areas. A building permit shall not be issued
until the Zoning Administrator has reviewed and approved the parking lot site
plan. Any variance to the parking lot standards of this section shall be
processed in accordance with §
151.06.13. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, parking lots with
unusual designs may be referred to the Planning Commission and/or City Council
for input.
   (B)   A parking lot with five or more parking spaces shall adhere to the
following design standards:
      (1)   Areas devoted to parking, loading, and driveways shall be surfaced
with materials suitable to control dust and drainage. The surface material
shall be asphaltic, bituminous, or concrete pavement.
      (2)   The parking stalls and driveways shall be graded for proper
drainage in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code pertaining
to stormwater. The city may require curbing as necessary to mitigate surface
water runoff to public rights-of-way and/or adjoining properties.
      (3)   All asphaltic, bituminous, or concrete surfacing shall be marked
with white or yellow lines not less than four inches wide.
      (4)   Any direct lighting source to illuminate off-street parking or
loading areas shall be directed away from abutting uses and public rights-of-
way and meet the requirements of
Part 151.04.6 Lighting.
      (5)   No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight, orderly
operation, and traffic movement within any parking or loading area.
      (6)   The parking and loading areas must be screened from abutting
residential uses or districts by a wall, fence, or densely planned compact
hedge or tree cover of proper design to provide an adequate screen, and meeting
the requirements of
Part 151.04.3 Fencing and Screening.
      (7)   Parking lots, excluding entrance/exit drives, may not be
constructed closer than three feet from the property line. This setback
distance shall increase to ten feet for any portion of the parking lot abutting
a residential use.
      (8)   In addition to the setbacks outlined in  subsection  (B)(7) of this
section, sufficient space, as approved by the city, shall be provided for as a
depository for snow cleared from the lot.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.24 NUMBER OF REQUIRED SPACES.
   (A)   The minimum number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
provided and maintained:
Table 151.04.02. Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
Use                                     Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
                                        Required
Residential
Dwelling, single-family detached        2 spaces per dwelling unit including 1
                                        enclosed
Dwelling, manufactured or mobile home   1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, two- to four-family           2 spaces per dwelling unit including 1
                                        enclosed
Dwelling, twinhome                      2 spaces per dwelling unit including 1
                                        enclosed
Dwelling, attached townhouses or        1.5 spaces per dwelling unit including
rowhouses                               1 enclosed
Dwelling, apartment                     1 space per bedroom plus 1 visitor
                                        space for every 10 dwelling units
Dwelling, apartment mixed use           1 space per bedroom
                                        1 space per dwelling unit plus 1 space
Dwelling, live/work                     per 1,000 square feet of nonresidential
                                        floor area
Dwelling, senior independent living     0.5 space per bedroom plus 1 visitor
                                        space for every 10 dwelling units
Cottage courtyard development           1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
                                        2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1
Residential care                        space per employee on the maximum work
                                        shift
Senior care facility                    1 space per every 5 beds plus 1 space
                                        per every 3 employees
Bed and breakfast                       2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1
                                        space for each guest room
Hotel or motel                          1 space for each guest room, plus 1
                                        space per every 3 employees
Public, Social, Healthcare
                                        1 space per employee on the maximum
Child care center                       work shift, plus 1 space per every 10
                                        children
Clinic and office, including medical,   1 space per 250 square feet of gross
dental, or therapeutic                  floor area
Club, lodge, or meeting place of a non- 1 space per every 4 persons of the
commercial nature                       maximum building occupancy
Funeral home, mortuary                  1 space per 50 square feet of floor
                                        area in parlors or assembly rooms
                                        1 space per every 5 beds plus 1 space
Hospital                                per every 3 employees on the maximum
                                        work shift
Municipal, county, state, or federal    1 space per employee on the maximum
administrative or services building     work shift
Municipal social, cultural, or          1 space per every 4 persons of the
recreational facility                   maximum building occupancy
Municipal, county, state or federal     1 space per 300 square feet of usable
administrative or services building     floor area
Place of worship                        1 space per every 5 persons of the
                                        maximum building occupancy
School, college/university/trade/       1 space per employee, plus 5 spaces per
business                                classroom
School, elementary                      1 space per employee
School, secondary                       1 space per employee, plus 5 spaces per
                                        classroom
Commercial
                                        1 space per each examination and
Animal/veterinary clinic or hospital    treatment room, plus 1 space per
                                        employee on the maximum work shift
Animal boarding, shelter or daycare     1 space per 600 square feet of gross
center                                  floor area
Automobile fueling and service station  1 space per 2 gas pumps
Automobile repair and service, minor    2 spaces per service bay, plus 1 per
                                        each employee
Automobile repair and service, major    2 spaces per service bay, plus 1 per
                                        each employee
Automobile sales, leasing and service   1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross
                                        floor area for indoor display area
Bar or drinking place, brewpub          1 space per 150 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Commercial center                       1 space per 300 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
                                        1.5 spaces per every 2 employees or 1
Professional offices                    space per 300 square feet of gross
                                        floor area, whichever is greater
Restaurant                              1 space per 4 seats provided for patron
                                        use
Retail with residential above street    1 space per 250 square feet of retail
level                                   gross floor area, plus 1 space per
                                        residential unit
                                        1 space per 250 square feet of gross
                                        floor area, plus 1.5 spaces per every 2
Retail with office above street level   employees or 1 space per 300 square
                                        feet of gross floor area, whichever is
                                        greater
Specialty food or coffee shop           1 space per 4 seats provided for patron
                                        use
Standalone store, retail or service     1 space per 250 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Storage facility, personal              1 space per 1,000 square feet of
                                        storage space
Studio or gallery                       1 space per 250 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Industrial
Brewery, winery or distillery           1.5 spaces per every 2 employees on the
                                        maximum work shift
                                        1 space per 500 square feet of gross
Construction contractor yard            floor area of office, sales, or display
                                        area, plus 1 space per 5,000 square
                                        feet of storage area
Manufacturing, heavy                    1.5 space per every 2 employees on the
                                        maximum work shift
Manufacturing, light                    1.5 spaces per every 2 employees on the
                                        maximum work shift
Open and outdoor storage                1 space per employee of the maximum
                                        work shift, plus 3 visitor spaces
Scrap or salvage storage yard           1 space per employee of the maximum
                                        work shift, plus 3 visitor spaces
                                        1 space per 500 square feet of gross
Storage and sale of machinery and       floor area for office, sales, and
equipment                               indoor display/storage area, plus 1
                                        space per 2,000 square feet for outdoor
                                        display/storage area
Warehouse or distribution facility      1.5 spaces per 2 employees on the
                                        maximum work shift
Wholesale trade establishment           1 space per every 2 employees
Arts, Entertainment, Recreation
Park or playground                      None required
Adult oriented entertainment business   1 space per 200 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Indoor recreational facility,           1 space per 200 square feet of gross
commercial or public                    floor area
                                        The lesser of 1 space per every 4
                                        persons of the maximum building
                                        occupancy, or 1.25 spaces per athlete,
Outdoor recreational facility,          plus 1 space per every 2 employees on
commercial                              the maximum shift. Parking spaces for
                                        any commercial area as part of a
                                        recreational facility shall be provided
                                        at a rate of 1 per 250 square feet of
                                        gross floor area.
                                        The lesser of 1 space per every 4
Outdoor recreational facility, public   persons of the maximum building
                                        occupancy, or 1.25 spaces per athlete
Theater, dance or music performance     1 space per every 5 persons of the
facility                                maximum building occupancy
Natural Resources, Agriculture
                                        1 space per 250 square feet of retail
Commercial greenhouse or nursery        gross floor area, plus 1 space per
                                        2,000 square feet of outdoor display
                                        area
Transportation & Utilities
Ambulance or medical carrier service    1 space per every 2 employees
Essential services                      1 space per employee of maximum work
                                        shift
Public works facility                   1 space per employee on maximum work
                                        shift
 
   (B)   The number of off-street parking spaces provided for a building in the
CBD constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall satisfy the
requirement of this section for any use that is determined to be a retail
store, business or professional office, or similar use, as determined by staff.
When such structure is reconstructed, enlarged, structurally altered, changed
in occupancy to a more intensive use category or otherwise increased in
capacity, off-street parking shall be provided for that portion of the
structure or use constituting the increase in capacity. Notwithstanding the
provisions above, any parking areas now serving such existing buildings shall
not be reduced below the requirements established in this section in the
future.
   (C)   In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the provision for a
use which is similar, as determined by the Zoning Administrator shall apply.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.25 JOINT FACILITIES.
   The City Council may, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, approve a conditional use permit for one or more uses to provide
the required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one or more sites
where the total number of spaces provided are less than the sum of the total
required for each business if the following conditions are satisfactorily met.
The requirement for a conditional use permit does not apply to commercial
centers.
   (A)   The building or use for which the application is being made to utilize
the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be
located within 500 feet of the parking facilities.
   (B)   The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the
operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street
parking facilities is proposed.
   (C)   A properly drawn legal instrument approved by the City Council and
executed by the parties concerned for joint use of off-street parking
facilities shall be filed with the City Clerk. Said instrument may be a three
party agreement, including the city and all private parties involved. Such
instrument shall first be approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.26 OFF-LOT PARKING.
   (A)   Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the principal use, or when this requirement cannot be met, such parking spaces
may be located off the lot provided the parking spaces are located in the same
zoning district and not over 500 feet from the principal use.
   (B)   In cases where off-street parking facilities are permitted on land
other than the same lot as the principal use, such facilities shall be in the
same possession as the lot occupied by the use to which the parking facilities
are necessary or a written agreement between property owners is on file with
the city and recorded in the office of the Chisago County Register of Deeds.
Every change of use or property ownership shall require a new written agreement
to be filed and recorded.
   (C)   Off-lot parking spaces for residential uses shall be within 200 feet
of the principal entrance or the entrance for the individual occupants for whom
the spaces are reserved while the farthest portions of a parking lot for all
other uses shall be within 500 feet of the entrance of the establishment.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.27 LOADING FACILITIES.
   (A)   In connection with any structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be adequate
space provided for off-street loading.
   (B)   On-street parking spaces may be used for loading purposes, provided
that:
      (1)   Vehicles loading or unloading shall be parked for no more than one
hour at a time.
      (2)   A loading berth shall not be located less than 50 feet from the
intersection of two local street rights-of-way nor less than 100 feet from the
intersection of a collector or arterial street.
   (C)   Off-street loading facilities shall:
      (1)   Be improved with a durable material to control the dust and
drainage according to a plan approved by the engineer.
      (2)   Not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or be
included as a part of the space requirements necessary to meet the off-street
parking area.
      (3)   Be located on the same lot as the building or use to be served.
      (4)   Not occupy the required front yard space.
   (D)   Where noise from loading or unloading activity is available in a
residential district, the activity shall terminate between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 3. FENCING AND SCREENING
§ 151.04.31 GENERAL FENCING/WALL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The following provisions within this part apply to both fences and
walls.
   (B)   All fences shall be maintained and kept safe and in a state of good
repair.
   (C)   Fences erected under this section shall be erected with the finished
side facing away from the center of the property.
   (D)   Property owners wishing to erect a fence shall first apply for and
obtain a fence permit from the city.
   (E)   Fences erected for the protection of planting or to warn of
construction hazard, or for similar temporary purposes, shall be clearly
visible and marked with colored streamers or other such warning devices at four
foot intervals. Such fences shall comply with the setback requirements set
forth in this section. Temporary fences shall not be erected for more than 45
days.
   (F)   Any fence existing on the effective date of this Zoning Chapter and
not in conformance with this section may be maintained, but no alteration,
modification, or improvement of said fence shall occur, unless installed in
conformance with this section.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.32 FENCE PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Fences shall be located upon the private property of the person
constructing or causing the construction of such fence.
   (B)   Fences shall be located so that each side of the fence may be properly
maintained by the owner of the fence while on said owner’s property.
      (1)   Fences may be located along an interior side or rear property line
upon mutual written consent of abutting property owners.
   (C)   Fences may be placed on that portion of the zoning lot which is
encumbered by drainage and utility easements at the risk of the property owner.
If located within a drainage easement, the fence shall not obstruct the free
flow of water. If, for any reason, the fence needs to be removed by the city or
any agent of the city for drainage and/or utility concerns, the removal,
repair, and/or replacement shall be at the property owner’s expense.
   (D)   Fences shall be set back at least three feet from any public right-of-
way or comply with the specified zoning district street yard setback, whichever
is less.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.33 FENCE HEIGHT.
   (A)   The height shall be measured from the average point between the
highest and lowest grade. In no case shall a fence exceed the height of the
principal building.
   (B)   In residential districts, no fence in the portion of the required
street yard or required corner side yard located in front of the home shall
exceed four feet in height and six feet in height in the rear yard and interior
side yard.
Figure 151.04.03. Residential Fence Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2317.png]
 
   (C)   In commercial and industrial districts, no fence shall exceed eight
feet in height. Fences may exceed eight feet in height with a conditional use
permit. Solid fencing or privacy fencing shall not exceed six feet in height,
with any fencing above six feet to be at least 75% open for the passage of air
and light.
Figure 151.04.04. Non-Residential Fence Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2315.png]
 
   (D)   In the Agricultural District, no fence shall exceed ten feet in
height. If a privacy fence is desired, the fence height shall not exceed six
feet. If an agricultural fence is desired, the fence height shall not exceed
ten feet and must be at least 75% open for the passage of air and light.
Figure 151.04.05. Agricultural Fence Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2325.png]
 
Figure 151.04.06. Agricultural Fence Height – Privacy Fence
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2327.png]
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.34 FENCE MATERIAL.
   (A)   Fences may be constructed of wood, vinyl, composite, masonry, brick,
metal, or other similar material.
   (B)   No fence shall be constructed which is in a dangerous condition, or
which conducts electricity or is designed to electrically shock or which uses
barbed wire, provided, however, that barbed wire may be used in industrially-
zoned areas if the devices securing the barbed wire to the fence are ten feet
above the ground or height and project toward the fenced property and away from
any public area.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.35 RETAINING WALLS.
   (A)   Retaining walls are not to be allowed within the city’s right-of-way
or easements, unless approved with the overall subdivision-grading plan.
      (1)   Approved subdivision retaining walls within the right-of-way or
easement areas shall meet current MnDOT standards and specifications.
   (B)   Detailed plans and specifications for retaining walls shall be
submitted for review by the City of Lindstrom.
      (1)   Drainage overtopping the walls shall not be allowed.
      (2)   Retaining walls four feet or greater in height, shall be designed
by an engineer licensed in the State of Minnesota and shall require a building
permit.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.36 SCREENING.
   (A)   Screening shall be used to provide a visual and noise separation of
more intensive uses from less intensive uses.
   (B)   Screening meeting the width shown in
Table 151.04.03 shall be provided along side and rear property boundaries of
business and industrial districts abutting residential districts.
Table 151.04.03 Screening Buffer Widths
 
Zoning District of Subject Property Buffer Width
Business                            15 feet
Industrial                          15 feet
 
   (C)   Industrial, personal storage facility, and open and outdoor storage
uses along collector roadways shall be fully screened from the roadway. The
screening shall consist of vegetation fronting the roadway and may also include
additional screening materials as specified in  subsection  (D) of this
section.
   (D)   All screening required by the provisions of this section shall consist
of the following elements or a combination of those elements:
      (1)   A green belt planting strip consisting of at least two staggered
rows of evergreen trees with trees in each row spaced at a maximum of 12 feet;
      (2)   A solid wall or fence constructed of masonry, brick, wood, or steel
which is compatible with surrounding structures and buildings. Vinyl or
composite materials may also be used where the Zoning Administrator finds that
the proposed material is compatible with surrounding structures and buildings
and at least the equivalent of other approved materials in quality, strength,
effectiveness, durability and safety;
      (3)   Hedge with year-round foliage; or
      (4)   Landscaped berm with year-round foliage.
   (E)   If a wall, fence, or hedge is used for screening, these elements shall
be between six and eight feet in height, following the district height
standards listed in §
151.04.33 Fence Height. Screening within the street or corner side yards is
limited to four in height. Height of screening shall be measured from the
natural or approved grade.
   (F)   The buffer area may be interrupted for necessary pedestrian or
vehicular access.
   (G)   Screen plantings shall be permanently maintained by the property
owner, and any plant materials which do not live shall be replaced within six
months.
   (H)   The following site elements shall be screened in compatibility with
the design elements, materials, and colors used elsewhere on the site:
      (1)   Refuse disposal areas.
         (a)   All refuse and recycling containers in all commercial,
industrial, or multi-family zoning districts shall be screened on four sides
(including a gate for access) by a solid, commercial-grade fence, wall, or
equivalent material that is architecturally compatible with the principal
structure and has a height of between six and eight feet.
         (b)   Refuse enclosures shall be subject to the following:
            1.   A three foot setback is required from any lot line.
            2.   Shall include a durable gate system that remains closed when
not in use; and
            3.   Shall allow for easy access by refuse and recycling
contractors.
      (2)   Outdoor storage areas. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from
abutting residential districts with a building wall or solid commercial-grade
fence, wall, year-round hedge, landscaped berm, or equivalent material, with a
height of between six and eight feet. Screening along district boundaries,
where present, may provide all or part of the required screening.
      (3)   Loading areas. Loading areas shall be screened from abutting
residential districts and from street view to the extent feasible by a building
wall or solid commercial-grade wood, vinyl, or equivalent material fence, with
a height of between six and eight feet. Screening along district boundaries,
where present, may provide all or part of the required screening.
      (4)   Mechanical equipment. All rooftop and ground-level mechanical
equipment and utilities shall be fully screened from view from any street or
residential district, as viewed from six feet above ground level. Screening may
consist of a building wall or fence and/or landscaping as approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   Off-street parking areas containing five or more spaces. Off-street
parking areas with five or more spaces shall be screened from abutting
residential districts by a solid wall, fence, evergreen planting of equivalent
visual density, or other effective means, built and maintained at a minimum
height of five feet.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 4. LANDSCAPING
§ 151.04.41 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All open areas of a lot not used for buildings, parking, circulation,
patios or storage must be landscaped with a combination of canopy trees,
ornamental trees, evergreen trees, shrubs, flowers, gardens, sod, ground cover,
natural drainage features, and other site design features to ensure soil
stabilization. This requirement shall not apply to undisturbed areas retained
in a natural state.
   (B)   Landscape plans shall be submitted for all site and subdivision
related applications where exterior construction and development activity will
occur, except for the construction of an individual one- or two-family
dwelling. Where there is greater than one acre of site disturbance, the
landscape plan shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect.
   (C)   The following minimum number of plant materials shall be provided:
      (1)   All residential one- and two-family developments shall require two
canopy trees per dwelling unit.
      (2)   All multi-family, mixed-use, and non-residential uses shall
provide:
         (a)   One canopy or evergreen tree per 25 linear feet of street
frontage.
         (b)   All structures must have foundation plantings consisting of
shrubs, perennials, and native grasses.
         (c)   All additions, expansions, or additional structures shall
require an additional two shrubs per 1,000 square feet of new construction.
   (D)   All plant materials must:
      (1)   Meet the minimum standards set by the American National Standards
Institute in ANSI Z60.1 American Standard for Nursery Stock.
      (2)   Landscape species shall be indigenous or proven adaptable to the
climate, but shall not be invasive species.
      (3)   Landscape materials shall be tolerant of specific site conditions,
including but not limited to heat, drought, and salt.
      (4)   Existing healthy plant material may be utilized to satisfy
landscaping requirements, provided it meets the minimum plant size specified in
this division.
   (E)   Not more than 30% of the required number of trees shall be of the same
genus.
   (F)   Trees and shrubs may be clustered and do not need to be evenly spaced.
For residential properties, it is preferable that new trees be located on the
lot itself and not within the right-of-way.
   (G)   The minimum size of plantings shall be as follows:
      (1)   Canopy trees: two and a half-inch caliper;
      (2)   Ornamental trees: one and a half-inch caliper;
      (3)   Evergreen trees: six-foot height; and
      (4)   Deciduous or evergreen shrubs: five gallon pot.
   (H)   Mulch shall consist of shredded bark, chipped wood, or stone installed
at a minimum depth of two inches. If stone is used, it shall be spread over a
permeable weed barrier fabric.
   (I)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for all projects requiring
approval of a landscape plan, the developer, contractor, or property owner
shall deposit a security with the city to guarantee compliance with and to
indemnify the city for any expenses incurred in enforcing the requirements of
this section. The landscaping security for all uses, which does not include
one- or two-family dwellings, shall be in a form approved by the Zoning
Administrator and shall be equal to 125% of the estimated cost necessary to
furnish and plant the required landscaping and any ancillary screening
improvements such as fencing. The estimated cost shall be subject to approval
by the Zoning Administrator.
   (J)   All required plant materials shall be planted prior to issuing a
certificate of occupancy. In the event that the project is completed during a
time of year when planting is impractical, a security meeting the requirements
of and in the amount of the remaining improvements will be required. In such
case that a performance guarantee is required, all landscaping shall be
completed within one year after the certificate of occupancy has been issued.
   (K)   The continued maintenance of all required landscaping materials in a
live and healthy state is a required responsibility of the owner and tenant of
the property. Plantings which have died shall be promptly replaced in
accordance with the landscape plan approved for the site. This requirement
shall run with the land and be binding upon all future property owners. Failure
to comply with this maintenance requirement shall be a violation of this
section.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.42 OFF-STREET PARKING AREA LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be required along the perimeter and within the
interior of the lot for all new, redevelopment, or retrofit projects. No
additional landscaping shall be required for striping or restriping of existing
parking lots.
      (1)   New parking and driveway areas that accommodate more than 40 cars,
and parking lot expansions that add more than 40 parking spaces, shall be
landscaped along the perimeter and within the interior of the lot. A minimum
area equal to 20% of the parking and driveway surface area shall be designed
with either landscaping islands or divider medians between opposing rows of
parking.
      (2)   For redevelopment or retrofit projects with fewer than 40 new
parking spaces, a minimum of 10% of the parking and driveway surface area shall
be designed with landscaping features. Landscaping features may include linear
parking lot landscaped islands, divider medians, parking lot rain gardens, and
depressed infiltration curb islands. Where the city determines that the parking
lot design cannot reasonably accommodate curb islands, divider medians, or
other landscaping features or cannot accommodate that amount of landscaping
cited herein, plant materials shall be moved to the outside perimeter of the
parking lot.
   (B)   Landscape island design.
      (1)   Landscape islands shall be sized and designed to support plant
health and shall be no smaller than 324 square feet in area. It is strongly
encouraged to use these areas for infiltration purposes.
      (2)   Landscaped islands may contain:
         (a)   Rain gardens;
         (b)   Depressed infiltration areas; or
         (c)   Trees, shrubs, perennials, and/or native grasses.
   (C)   Any divider median shall be at least eight feet in width and extend
the full length of the parking stalls. The divider median shall be covered in
grass, ground cover, mulch, shrubs, trees, or other landscape treatment other
than concrete and pavement.
   (D)   Shade trees shall be used for the perimeter of the parking area and
island landscaping at a minimum rate of one shade tree per ten parking stalls.
Shade trees shall be setback a minimum of eight feet from curbs and/or
pavement.
   (E)   The preservation of existing trees, shrubs, and other natural
vegetation in the parking area may be included in the calculation of the
required minimum landscape area.
   (F)   Modifications from the requirements of this section may be permitted
through the site plan permit review process.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 5. TREE PRESERVATION
§ 151.04.51 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to recognize and protect the integrity of
the natural environment of the community through the preservation, protection,
and planting of trees.
   (B)   The city has found it necessary and desirable to establish
requirements for the preservation and replanting of trees in order to maintain
a healthy and desirable community and to ultimately provide a long term
environmental and economic benefit.
   (C)   In establishing tree preservation requirements, the city intends to:
      (1)   Prevent clear cutting;
      (2)   Preserve the existing tree canopy through root protection by
eliminating or reducing compaction, filling or excavation;
      (3)   Preserve a continuous tree canopy throughout the site and extending
into adjoining properties whenever possible;
      (4)   Preserve mix of tree ages, sizes, and species;
      (5)   Preserve the existing under-story and forest floor vegetation;
      (6)   Preserve both front and backyard trees in residential developments
with custom lot development and site specific roadway alignments;
      (7)   Prevent soil erosion and sedimentation;
      (8)   Control the spread of tree diseases from affected trees to healthy
trees;
      (9)   Protect privacy by establishing and maintaining buffers between
land uses;
      (10)   Providing habitat for wildlife, including birds that help in the
control of insects; and
      (11)   Support energy conservation through natural insulation and
shading.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.52 SCOPE.
   This section shall apply to the following in the city:
   (A)   Any major subdivision or planned unit development application for a
residential development;
   (B)   Any land use or subdivision application for a commercial or industrial
use which will involve site grading and/or principal structure construction;
   (C)   Any building permit that involves the new construction of a principal
structure, the reconstruction of a principal structure, or construction that
more than doubles the building footprint of a principal structure;
   (D)   Any pre-emptive cutting of forests or woodland within one year of any
formal land use application;
   (E)   Grading permits that are not associated with a development or
redevelopment;
   (F)   Removal of more than 30% of the diameter inches of significant trees
on any parcels; and
   (G)   Tree preservation requirements for planned unit developments shall be
determined as part of the development review process.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.53 PROCESS.
   (A)   A tree preservation plan shall be prepared and submitted concurrently
with land use, subdivision and building permit applications for a project
except that a tree preservation plan shall not be required for:
      (1)   The construction or reconstruction of an individual single-family
home as long as any significant trees removed are within the footprints and 20
feet around buildings with frost footings; within the footprints and ten feet
around structures with post footings; and within the areas and within ten feet
of reasonably-sized driveways.
      (2)   The removal of significant trees resulting from the expansion of an
existing single-family home as long as the home has been in existence and not
expanded for at least two years after the final certificate of occupancy was
issued and all of its final landscaping and ground cover was installed.
   (B)   The tree preservation plan must be approved by the Zoning
Administrator prior to grading or construction commencing.
   (C)   For subdivisions with mass grading, the following process shall be
followed:
      (1)   A tree preservation plan shall be prepared and superimposed on the
grading plan;
      (2)   During preliminary plat review, the tree preservation plan will be
reviewed according to the best available layout to preserve significant trees
and the efforts of the subdivider to mitigate damage to significant trees.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee as part of the
development contract to guarantee replacement of all significant trees which
were to have been saved but were actually destroyed or damaged. A financial
security for each mass graded lot with at least one significant tree to be
saved and a financial security for each custom graded lot with at least one
significant tree shall be provided as part of the development contract to
ensure tree protection. The financial security, generally $1,000 per lot, will
be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the number and size of trees
to be saved.
      (4)   All sites shall be staked, as depicted in the approved grading
plan, before grading is to commence. No encroaching, grading, trenching,
filling, compaction, or change in soil chemistry shall occur within the fenced
areas protecting the root zone of the trees to be saved.
      (5)   After mass grading has been completed and streets and utilities
installed, the forester or landscape architect shall submit a tree
certification to the city, which shall include:
         (a)   Certify in writing to the city the status of all trees indicated
as saved trees in the approved plan;
         (b)   Certify in writing to the city whether tree protection measures
were installed;
         (c)   Certify the status of any designated trees that were saved; ande
         (d)   Certify how the city’s tree replacement policy will be met if a
significant tree designated to be saved on the tree preservation plan is
destroyed or damaged.
      (6)   Removal of tree preservation measures shall require written
approval from the Zoning Administrator. Tree preservation measures shall not be
removed from the site until the Zoning Administrator has approved the grading
as built plans for a mass graded site and not prior to the release of financial
securities held by the city.
      (7)   The financial security will be released upon:
         (a)   Approval of the city and a certification in writing by the
forester or landscape architect indicating the tree protection measures were
installed on mass graded lots and tree replacement is completed, if necessary;
and/or
         (b)   The builders have posted security for the custom graded lots.
   (D)   For subdivisions with custom graded lots, the applicant submitting a
building permit for the lot shall:
      (1)   Submit a tree preservation plan prepared and incorporated on the
required site survey for the custom graded lot.
      (2)   Provide the financial security, generally $1,000 per lot, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the number and size of trees to
be saved.
      (3)   Ensure that the tree preservation plan is consistent with the
original tree preservation plan for the plat. The placement of the home and
driveway should be where the fewest significant trees would be destroyed or
damaged.
      (4)   The applicant will be responsible for ensuring the tree
preservation plan is followed during building construction.
      (5)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and release of
tree preservation security, the applicant shall submit a tree certification to
certify to the city in writing the final disposition of safe trees on the lot
and that all the tree protection measures identified on the tree preservation
plan were installed from the start of construction to the end of construction
and tree replacement is completed, if necessary.
   (E)   Zoning and grading permits.
      (1)   At the time of building permit application, applicants will be
required to furnish the following items for tree preservation for all lots with
at least one significant tree:
         (a)   Security of $1,000 per lot for tree protection requirements;
         (b)   Tree preservation plan;
         (c)   Builders are liable for subcontractors that destroy or damage
significant trees that were indicated to be saved on the individual lot tree
preservation plan;
      (2)   Inspectors will monitor the tree protection measures at the time of
routine inspections; and
      (3)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and release of
tree preservation security, the applicant shall submit a tree certification to
certify to the city in writing the final disposition of safe trees on the lot
and that all the tree protection measures identified on the tree preservation
plan were installed from the start of construction to the end of construction
and tree replacement is completed, if necessary.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.54 TREE PROTECTION MEASURES.
   (A)   Placing fill against the trunk of the tree, on the root crown, and
under the drip line of the tree shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Tree protection measures must be installed before construction and
remain in place until all construction activities are terminated.
   (C)   Measures required for protecting significant trees shall include:
      (1)   Installation of orange polyethylene laminate safety netting, or an
equivalent form of safety netting, and metal stakes placed along the
disturbance zone and around significant trees (at least one foot outside the
drip line) to be saved;
      (2)   Installation of erosion control measures;
      (3)   Prevention of soil compaction or alteration of existing grades in
critical root zones (at least one foot outside of the drip line);
      (4)   Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the critical
root zone of significant trees, or use of tunneled installation;
      (5)   Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and
leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuel or paints;
      (6)   Calculation of critical root zones of all significant trees near
disturbance zone and adherence to maximum 25% removal of critical root zone;
      (7)   Root pruning during construction along all disturbance zones shall
be done by hand with a chainsaw or with a machine designed for root sawing
(machine will shatter roots);
      (8)   Pruning of oak trees must not take place from April 15 through July
1. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a nontoxic tree wound dressing must be
applied immediately. Excavators must have a nontoxic tree wound dressing with
them on the development site.
      (9)   Tree stumps to be removed by grinding, not with a bulldozer, in all
areas where root pruning does not occur;
      (10)   Natural ground cover (not sod) shall be maintained where clusters
or areas of significant trees exist;
      (11)   Removal of any diseased oak or elm trees located in areas to be
preserved; and
      (12)   No vehicles or equipment parking or driving out of the
construction boundaries.
   (D)   Optional measures to protect significant trees may include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Installation of retaining walls to preserve trees;
      (2)   Reduced roadway width and paved areas when it can be illustrated
that such variances save trees;
      (3)   On-site layout of roads and house pads;
      (4)   Flag lots and other unconventional lot shapes when it can be
illustrated that such variances save trees;
      (5)   Variable setbacks when it can be illustrated that such variances
save trees;
      (6)   Larger lots in treed areas;
      (7)   Common washout pond for cement, paint and the like, outside of
woods;
      (8)   Basements dug with backhoe and material removed from site;
      (9)   Concrete pumped in;
      (10)   Specified stock pile areas;
      (11)   Prioritize trees to be saved; and
      (12)   PUD zoning.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.55 ALLOWABLE TREE REMOVAL.
   (A)    Significant tree removal shall only be carried out with a city-
approved tree preservation plan. As part of its consideration of the tree
preservation plan the Planning Commission and City Council may take into
consideration the types of trees that are proposed to be removed.
   (B)   Mitigation shall be required if the total number of caliper inches of
existing significant trees removed as a result of the development exceed the
following percentages:
      (1)   Subdivisions with mass grading.
         (a)   R-1 and R-2 Residential Zoning Districts shall have no more than
20% of the total number of caliper inches of significant trees in the
development area removed.
         (b)   All other zoning districts shall have no more than 30% of the
total number of caliper inches of significant trees in the development area
removed.
      (2)   Subdivisions with custom grading.
         (a)   The party responsible for initial site development may remove up
to 20% of the total number of caliper inches of significant trees in the
development area. The party responsible for initial site development shall be
solely responsible for any mitigation required and performance guarantees
required.
         (b)   After the initial site development, the following removal limits
shall apply for each custom graded lot:
            1.   R-1 and R-2 Residential Zoning Districts shall have no more
than 20% of the total number of caliper inches of significant trees in the
development area removed.
            2.   All other zoning districts shall have no more than 30% of the
total number of significant trees in the development area removed.
   (C)   The following types of trees are not considered significant trees and
do not need to be included as part of total caliper inches removed:
      (1)   Dead, diseased or dying trees;
      (2)   Trees that are transplanted from the site to another appropriate
area within the city;
      (3)   Trees that were planted as part of a commercial business such as a
tree farm or nursery; or
      (4)   Undesirable trees as noted in §
151.04.57.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20240515-01, passed 5-15-24)
§ 151.04.56 REQUIRED REFORESTATION.
   (A)   If the removal or disturbance of significant trees proposed by the
preservation plan exceeds the thresholds in §
151.04.55 Allowable Tree Removal, the applicant must mitigate the loss of
significant trees by planting reforestation trees at the rate of one-half
caliper inch per one diameter inch removed. Significant tree replacements will
be calculated by replacing the largest diameter tree first, proceeding down to
the smallest diameter significant tree.
   (B)   Reforestation trees shall be planted on the site being developed. The
applicant may also request approval to plant reforestation trees on city
property. Planting on such sites shall be at the discretion of the city.
   (C)   The reforestation plan shall be prepared and signed by a licensed
forester or a registered landscape architect and comply with the criteria found
in the City of Lindstrom Application Manual.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.57 DESIRABLE SPECIES.
   (A)   A full list of approved and prohibited tree species for planting is
available from city staff and on the city’s website.
   (B)   Trees native to the area shall be encouraged.
   (C)   No invasive species shall be planted in the city.
   (D)   Additional types of tree species not included on the approved list of
planting may be planted with approval from the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.58 TREE REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   Applicants shall be required to replace the significant trees which
were indicated on the tree preservation plan to be saved but ultimately were
destroyed or damaged during construction. Significant trees destroyed or
damaged shall be replaced by trees equivalent in caliper inches lost.
Replacement trees must consist of nursery stock and be no less than the
following sizes:
      (1)   Deciduous trees: no less than two and one-half inches in diameter;
and
      (2)   Coniferous trees: no less than six feet high.
   (B)   Replacement trees shall be covered by a minimum two year guarantee.
Species shall be similar to the trees which were destroyed or damaged and can
include those native species shown on the approved list of trees in Lindstrom.
   (C)   Replacement trees shall not be placed on easements or street rights-
of-way. The city shall determine the locations of tree replacement for
subdivision tree replanting plans. If tree replacement is required on the
individual lot because the builder destroyed or damaged a tree which was to be
saved, the forester or landscape architect shall determine where the
replacement trees shall be installed.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 6. LIGHTING
§ 151.04.61 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   In general, no use or structure shall be operated as to create light or
glare in such an amount or such a degree or intensity as to constitute a
hazardous condition, or as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment
of property by any person of normal sensitivities, or otherwise as to create a
public nuisance.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.62 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   All uses shall comply with the following standards except as otherwise
proved in this section:
   (A)   Lighting fixtures shall be effectively shielded and arranged so as not
to shine directly on any residential property. Lighting fixtures not of a
cutoff type shall not exceed 2,000 lumens (equivalent to a 150 watt
incandescent bulb).
   (B)   Lighting shall not directly or indirectly cause illumination or glare
in excess of one-half foot-candle measured at the street curb line or
nonresidential property line nearest the light source.
   (C)   Time of outdoor lighting reduction in non-residential areas and common
areas of multi-family residential properties shall be 11:00 p.m. or one hour
after the close of business, whichever is later. After such time, total outdoor
brightness (lumens) must be reduced by at least 50% or turned off, unless light
levels need to be maintained due to traffic or safety concerns.
   (D)   No exterior light source on a nonresidential property shall be visible
from any permitted or conditional residential use.
   (E)   Lighting shall not create a sensation of brightness that is
substantially greater than ambient lighting conditions as to cause annoyance,
discomfort or decreased visual performance or visibility from any permitted or
conditional residential use.
   (F)   Lighting shall not create a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
   (G)   Motion sensing light fixtures shall be adjusted according to the
manufacturer’s instructions to dim or turn off no more than ten minutes after
detected motion ceases, unless located at the main entrance of a building.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.04.63 EXCEPTIONS.
   The uses listed below shall be exempt from the provisions of this section as
follows:
   (A)   Publicly controlled or maintained street lighting and warning,
emergency, or traffic signals;
   (B)   Lighting for public monuments, statutes, flagpoles, or other similar
elements;
   (C)   Underwater lighting in swimming pools and other water features;
   (D)   Lighting specified or identified in a conditional use permit;
   (E)   Lighting required by federal, state, county, or city ordinances and
regulations;
   (F)   Lighting for outdoor events as allowed for in the special events
permit;
   (G)   Seasonal lighting and related holiday decorations;
   (H)   Solar landscape lights;
   (I)   Athletic fields and outdoor recreation facilities serving or operated
by an institutional or public use that otherwise meet all of the requirements
of this Zoning Chapter shall be exempt from the requirements of §
151.04.62(B), (D), and (E) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; and
   (J)   Neon signs, theater marquee lights, or decorative lighting that
otherwise meets all of the requirements of this Zoning Chapter shall be exempt
from the requirements of §
151.04.62(A).
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 05: USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
PART 1. PRINCIPAL USES – RESIDENTIAL, FAMILY LIVING
§ 151.05.11 DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.
   (A)   Dwelling unit restrictions.
      (1)   Tents, play houses, or similar structures may only be used for play
or recreational purposes.
      (2)   Site built dwellings and manufactured homes shall be no less than
30 feet in length and no less than 16 feet in width over that entire minimum
length. Width measurements shall not include overhangs and other projections
beyond the principal walls.
      (3)   All dwellings shall be located upon a foundation that meets the
requirements of the State Building Code.
      (4)   Single-family dwellings other than approved earth sheltered homes
shall have one of the following:
         (a)   A pitched roof covered with shingles or tiles;
         (b)   A pitched metal roof that is shingle-colored; or
         (c)   A flat, vegetative roof.
      (5)   Roofs for single-family dwellings other than approved earth-
sheltered homes shall have eaves of not less than six inches.
   (B)   Attached accessory structures.
      (1)   Attached accessory structures may not exceed, in area or height,
the size of the principal structure.
      (2)    Attached accessory structures may not exceed 900 square feet plus
25% of the amount by which the footprint of the principal structure exceeds 900
square feet. The maximum allowable attached accessory structure area is limited
to 1,200 square feet.
      (3)   A basement may be constructed below an attached garage so long as
the square footage of the basement of the garage does not exceed the square
footage of the ground floor of the garage.
         (a)   The lower level square footage shall not be included in the
calculations of the attached accessory building square footage.
         (b)   The total number of garage doors in the garage basement shall
not exceed the number of garage doors on the ground level.
   (C)   Architectural design & construction.
      (1)   For the purpose of creating a desirable neighborhood appearance, no
two dwellings with the same exterior configuration shall be erected in the R-1,
R-2, or R-3 Districts on any three abutting or successive lots fronting the
same street leading in any direction, including fronting on the same or two
intersecting streets. Nor shall any two dwellings with the same exterior
configuration be constructed on lots that abut each other at any point.
Figure 151.05.01 Exterior Configuration
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2333.png]
 
      (2)   It is the declared purpose of this provision to preserve a
desirable neighborhood appearance. Builders shall alter the exterior
configuration of the dwelling unit in particular neighborhood units by using
three or more of the following methods:
         (a)   Varying a portion of the front setback line slightly so as to
eliminate “row” design;
         (b)   Utilizing varying amounts of brick trim on dwellings;
         (c)   Installing shutters on houses where appropriate;
         (d)   Using exterior colors compatible but not the same as those on
neighboring dwellings;
         (e)   Utilizing a mixture of hip roofs and gable roofs;
         (f)   Incorporating a bay window or gabled dormer;
         (g)   Including a porch at least six feet deep;
         (h)   Recessing a portion of the façade at least six feet in length by
at least two feet of depth;
         (i)   Varying the placement of garages; and
         (j)   Utilizing built-out or extended entrances.
         (k)   Additional methods to alter the exterior configuration may be
utilized as approved by the City Council.
      (3)   The city shall determine whether the alterations in the exterior
configuration of neighborhood dwelling units are sufficiently different from
the other units within the neighborhood.
      (4)   The addition of an attached or detached garage shall not be
construed to alter the type of the house as to change the exterior
configuration.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20240515-01, passed 5-15-24)
§ 151.05.12 DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME.
   (A)   Manufactured homes shall meet the permitting and installation
standards established within
Chapter 151, Division 03 of the City Code and state statutes and rules.
   (B)   All manufactured homes located outside of approved manufactured home
parks shall be located upon a foundation that meets the requirements of the
State Building Code.
   (C)   Manufactured homes shall have one of the following:
      (1)   A pitched roof covered with shingles or tiles;
      (2)   A pitched metal roof that is shingle-colored; or
      (3)   A flat, vegetative roof.
   (D)   Roofs for manufactured homes shall have eaves of not less than six
inches.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.13 DWELLING, ATTACHED (TWINHOME, TOWNHOUSE, OR ROWHOUSE).
   (A)   The orientation of the structure(s) shall match the orientation of
other existing principal structures along the block on which it is located.
   (B)   Individual units shall be no less than 18 feet wide.
   (C)   There shall be a separation of at least 15 feet between structures.
   (D)   Attached dwellings shall have one of the following:
      (1)   A pitched roof covered with shingles or tiles;
      (2)   A pitched metal roof that is shingle-colored; or
      (3)   A flat, vegetative roof.
   (E)   Roofs for attached dwellings shall have eaves of not less than six
inches.
   (F)   Buildings shall be designed with significant variation in the façade
every 60 feet and minor variations at least every 20 feet. Variation can be
achieved with articulation, color, texture, materials, doors, and windows.
   (G)   The applicant shall record all covenant and deed restrictions on all
property which will abut the common line. The covenants and deed restrictions
shall:
      (1)   Provide access for repair and maintenance of common walls, service
lines and overhangs;
      (2)   Provide for easements for service lines, common walls, footings and
overhangs; and
      (3)   Provide for restrictions to limit changes in color, material and
design of the dwelling.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.14 DWELLING, APARTMENT.
   (A)   The following standards shall apply to new development, redevelopment,
and building expansions greater than 50% of the floor area of an existing
building unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator or City Council:
      (1)   All multiple-family dwelling buildings shall be designed and
constructed to have the equivalent of a front appearance on each façade.
      (2)   All building façades shall include a variety of materials and
textures.
      (3)   All accessory or ancillary structures, including garages, shall be
designed and constructed with the same facing materials as the principal
structure. The materials shall be used in the same or better proportions as
used on the principal structure.
      (4)   All building entrances shall incorporate arcades, roofs, porches,
alcoves, porticoes or awnings that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun.
In addition, the primary front entrance shall be clearly articulated and
obvious from the street through the use of design features as awnings,
canopies, pillars, special building materials or architectural details.
      (5)   Wall planes shall not run in one continuous direction for more than
36 feet without a change of at least three feet. Any architectural projection
or recess used to accomplish this change shall be a minimum of six feet wide
and three feet deep.
Figure 151.05.02 Façade Articulation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2337.png]
 
      (6 )   The ground floor of the building shall be distinguished from the
upper floors through the use of an awning, trellis, arcade, window lintels,
intermediate cornice line, or brick detailing.
   (B)   Any exterior trash or garbage disposal or storage shall be fully
enclosed by screening walls with access gate, made of the similar materials as
the principal structure.
   (C)   Sidewalks shall be provided from parking areas, loading zones and
recreation areas to the entrance(s) of the building.
   (D)   Outdoor swimming pools or other intensive recreation shall observe
setbacks required for the principal structure.
   (E)   Height. When a structure is located within 30 feet of a residentially-
zoned property outside of the development, the fourth floor must be stepbacked
12 feet from the third floor building envelope.
   (F)   A 15 foot buffer meeting the requirements of §
151.04.36 Screening shall be provided along all property lines abutting the R-
1 or R-2 Districts.
   (G)   In addition to the requirements above, apartments in the CBD shall
adhere to the following:
      (1)   For apartment uses immediately adjacent to Highway 8 or North 1st
Avenue, exclusive of required entrances, the residential use and any parking
may occupy no portion of the front one-half of the first story floor area. For
corner or through lots, the standard shall be applied to one street frontage as
determined by the Zoning Administrator in consultation with the applicant. As
permitted in
Table 151.02.01 Principal Uses Table, non-residential uses are allowed in the
front one-half story floor area.
      (2)   The orientation of the apartment structure shall match the
orientation of other existing principal structures along the block on which it
is located.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.15 DWELLING, APARTMENT MIXED USE.
   (A)   Exclusive of required entrances, the residential use and any parking
may occupy no portion of the front one-half of the first story floor area. For
corner or through lots, the standard shall be applied to one street frontage as
determined by the Zoning Administrator in consultation with the applicant. As
permitted in
Table 151.02.01 Principal Uses Table, non-residential uses allowed in the front
one-half of the first story floor area include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Retail sales;
      (2)   Personal services; and
      (3)   Business and technical services.
   (B)   The following standards shall apply to new development, redevelopment,
and building expansions greater than 50% of the floor area of an existing
building unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator or City Council:
      (1)   All multiple-family dwelling buildings shall be designed and
constructed to have the equivalent of a front appearance on each façade.
      (2)   All building façades shall include a variety of materials and
textures.
      (3)   All accessory or ancillary structures, including garages, shall be
designed and constructed with the same facing materials as the principal
structure. The materials shall be used in the same or better proportions as
used on the principal structure.
      (4)   All building entrances shall incorporate arcades, roofs, porches,
alcoves, porticoes or awnings that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun.
In addition, the primary front entrance shall be clearly articulated and
obvious from the street through the use of design features as awnings,
canopies, pillars, special building materials or architectural details.
      (5)   Wall planes shall not run in one continuous direction for more than
36 feet without a change of at least three feet. Any architectural projection
or recess used to accomplish this change shall be a minimum of six feet wide
and three feet deep. This requirement is shown in
Figure 151.05.02 Façade Articulation.
      (6)   The ground floor of the building shall be distinguished from the
upper floors through the use of an awning, trellis, arcade, window lintels,
intermediate cornice line, or brick detailing.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.16 DWELLING, LIVE/WORK.
   (A)   Any commercial use permitted in the zoning district applicable to the
property is permitted in the live/work unit.
   (B)   Live/work units located at street level are subject to the development
standards for ground-floor retail or commercial establishments as follows:
      (1)   A minimum of 80% of a structure’s street front façade at street
level shall be occupied by nonresidential uses.
      (2)   The ground floor shall have a minimum floor-to-floor height of 13
feet.
   (C)   Parking for customers, if required, shall be separate from resident
parking.
   (D)   Within each live/work unit, the living portion of the unit shall not
exceed one-third of the total floor area of the unit.
   (E)   Wall planes shall not run in one continuous direction for more than 36
feet without a change of at least three feet. Any architectural projection or
recess used to accomplish this change shall be a minimum of six feet wide and
three feet deep.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.17 DWELLING, APARTMENT WITH RESIDENTIAL SUPPORT SERVICES.
   (A)   For apartment uses immediately adjacent to Highway 8 or North 1st
Avenue, exclusive of required entrances, the residential use and any parking
may occupy no portion of the front one-half of the first story floor area. For
corner or through lots, the standard shall be applied to one street frontage as
determined by the Community Development Department in consultation with the
applicant. As permitted in
Table 151.02.01 Principal Uses Table, non-residential uses are allowed in the
front one-half story floor area.
   (B)   The orientation of the apartment structure shall match the orientation
of other existing principal structures along the block on which it is located.
   (C)   Windows or other transparent materials should make up 60% of the
ground floor.
   (D)   Wall planes shall not run in one continuous direction for more than 36
feet without a change of at least three feet. Any architectural projection or
recess used to accomplish this change shall be a minimum of six feet wide and
three feet deep. This requirement is shown in
Figure 151.05.02 Façade Articulation.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.18 COTTAGE COURTYARD DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Minimum distance between dwelling units shall be 12 feet.
   (B)   Each cottage courtyard development shall provide a shared courtyard
which is centrally located, allowing each dwelling unit to be located adjacent
to the shared courtyard. Minimum width and depth of the shared courtyard shall
be 20 feet.
   (C)   Each dwelling with street frontage shall have a principal entrance
facing the front property line and street. Each dwelling that does not have
street frontage shall have a principal entrance facing the shared courtyard.
   (D)   Dwelling units shall be limited to a height of 25 feet.
   (E)   Dwelling units shall have one of the following:
      (1)   A pitched roof covered with shingles or tiles;
      (2)   A pitched metal roof that is shingle-colored; or
      (3)   A flat, vegetative roof.
   (F)   Roofs for each dwelling unit shall have eaves of not less than six
inches.
   (G)   Pedestrian paths shall be provided to ensure pedestrian access from
each individual dwelling unit to the front property line and street.
   (H)   All parking shall be provided in a shared parking area in the rear or
side yard.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.19 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
   (A)   Generally. All regulations prescribed by the State Board of Health or
other authority having jurisdiction and the regulations of the Building Code of
the city shall be complied with in addition to the regulations set forth in
this section.
   (B)   Size. Any manufactured home park established after the effective date
of this chapter shall contain not less than 20 manufactured home lots and shall
be at least three acres in area.
   (C)   Access. Each manufactured home park shall abut upon a public street
and shall have no less than two ingress and egress locations abutting the
public street.
   (D)   Setback requirements. Structures in manufactured home parks shall be
set back 20 feet from front and rear property lines and 12 feet from side
perimeter property lines.
   (E)   Interior requirements. The following requirements shall apply to the
interior of the manufactured home park:
      (1)   Interior streets. The minimum roadway width of interior one-way
streets with parking permitted on one side shall be 21 feet. The minimum
roadway width of two-way streets with parking permitted on one side shall be 30
feet. The minimum width of two-way streets without parking shall be 20 feet.
The streets shall be paved according to city specifications for residential
streets, maintained in good condition and lighted at night.
      (2)   Lot area. The minimum lot area per manufactured home site shall be
5,000 square feet.
      (3)   Utilities. Each manufactured home shall be equipped with one
electric outlet and hookups for municipal water and sewer. Metering shall
follow M.S. § 327C.04. Fire hydrants shall be located in accordance with
generally accepted practices as determined by the City Fire Marshal and City
Engineer.
      (4)   Distance between manufactured homes. The minimum distance between
neighboring manufactured homes shall be 12 feet.
      (5)   Setback from interior streets. No manufactured home shall be
located closer than ten feet to the traveled portion of an interior street.
      (6)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the
ratio of two spaces for each manufactured home lot.
   (F)   Required improvements. In order that a manufactured home park may be
harmonious within itself and with the surrounding area, the following
improvements shall be required:
      (1)   Provisions per city standards for the control of surface drainage,
approved by the City Engineer, must be incorporated on the site.
      (2)   All areas not used for access, parking, circulation, buildings and
service shall be completely and permanently landscaped and the entire area
maintained in good condition.
      (3)   Screening a minimum of 12 feet wide and meeting the standards of §
151.04.36 shall be located and maintained along all exterior boundary lot lines
not bordering a street.
      (4)   Skirting for manufactured homes is required.
         (a)   Skirting shall be a permanent exterior material color
coordinated to match the decor of the manufactured home.
         (b)   All skirting shall be firmly attached and maintained in good
repair.
         (c)   No other buildings or structures shall be attached to a
manufactured home, as specified by the Building Code. This shall not prevent
the use of an awning of aluminum, canvas or fiberglass, which may be enclosed
by mesh screen, and which shall not be larger than 120 square feet in floor
area.
      (5)   Accessory structures allowed shall be one utility building per lot
no larger than 120 square feet and one automobile storage garage no larger than
8% of the lot or 300 square feet, whichever is greater.
         (a)   No accessory structure shall be placed less than two feet from
any lot line; less than six feet from the main structure and/or closer to the
street than the front of the main structure.
         (b)   Automobile storage garages shall be constructed in strict
compliance with the State Building Code and must be approved by the City
Building Official and the park owner(s) or their authorized representative.
      (6)   There shall be provided within each manufactured home park, a
recreation site or sites, for the exclusive use of the park occupants. The
recreation site shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet for each 50
units or fraction thereof. Where possible, the area shall be configured so it
is no longer than two times its width. The recreational sites shall be provided
with equipment as approved by the City Council.
   (G)   Commercial operations restricted. No commercial operation shall be
conducted within the park other than those necessary for the operation thereof.
A common laundering facility is an allowed use. Commercial sales lots for
manufactured homes are prohibited.
   (H)   Parking restrictions. Except as may be authorized by general traffic
and parking regulations or ordinances, no person shall park or occupy any
recreational vehicle in a manufactured home park.
   (I)   New application required for enlargement, extension or transfer of
permit. Any enlargement or extension to any existing manufactured home park or
transfer of an existing permit shall require a new application for a
conditional use permit as if it were a new establishment.
   (J)   Storm shelter facilities. There shall be provided within each
manufactured home park that has ten units or more, except a park for travel
trailers, suitable storm shelter facilities constructed to withstand a free
field of wind of 200 mph, a 1.2.PSI drop in four seconds, of any type of
missile projections. Storm shelter facilities shall comply with the most recent
State Building Code requirements and State Health Department standards. The
area of the shelter facilities shall be equal to seven and one-half square feet
per manufactured home lot.
   (K)   Promulgation of additional regulations. In addition to the foregoing,
the city may impose other conditions, requirements or limitations concerning
the design, development and operation of the manufactured home park it may deem
necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. PRINCIPAL USES – RESIDENTIAL, GROUP LIVING
§ 151.05.21 BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY.
   (A)   The owner or operator shall reside on the property.
   (B)   The establishment shall conform to State Health and Building Code
requirements.
   (C)   The only meal served to guests shall be breakfast and only guests
shall be served.
   (D)   Guests shall not stay for more than 14 days within any 90-day period.
   (E)   On-premises advertising for any bed and breakfast facility located in
any residential district shall be limited to either one wall sign or one
freestanding sign not more than four square feet in area per sign face. The
content of any such sign shall be limited to identifying not more than the name
and address of the facility. No sign shall be internally illuminated.
   (F)   No cooking or cooking facilities shall be allowed or provided in the
guest rooms.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 3. PRINCIPAL USES – COMMERCIAL
§ 151.05.31 ADULT ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS.
   (A)   Location. The property line of the parcel upon which the sexually
oriented adult establishment is located shall not abut the property line of:
      (1)   A residentially zoned property;
      (2)   A licensed day care;
      (3)   A public or private educational facility such as an elementary,
junior high or senior high;
      (4)   A public park; or
      (5)   A church.
   (B)   License. No person, partnership, firm, business or corporation shall
own or operate a sexually oriented adult establishment without having first
secured a business license as provided for in these ordinances.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.32 ANIMAL BOARDING, SHELTER, OR DAYCARE CENTER.
   (A)   An odor mitigation plan shall be provided to demonstrate how impacts
from odors will be minimized.
   (B)   All outdoor areas for animals shall be enclosed with a fence.
   (C)   A facility sharing a common building wall, ceiling, or floor plate
with another use or structure must provide engineering detail demonstrating
sound attenuation to STC rating of 55 or higher for such common walls and
ceilings. Noise testing by a qualified noise professional may be required as a
condition of approval prior to issuance of a building certificate of occupancy.
   (D)   All outdoor designated areas for animals shall be located a minimum of
125 feet from a residential property line.
   (E)   An indoor facility must be located at a minimum of 50 feet from a
residential property line.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.33 CHILD CARE CENTER.
   A child care center may be permitted as a principal use in commercial and
mixed use districts as long as the following standards are met:
   (A)   The child care center shall be licensed by the State of Minnesota; and
   (B)   Play equipment, swings, sand boxes, or structures shall not be located
in the front yard.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.34 MARINA, COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   The marina shall only be used for the purpose of storing, displaying,
and renting of boats and renting of slips and shall not be used for any other
purpose.
   (B)   The conditional use permit shall establish the marina size, including
location, number, and size of slips and the construction of any on-shore
improvements, such as administrative offices, storage, restrooms, and racks for
kayaks, canoes, and paddleboards. An office/storage pontoon can also be parked
in the marina for administrative purposes and to store equipment. The office/
storage pontoon shall not count towards the number of boats or slips available
for rental.
   (C)   Boat rentals shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
daily, or as further restricted by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.
   (D)   Restroom facilities for employees and customers must be provided on-
site or through a recordable document with an adjacent property.
   (E)   Parking shall be established through the conditional use permit.
Consideration should be given to providing one and one-half parking spaces for
each rental boat or slip.
   (F)   A public water work permit shall be obtained from the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources before the marina is constructed.
   (G)   The marina must provide for garbage storage and removal at a rate of
at least once per week.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.35 OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   No overnight accommodations shall be provided.
   (B)   All structures, such as clubhouses, maintenance facilities, or
concession stands, and portions of the parcel used for the outdoor commercial
recreation, including temporary structures, shall meet the greater of the
minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located or
300 feet from any existing residential dwelling on an adjacent parcel.
   (C)   Local and state health and liquor regulations shall be met if food or
beverages are served.
   (D)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. The
City Council may grant approval for modified hours of operation.
   (E)   Any outdoor lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away
from adjoining property and right-of-way.
   (F)   If there is a commercial kitchen on-site or if the facility has its
own liquor license, one of the following must be provided:
      (1)   The facility must be connected to a municipal sewer system.
      (2)   The facility must be connected to an individual sewage treatment
system that complies with regulations from the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency (PCA).
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.36 STORAGE FACILITY, PERSONAL.
   (A)   Facility shall consist of a permanent structure(s) only; temporary/
mobile storage units, such as storage pods and shipping containers, are
prohibited.
   (B)   Individual storage units shall be used for dead storage only. Storage
units shall not be used for retail, commercial, human habitation, office,
workshop, studio, hobby or rehearsal area, manufacturing or processing of
goods, or repair/service of autos or equipment. Auctions, garage or estate
sales are prohibited.
   (C)   Storage of flammable, hazardous or perishable materials and keeping of
animals is prohibited.
   (D)   Outdoor storage, including vehicles and boats, may be allowed with the
approval of a conditional use permit. Any outdoor storage use shall be required
to meet the standards listed in §
151.05.41 Open and Outdoor Storage.
   (E)   All doors to the storage units shall be internally accessed; doors
shall be internally facing and shall not face any street or property line.
   (F)   The entire facility shall be secured by either the walls of the
structure(s) and/or fencing.
   (G)   The use shall be screened from view of any residential use,
residential district, or public right-of-way.
   (H)   All areas intended for driving, parking, and loading shall be paved
with asphalt or concrete.
   (I)   Mini-storage facilities adjacent to residential uses shall not operate
or allow tenant access between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (J)   The overall height of light fixtures installed to illuminate parking
lots and exterior grounds shall not exceed the height of any principal
structure.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.37 CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESS.
   (A)   Location. A cannabis retail business use may not locate:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of a school;
      (2)   Within 500 feet of a daycare;
      (3)   Within 500 feet of a residential treatment facility; or
      (4)   Within 300 feet of an attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field.
   (B)   Hours of operation shall be limited to between 10:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. daily.
(Ord. 20241120-02, passed 11-20-24)
§ 151.05.38 LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAIL.
   (A)   Location. A lower-potency hemp edible retail use may not locate:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of a school;
      (2)   Within 500 feet of a daycare;
      (3)   Within 500 feet of a residential treatment facility; or
      (4)   Within 300 feet of an attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field.
(Ord. 20241120-02, passed 11-20-24)
PART 4. PRINCIPAL USES – INDUSTRIAL
§ 151.05.41 OPEN AND OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   (A)   Use shall be surrounded by a solid fence, berm, or evergreen planting
screen completely preventing a view from any other property or public right-of-
way.
   (B)   Use shall be at least 600 feet from residential districts.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 5. ACCESSORY USES, A-M
§ 151.05.51 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUs).
   (A)   Only one ADU may be created per property.
   (B)   All ADUs must meet principal structure setbacks.
   (C)   ADUs must meet zoning district height restrictions. Internal or
attached ADUs shall adhere to the maximum height permitted for principal
structures within the applicable zoning district. Detached ADUs shall not
exceed the height of the principal structure.
   (D)   An ADU shall be between 250 and 960 square feet in size. The square
footage of a detached ADU shall be counted toward the total allowable detached
accessory structure area on a lot as listed in
Table 151.05.01.
   (E)   The maximum number of bedrooms allowed within an ADU is two.
   (F)   There shall be no more than two occupants per bedroom.
   (G)   The owner(s) of the property must continue to occupy at least one of
the dwelling units on the property as their primary residence, except for a
bona fide temporary absence.
   (H)   All vehicles owned by owners or tenants must be kept on-site, on
improved surfaces.
   (I)   A deed restriction shall be created and recorded with Chisago County
restricting the independent sale of an ADU and requiring adherence to size
limitations and other requirements found in this chapter.
   (J)   No structures on any lot containing an ADU may be used for short-term
rental.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.52 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)    An accessory building shall be considered attached to the
principal building if it is connected to the principal building by a covered
passageway. Attached accessory structures shall meet principal structure
setback and dimensional requirements.
      (2)   Accessory structures associated with public or institutional uses
are exempt from the size and height requirements in this section.
      (3)   Accessory structures shall not be located within a drainage or
utility easement.
      (4)   Detached accessory structures shall not:
         (a)   Be located in the street yard, except for riparian lots;
         (b)   Be located five feet or less from side or rear lot lines of
adjoining lots, except as otherwise provided within this chapter. For riparian
lots, accessory structures in the street yard shall be set back at least 35
feet; nor
         (c)   Be constructed prior to the primary structure.
   (B)   Height.
      (1)   The roof pitch for any accessory structure over 120 square feet
shall be similar to that of the primary structure located on the same parcel.
      (2)   No structure shall exceed the maximum building height for its
respective zoning district.
   (C)   Detached accessory structure size.
      (1)   The following table lists the total allowable area and height of
detached accessory structures by lot size:
Table 151.05.01 Detached Accessory Structure Size
 
Lot Size       Total Detached Accessory Structure Area         Sidewall Height
Under 0.5 acre 75% of the principal structure footprint, up to 10 ft.
               900 sq. ft.
0.5 to 1 acre  75% of the principal structure footprint, up to 10 ft.
               1,200 sq. ft.
1 to 5 acres   75% of the principal structure footprint, up to 12 ft.
               2,000 sq. ft.
5 to 10 acres  3,000 sq. ft.                                   14 ft.
Over 10 acres  5,000 sq. ft.                                   16 ft.
 
      (2)   For residential properties less than one-half acre in area without
an attached garage, an additional 500 square feet shall be allowed beyond the
maximum size referenced in the table above.
      (3)   One detached accessory structure with a nonpermanent foundation per
lot is permitted.
         (a)   The maximum allowable size of this structure is 200 square feet
which is counted as part of total allowable square footage.
         (b)   For riparian lots, one water-oriented accessory structure and
one fish house may be permitted. The size of these structures will be counted
as part of total allowable square footage.
      (4)   Any existing, detached accessory structures on a lot created after
July 16, 2020 shall meet all regulations listed in this section.
      (5)   Detached accessory structures located in the rear yard and entered
from the alley shall be setback at least 20 feet from the rear lot line. Lots
platted prior to January 1, 1980 which do not meet lot width requirements, may
have garages located with a rear yard setback of ten feet to the property line.
      (6)   The allowable area of detached accessory structures as listed in
Table 151.05.01 shall not apply to uses which require additional covered
parking spaces by §
151.04.24 Number of Required Spaces.
      (7)   This section shall not limit structures which are needed to provide
parking by §
151.04.24.
      (8)   The size limits listed here shall not apply to multi-family
residences which are required to provide parking spaces by Table 151.04.02 Off-
Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20240515-01, passed 5-15-24)
§ 151.05.53 ANTENNAS AND SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Antennas exempt from building permit requirements include:
      (1)   Antennas whose heights, without additional supporting structures,
are less than five feet and are mounted on the roof of any building.
      (2)   Any cable television company duly franchised by the city.
      (3)   The city is exempt from these regulations.
   (B)   The erection of any non-exempt antenna requires a building permit and
may be installed subject to the following standards:
      (1)   In all residential zoning districts, antennas shall not be located
in the street yard of any dwelling nor on the lake side of any riparian lot.
Antennas may be located in the street yard of a riparian lot.
      (2)   No signage shall be displayed on any antenna.
      (3)   Antennas attached or mounted to buildings shall comply with the
requirements of the Uniform Building Code 1988, Chapter 23, Section 23.11, Wind
Design of the State Building Code.
      (4)   Free standing antenna shall be set back from all lot lines a
distance at least equal to their height.
   (C)   Amateur radio support structures (towers) shall not exceed a height
above ground level of 70 feet, unless a conditional use permit has been
granted. They shall be mounted on the roof of a dwelling or other building or
located in the rear yard unless there is not sufficient space to erect them in
those locations. They shall be installed in accordance with the instructions
furnished by the manufacturer of that tower model. Because of the experimental
nature of the amateur radio service, antennas mounted on a tower may be
modified and changed at any time so long as the published allowable load on the
tower is not exceeded and the structure of the tower remains in accordance with
the manufacturer’s specifications.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.54 CHILD CARE.
   Child care family and child care group family. Family child care providers
are permitted as an accessory use in any residential district as long as the
following standards are met:
   (A)   Must comply with all state and local standards.
   (B)   The use of any accessory building or accessory structure for child
care is not allowed.
   (C)   Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
      (1)   Meet the requirements of parking for the dwelling;
      (2)   One space per non-resident employee; and
      (3)   One space for pick-up/drop-off.
   (D)   Signage shall be limited to a two foot by two foot, non-illuminated
sign.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.55 DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   All drive-thru lanes shall be clearly identified using striping,
landscaping, and/or signs.
   (B)   Curb-cut entrances for queuing driveways and exit driveways shall be
consolidated with any other driveway entrances or exits on the site.
   (C)   Drive-thru windows, drop boxes, menu boards, and associated or similar
structures shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building, and
must incorporate landscape screening, decorative fences, walls, or a
combination of these elements to minimize their view from the street.
   (D)   This use shall only be permitted when it can be demonstrated that the
operation will not have a significant adverse effect on the existing level of
service of adjacent streets and intersections. Access shall be located so that
access can be provided without generating significant traffic on local
residential streets.
   (E)   Drive-thru lanes shall be designed in a manner that allows drivers not
using the drive-thru, or wishing to exit the drive-thru area, to bypass the
drive-thru lane(s). The drive-through facility shall be designed so it does not
impede traffic or impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement, or
exacerbate the potential for pedestrian or vehicular conflicts.
   (F)   All new lighting must be LED, fully shielded, be no brighter than
needed for the task, and shine only where it is needed. Lights should have a
correlated color temperature (CCT) of 3,000 Kelvin (K) or lower, and dim or
turn off at 11:00 p.m. or one hour after close of business, whichever is later.
Existing lighting should be retrofitted or replaced to meet these standards.
   (G)   Menu boards must be no brighter than needed for the task, be lit with
LED lights of a correlated color temperature (CCT) no higher than 5,000 Kelvin
(K) (ideally 4,000K or lower), and be turned off when the drive-thru closes.
   (H)   A minimum of 100 feet leading to the drive-up window for one lane and
60 feet per lane when more than one lane shall be provided for queuing.
   (I)   Any canopy as part of this use shall be compatible with the
architectural design and materials of the principal structure.
   (J)   If the drive-thru facility is adjacent to residential uses:
      (1)   The facility shall establish sound barriers and be screened from
vehicle lights in stacking areas.
      (2)   Systems for placing of orders shall be located and designed so that
noise is not perceptible on adjacent residential properties.
   (K)   The hours of operation are limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. unless
extended by the City Council as part of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.56 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   The following activities shall be prohibited from being home
occupations:
      (1)   Animal kennels;
      (2)   Funeral chapel;
      (3)   Dispatch where persons come to a site and are dispatched to other
locations;
      (4)   Firearm training or instruction;
      (5)   Business that rents vehicles or equipment, such as trailers;
      (6)   Tow truck; and
      (7)   Excavating.
   (B)   Family child care and group family child care uses are not considered
a home occupation but are subject to the regulations in §
151.05.54 Child Care.
   (C)   Home occupations are permitted in residential and mixed-use zoning
districts as long as the following standards are met:
      (1)   The home occupation is conducted entirely within the enclosed
portion of the dwelling and does not interfere with the principal use of the
dwelling for residential living purposes;
      (2)   The entrance to the space devoted to the home occupation is within
the building;
      (3)   At any time, each dwelling unit shall not have more than two
nonresident employees employed by or engaged in a home occupation working
within the dwelling. This limit shall apply regardless of the number of home
occupations in operation. For purposes of this section, nonresident employee
shall include an employee, business partner, independent contractor or other
person affiliated with the home occupation who is not a resident of the
dwelling unit;
      (4)   There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation and no
alterations, whether interior or exterior, shall change the character of the
structure as a dwelling unit. This includes that no mechanical equipment or
machinery shall be used for the home occupation other than is usually,
customary, and incidental to the residence for domestic or hobby purposes;
      (5)   There is no outside storage or display of products, equipment, or
merchandise;
      (6)   There is no activity or equipment used that creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odor, or electric or television interference
discernable at the property line;
      (7)   Merchandise shall not be displayed or offered for sale outside of
the residence. Orders previously made online, by telephone, or at a sales party
may be filled on the premises;
      (8)   When required, a license from the state shall be maintained at all
times and the home occupation shall operate in compliance with the terms of
that license and all applicable regulations of the state;
      (9)   Signage shall be limited to a four square foot, non-illuminated
name plate attached to the building entrance;
      (10)   In addition to the off-street parking required for the principal
dwelling use, two improved off-street parking spaces must be provided for
customers and an improved off-street parking space must be provided for each
non-resident employee;
      (11)   Customer hours are limited to the period of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
on weeknights and 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on weekends.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.57 KEEPING OF BEES.
   See §
92.16 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.58 KEEPING OF CHICKENS.
   See §
92.15 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.59 MEMBRANE STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Membrane structures shall not be used for human habitation.
   (B)   Membrane structures shall be replaced when bent, cracked, torn,
ripped, punctured, or significantly faded by the sun.
   (C)   Membrane covered structures shall be neutral colored (i.e., dark
green, tan, brown, etc.).
   (D)   There shall be no more than one membrane-structure per property and
such structure shall not exceed 275 square feet.
   (E)   Membrane structures shall be included in accessory structure size and
impervious surface calculations.
   (F)   Membrane structures shall meet the appropriate setbacks for accessory
buildings and shall not be placed in a location which obstructs traffic
visibility.
   (G)   Membrane structures shall be adequately anchored and/or secured to the
ground.
   (H)   Privately owned membrane structures shall not be placed on public
property.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 6. ACCESSORY USES, N-Z
§ 151.05.61 OPEN AND OUTDOOR STORAGE, SALES, SERVICE, AND RENTAL.
   (A)   Use shall be surrounded by a solid fence or evergreen planting screen
completely preventing a view from any other property or public right-of-way.
   (B)   Use shall be at least 600 feet from residential districts.
   (C)   Open and outdoor storage and service shall not be located in the
street yard. Sales and rental may be located in the street yard.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.62 OUTDOOR DINING.
   (A)   The outdoor dining area shall be contiguous to the food or beverage
service principal use to which it is accessory.
   (B)   The outdoor dining area must not extend beyond the frontage of the
principal use, unless a written statement, signed by the owners and tenants of
any adjacent business fronting the street, indicates approval of the placement
of the outdoor dining area in front of their business.
   (C)   Outdoor dining may be permitted within any setback area on private
property and on public right-of-way with the approval of the City Council.
   (D)   The outdoor dining area shall be clearly delineated by fences, walls,
or plant materials that have a height of less than 42 inches.
   (E)   None of the minimum number of off-street parking stalls required for
the principal use shall be occupied by the outdoor dining area.
   (F)   When an outdoor dining area is located adjacent to a street, a clear,
continuous pedestrian path, parallel to the curb and not less than five feet in
width, shall be required for pedestrian circulation outside of the outdoor
dining area.
   (G)   The outdoor dining area shall not include nor be located within five
feet of fire hydrants, or other facilities deemed necessary for public safety.
   (H)   Operating hours for the outdoor dining area shall be consistent with
the hours of the associated business. Outdoor dining areas within 300 feet of a
residential district shall not be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
   (I)   All food and drink preparation shall be performed within the principal
use. No preparation or storage of food or drink shall be permitted within the
outdoor dining area.
   (J)   All equipment associated with the outdoor dining area that is stored
outdoors when not in use shall be neatly stacked in an area approved by the
city on a site plan.
   (K)   Prerecorded music within the outdoor dining area shall only be
permitted during the hours of operation of the outdoor dining area and shall be
kept at a volume that does not create a nuisance for adjacent properties. There
shall be no televisions within the outdoor dining area.
   (L)   Adequate lighting in and around the outdoor dining area shall be
provided at all times. Lighting fixtures shall be limited to fixtures attached
to the building facade or upon private property.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.63 OUTDOOR PARKING OR SEASONAL STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Recreational vehicles and equipment of any kind or type without
current legal license plates, or those that are inoperable, shall not be parked
or stored on any property other than in completely enclosed buildings.
   (B)   Number.
      (1)   On non-riparian lots and those lots less than one-half acre in
size, no more than three recreational vehicles or equipment shall be parked or
stored outside of a building on the property.
      (2)   On riparian lots and lots exceeding one-half acre in size, no more
than four recreational vehicles or equipment shall be parked or stored outside
of a building on the property.
      (3)   The number of recreational vehicles and equipment may exceed the
above allowances if they are parked inside a building.
      (4)   Hand-carried and non-motorized recreational vehicles and equipment,
such as canoes, kayaks and bicycles, are exempted from these regulations.
   (C)   Parking and storage regulations.
      (1)   Street yard. One recreational vehicle and equipment may be parked
in the street yard, provided it is:
         (a)   Entirely on the equipment owner's property;
         (b)   No closer than ten feet from the edge of the roadway;
         (c)   No closer than five feet from the side lot line; and
         (d)   Does not encroach upon a pedestrian walkway.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   One recreational vehicle or equipment may be parked in an
interior side yard no closer than five feet to a side property line.
         (b)   All recreational vehicles and equipment stored in a corner side
yard shall be set back at least 30 feet from the right-of-way.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles and equipment may be parked in the rear yard,
provided the location is at least five feet from the rear lot line, five feet
from the side lot lines, and not located within a drainage or utility easement,
alley, or other right-of-way.
      (4)   For riparian lots, a total of three recreational vehicles or
equipment may be parked in the street or side yard meeting the setbacks listed
in  subsections  (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section.
Figure 151.05.03. Recreational Vehicle Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2345.png]
 
      (5)   Street parking prohibited.
         (a)    Recreational vehicles and equipment shall not be parked or
stored in a street or in the public right-of-way for more than 24 consecutive
hours.
         (b)    Vehicles and equipment shall comply with the winter parking
restrictions as noted in §
71.04(A)(2).
         (c)   In any prosecution charging a violation of the above provisions,
the presence of a vehicle that is stopped, standing, or parked in violation of
the below provisions, shall be prima facie evidence that a registered owner
committed or authorized the commission of such violation.
      (6)   One additional recreational vehicle or equipment may be parked on
an improved driveway for loading, unloading and cleaning for a period not to
exceed 72 hours; provided it is not within ten feet of the edge of the roadway,
and it does not encroach upon a pedestrian walkway.
      (7)   Permit to connect to water and electricity. An administrative
permit of up to seven days, renewable once during a 12-month period, may be
obtained from the Zoning Administrator to allow a recreational vehicle or
equipment to be connected to water and electricity.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20240515-01, passed 5-15-24)
§ 151.05.64 SHORT TERM VACATION RENTAL.
   (A)   The property owner shall obtain a Short-Term Rental Housing License
from Chisago County.
   (B)   The maximum number of overnight guests will be limited to two times
the number of bedrooms rented plus one.
   (C)   Dwelling requirements.
      (1)   The dwelling must be connected to sewer and water.
      (2)   Rooms used for sleeping shall have an egress window and functioning
smoke detectors.
      (3)   The guest(s) must have access during their entire stay to a full
bathroom, including sink, toilet, and tub or shower.
   (D)   Parking.
      (1)   All guest parking must be accommodated on improved surfaces on the
premises. No on-street parking is allowed for guests.
      (2)   At a minimum, parking shall be provided at the following rate:
         (a)   One space for each one- or two-bedroom rental.
         (b)   Two spaces for each three-bedroom rental.
         (c)   Spaces equal to the number of bedrooms minus one for each four
and four plus bedroom rental.
      (3)   In short term vacation rentals where the property owner resides on
the premise, additional off-street parking for personal use must be provided at
a rate of one parking space per two bedrooms not dedicated to the guest use.
   (E)   If not residing on the property, the property owner or a manager/
representative must be located within 30 miles of the property. The property
owner shall maintain with the city the name, address, phone number, and email
for the local contact or managing agent for the property.
   (F)   A guest record must be maintained, including the name, address, phone
number, and vehicle license plate information for all guests. This record must
be provided to the city within 48 hours of a request for the guest record.
   (G)   Guest disclosures. The property owner must disclose in writing to
their transient guests the following rules and regulations. This disclosure
shall be conspicuously displayed in the home:
      (1)   The name, phone number and address of the owner, operating lessee
or managing agent/representative;
      (2)   The maximum number of guests allowed at the property;
      (3)   The maximum number of vehicles allowed at the property and where
they are to be parked;
      (4)   City nuisance ordinances requirement that noise levels be reduced
between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and that this will be enforced by the Lakes
Area Police Department; and
      (5)   Property rules related to use of outdoor features, such as decks,
patios, grills, recreational fires, saunas and other recreational facilities.
   (H)   All garbage must be kept in rubbish containers issued by a contracted
collection service.
   (I)   Signage shall be limited to a four square foot, non-illuminated name
plate attached to the building entrance.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.65 SMALL-SCALE SOLAR ENERGY GENERATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Height. Solar energy systems are subject to the following height
requirements:
      (1)   Building- or roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum allowed height in any zoning district. For the purposes of height
measurement, solar energy systems other than building-integrated systems shall
be considered to be mechanical devices and are restricted consistent with other
building-mounted mechanical devices for the zoning district.
      (2)   Pole-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 15 feet in
height when oriented at maximum tilt.
   (B)   Location within lot. Solar energy systems must meet accessory
structure setbacks for the appropriate zoning district.
      (1)   Building- or roof-mounted solar energy systems. In addition to the
building setback, the collector surface and mounting devices for building- or
roof-mounted solar systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of
the building on which the system is mounted or built, unless the collector and
mounting system has been explicitly engineered to safely extend beyond the
edge. The collector and racking for roof-mounted systems that have a greater
pitch than the roof surface shall be set back from all roof edges by at least
two feet. Exterior piping for solar hot water systems shall be allowed to
extend beyond the perimeter of the building on a side yard exposure.
   (C)   Visibility. Solar energy systems in the CBD and any residential
districts shall be designed to minimize visual impacts from the public right-
of-way.
      (1)   Building integrated systems. Building-integrated systems shall be
allowed regardless of whether the system is visible from the public right-of-
way, provided the building component in which the system is integrated meets
all required setback, land use, and performance standards for the district in
which the building is located.
      (2)   Aesthetic restrictions.
         (a)   Roof-mounted systems shall not be restricted for aesthetic
reasons if the system is not visible from the closest edge of any public right-
of-way other than an alley or if the system meets the following standards:
            1.   Roof-mounted systems on pitched roofs that are visible from
the nearest edge of the street frontage right-of-way shall have the same
finished pitch as the roof and be no more than ten inches above the roof.
            2.   Roof-mounted systems on flat roofs that are visible from the
nearest edge of the street frontage right-of-way shall not be more than five
feet above the finished roof and are exempt from any rooftop equipment or
mechanical system screening.
         (b)   Reflectors. All solar energy systems using a reflector to
enhance solar production shall minimize glare from the reflector affecting
adjacent or nearby properties.
   (D)   All solar energy systems shall comply with the Minnesota State
Electrical Code.
   (E)   All solar energy systems shall comply with all applicable federal,
state and local laws, rules and regulations.
   (F)   Solar panels must be removed and properly disposed of if they are out
of production for more than one year unless the Planning Commission grants an
extension of time for their removal.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.66 SMALL-SCALE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SWECS).
   (A)   SWECS shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   No more than one SWECS may be placed on a lot.
      (2)   Lots containing a SWECS shall have an area of at least ten acres.
      (3)   No SWECS shall be allowed within the Shoreland Overlay District.
      (4)   The base of the SWECS tower shall be set back at least 100 feet
from all property lines. SWECS shall not be installed in the street side yard
of any lot. SWECS shall not be located more than 100 feet from the principal
structure on the property.
      (5)   SWECS shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the SWECS
from a floodplain, pond, or wetland.
      (6)   SWECS shall not encroach on public drainage, utility, roadway, or
trail easements.
      (7)   A maximum hub height of 30 feet is allowed.
      (8)   A maximum blade length of 15 feet is permitted.
      (9)   The minimum distance from the ground for the lowest point of a
blade or any moving part shall be 12 feet.
      (10)   Roof- or wall-mounted SWECS are not permitted.
      (11)   SWECS shall comply with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
standards outlined in Minn. Rules Chapter 7030 at all property lines.
      (12)   SWECS are exempt from the screening requirements for the district
in which they are located.
      (13)   All portions of the SWECS shall be a nonreflective surface,
subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. Only monopole towers are
permitted. The appearance of the turbine, tower, and any other related
components shall be maintained throughout the life of the SWECS pursuance to
industry standards. Systems shall not be used for displaying any advertising,
nor for other uses including but not limited to cell phone antennas, flags, ham
radio antennas, etc. No components unnecessary to the operation of the SWECS
shall be allowed. Systems shall not be illuminated.
      (14)   The electrical collection system shall be placed underground
within the interior of each parcel.
      (15)   No SWECS shall produce vibrations through the ground that are
humanly perceptible beyond the property on which it is located.
   (B)   Safety.
      (1)   Standards and certification.
         (a)   Standards. SWECS shall meet minimum standards such as
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 61400-2 or the American Wind
Energy Association's (AWEA) Small Wind Turbine Performance and Safety Standard
or other standards as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   Certification. SWECS shall be certified by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, the Small Wind
Certification Council or other body as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
The city reserves the right to deny a building permit for proposed SWECS deemed
to have inadequate certification or testing for operation in a severe winter
climate.
         (c)   Maintenance. SWECS shall be maintained under an agreement or
contract by the manufacturer or other qualified entity. The owner of the SWECS
shall once every two years have the SWECS inspected by a licensed qualified
professional and submit to the city a report on the status and condition of the
SWECS.
      (2)   Utility connection. All grid connected systems shall have an
agreement with the local utility prior to the issuance of a building permit. A
visible external disconnect must be provided if required by the utility.
   (C)   A building permit shall be obtained for any SWECS prior to
installation.
   (D)   The power produced from a SWECS shall only be used for on-site
consumption except if connected to the local utility power grid per the
provisions of this section.
   (E)   If the SWECS remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous
period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall
constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the abandoned system at
their expense after a demolition permit has been obtained. Removal includes the
entire structure including foundations to below natural grade and transmission
equipment.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.05.67 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The intent of this section is to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare of the community and its people
through the establishment of minimum regulations pertaining to outdoor swimming
pools in residential districts. These design controls are intended to provide
protection against potential drowning and near-drownings by restricting access
to swimming pools.
   (B)   Permit required. A building permit is required for the construction of
the following types of swimming pools:
      (1)   In-ground pools, whether indoor or outdoor.
      (2)   Above-ground pools, except for storable swimming or wading pools
having a diameter of 18 feet or less and a wall height of four feet or less and
installed for less than 180 days in a calendar year.
   (C)   Location.
      (1)   Swimming pools requiring a permit may be constructed or placed in
the rear yard, or in a side yard behind the front building line.
      (2)   Swimming pools must be located a minimum of ten feet from the rear
and side property lines.
      (3)   Swimming pools on riparian lots are considered structures and must
meet the required structure setback from the ordinary high water (OHW) mark;
      (4)   Pool operational equipment shall be no closer than 25 feet to
neighboring structures.
   (D)   No part of a structure, including fencing, shall exceed six feet above
ground level.
   (E)   Barrier requirements. An outdoor swimming pool requiring a permit,
including an in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, shall be surrounded by
a barrier which shall comply with the following:
      (1)   The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches above grade
measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool.
The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier
shall be two inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from
the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as
an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as abutting the
pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is
mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between
the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be four
inches.
      (2)   Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of more than a four
inch diameter sphere.
      (3)   Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or
stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal
construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
      (4)   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members
and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45
inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of
the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed one and three-
quarters inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical
members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed one and three-quarters
inches in width.
      (5)   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members
and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or
more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches. Where
there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall not exceed one and three-quarters inches in width.
      (6)   Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a two and one-
quarter inch square unless the fence has slats fastened at the top or the
bottom which reduce the openings to not more than one and three-quarters
inches.
      (7)   Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a
lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be
more than one and three-quarters inches.
      (8)   Access gates shall comply with the requirements of  subsections
(E)(1) through (E)(7) of this section, and shall be equipped to accommodate a
locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool
and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than
pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release
mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches from the
bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the
following:
         (a)   The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the
gate at least three inches below the top of the gate; and
         (b)   The gate and barrier shall have no opening larger than one-half
inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism.
      (9)   Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, other
means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices.
      (10)   Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where
the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is
a ladder or steps:
         (a)   The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or
removed to prevent access; or
         (b)   The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets
the requirements of  subsections  (E)(1) through (E)(9) of this section. When
the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall
not allow the passage of a four inch diameter sphere.
      (11)   Location of pool barriers. Barriers shall be located to prohibit
permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb
them.
   (F)   Impervious surface. For calculating lot coverage purposes, the water
area of the swimming pool shall not be considered an impervious surface. Any
aprons constructed of concrete, stone, wood or similar materials will be
included in determining impervious surface area.
   (G)   Discharge of pool water. Water must be drained on the homeowner's
property or, if approved by the city, diverted to an existing city storm sewer
drainage system. If drained onto the homeowner's property, water cannot drain
onto or across any adjoining property.
   (H)   Electrical. All wiring must be in accordance with the guidelines
established by the Minnesota State Board of Electricity. A separate electrical
permit must be obtained from the city.
   (I)   The storage of chemicals shall meet the requirements of the Uniform
Fire Code.
   (J)   Lights used to illuminate any private swimming pool shall be so
arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 06: PROCEDURES
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.06.11 COMMON PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all
development applications and procedures subject to development review under
this Code unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   Authority to file applications.
      (1)   Development review applications for an individual property may be
initiated by:
         (a)   The owner of the property that is the subject of the
application; or
         (b)   An agent authorized by the owner of the property that is the
subject of the application, which may include a lessee of the property.
Evidence of such authorization shall be the signature of the property owner.
         (c)   If the property subject to an application is under more than one
ownership, all owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the
application.
      (2)   The Planning Commission and City Council may initiate text and map
amendments to this chapter. If the subject of the amendment is a specific site
or project, the Planning Commission or City Council may initiate amendments
with or without application from the owner.
   (C)   Pre-application meetings.
      (1)   Pre-application meetings are required or recommended based on
development application type.
      (2)   A pre-application meeting is an informal discussion between a
potential applicant and city staff regarding a possible project subject to this
Title. The Zoning Administrator shall determine which city staff shall attend
the pre-application meeting.
      (3)   The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to assist the
applicant in identifying the type of approvals needed, the potential review
criteria, and the information to be contained in the application(s).
      (4)   Discussions that occur during pre-application meetings are not
binding on the city and do not constitute official assurances or
representations of the city.
   (D)   Application materials and fees.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall develop and amend a Development
Application Manual as needed.
      (2)   Each application for a permit or approval, or for an amendment of a
permit or approval, shall include all those application materials listed in the
Development Application Manual.
      (3)   To defray administrative costs of processing of land use requests,
a base fee shall be paid by all applicants. The fee shall be set by ordinance
of the City Council, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   In order to defray the additional cost of processing land use
applications, all applicants shall pay the total cost of staff and/or
consulting time spent exclusively in producing materials for the applicant’s
request, and all materials for the request.
         (a)   Materials shall include, but not be limited to maps, graphs,
charts, drawings and the like and all printing or reproduction of same.
         (b)   Staff and/or consulting time shall include any time spent in
either researching for or actual production of materials.
         (c)   The hourly rate for staff and/or consulting time shall be
established and made available to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator
prior to production of any materials and the applicant shall be given a
reasonable estimate of project time and/or materials costs upon request. The
applicant shall be responsible for the actual costs, even if the actual costs
exceed the city’s estimates.
      (5)   No application shall be deemed complete for processing until any
fee or escrow required has been paid.
      (6)   Applications for licenses, permits, and other approvals under this
chapter shall not be accepted by the city until the Finance Director certifies
that all real estate taxes, personal property taxes, special assessments and
other fees or charges then due and owing to the city by the applicant or which
relate to the property for which the license, permit, approval or application
is requested, have been paid in full.
      (7)   Application fees are not refundable, except where the Zoning
Administrator has determined that an application was accepted in error or when
the fee paid exceeded the amount due, in which case the overpayment shall be
refunded to the applicant.
   (E)   Technical assistance. In making its decision, the city may determine
that technical assistance is needed. The city may request technical assistance
from any of the firms with which it contracts. The applicant shall be
responsible for the actual costs of such assistance. Actual costs are
identified in the fee schedule and shall be paid by the applicant for building/
development application expenses which the city incurs in regard to the review
and processing of that application, and which exceeds the application fee. Such
fees shall come due immediately upon notification by the city. The city may
withhold any final action on a development application until all fees are paid
in full.
   (F)   Coordination of applications.
      (1)   Depending on the requirements of this division, multiple
applications may be required.
      (2)   City staff shall determine the order of application review based on
the City Code, including this division, and state requirements. Where possible,
applications will be reviewed in tandem.
   (G)   Public hearing.
      (1)   Public hearings are required by this division and shall be
conducted pursuant to the rules established for each of the bodies, the
Lindstrom City Code, and in compliance with state law.
      (2)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality at least ten days prior to the date of the
hearing. The notice shall also be mailed not less than ten days prior to:
         (a)   All property owners of record according to the county assessment
records within 350 feet of the property.
         (b)   If the application pertains to land within the Shoreland Overlay
District or Floodplain Overlay District, a copy of the application and notice
of hearing shall be provided to the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
(DNR). The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective
DNR hydrologist.
         (c)   If the proposed project abuts or includes a state trunk highway
or a county state aid road, a copy of the application and notice of hearing
shall be provided to the Minnesota Department of Transportation (MNDOT) or the
Chisago County Engineer, respectively.
         (d)   A copy of the notice and list of the individuals and/or property
owners and addresses to which the notices were sent shall be attested to by the
Zoning Administrator and made part of official record. The failure to give
mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice, shall
not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with
this division has been made.
      (3)   All public hearings shall be open to the public.
      (4)   The applicant, or their designee, should attend the public hearing.
   (H)   Recording. When conditions have been satisfied by the applicant, the
city shall file with the County Recorder’s Office a copy of any required
approval documents, such as ordinances, resolutions, and agreements.
   (I)   Withdrawal of applications.
      (1)   Any request for withdrawal of an application shall be submitted in
writing to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   In all cases where the applicant has requested withdrawal of an
application, the associated fee paid and any costs incurred by the city in the
processing of an application shall not be refunded.
   (J)   Successive applications. No application which has been denied wholly
or in part may be resubmitted for at least one year from the date of its
denial, unless substantial changes have been made which warrant
reconsideration, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
   (K)   Appeals of City Council decisions. All decisions made by the city
regarding zoning shall be final, except that any aggrieved person shall have
the right to appeal within 30 days after delivery of the decision to the
appellant, to the District Court in Chisago County. Any person seeking judicial
review under this chapter must serve the city and all necessary parties,
including any landowners, within the 30-day period defined above.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.06.12 SITE PLAN PERMIT.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   A site plan permit is required to allow for the Zoning
Administrator to review the proposed site plan for compliance with
Chapter 151 Zoning.
      (2)   A site plan permit shall be required for:
         (a)   All residential developments with three or more units;
         (b)   Any non-residential project; and
         (c)   All developments within the R-M Manufactured Home Park District.
      (3)   Site plan permit review may be part of a building permit approval
process, or may be included as part of the review process for other requests,
such as conditional use permits or variances.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.06.11(C) Pre-Application Meetings is suggested prior to submitting a site
plan permit application.
   (C)   Submittal. The application for a site plan permit shall be filed
pursuant to §
151.06.11(D).
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to city staff and other applicable
agencies for review.
      (2)   Administrative review. When the application is reviewed by city
staff, the application will be granted, denied or referred for additional
review for more information.
      (3)   Planning Commission review.
         (a)   Under certain circumstances, the Zoning Administrator or city
staff may refer site plan permit applications to the Planning Commission for
review.
         (b)   If the application is referred to the Planning Commission, the
Planning Commission shall review the application along with the Zoning
Administrator's preliminary findings, and may refer the application and plans
to any necessary expert consultants to advise whether the application and plans
meet all the requirements applicable thereto in this chapter.
         (c)   The Planning Commission shall authorize the Zoning Administrator
to issue, refuse, or refer for additional review for more information, the site
plan permit.
   (E)   Criteria for review. In acting on any site plan permit, the Zoning
Administrator shall consider the following:
      (1)   The appropriateness of the site plan and buildings in relation to
the physical character of the site and the usage of adjoining land areas;
      (2)   The layout of the site with regard to entrances and exits to public
streets; adequacy and improvement of areas for parking and for loading and
unloading and shall, in this connection, satisfy itself that the traffic
pattern generated by the proposed construction or use shall be developed in a
manner consistent with the safety of residents and the community, and the
applicant shall so design the construction or use as to minimize any traffic
hazard created thereby;
      (3)   The adequacy of the proposed water supply, drainage facilities and
sanitary and waste disposal; and
      (4)   The landscaping and appearance of the completed site. The Zoning
Administrator may require that those portions of all front, rear and side yards
not used for off-street parking shall be attractively planted with trees,
shrubs, plants or grass lawns and that the site be effectively screened so as
not to impair the value of adjacent properties nor impair the intent or
purposes of this section.
   (F)   Effect of site plan permit decision.
      (1)   The site plan permit shall expire within 12 months unless
substantial work has commenced. If within 24 months after the issuance of the
permit the structure is not substantially completed, the site plan permit shall
expire, and the applicant shall reapply for a site plan permit before
commencing work on the structure.
      (2)   Substantial completion is defined as the point in time when the
structure has been completed to the point where it may be used for its intended
purpose.
      (3)   Any site plan permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.06.13 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The City Council, in its capacity as the Board of Adjustment and
consistent with the authority granted by law, may grant a property owner a
variance from compliance with the literal provisions of the Zoning Code in an
instance where strict enforcement would cause practical difficulties to the
individual property owner, and when it can be demonstrated that such action
will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of the Code.
      (2)   A variance may not be approved to allow a use which has not been
identified as a permitted, permitted with standards, conditional or accessory
use.
      (3)   Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as
defined in Minn. Stat. § 216C.06, Subd. 14, as it may be amended from time to
time, when in harmony with this chapter.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.06.11(C) Pre-Application Meetings is suggested prior to submitting a
variance application.
   (C)   Submittal.
      (1)   The application for a variance shall be filed pursuant to §
151.06.11(D) Application Materials and Fees.
      (2)   No variance application shall be accepted for a property located
within the floodplain until the applicant demonstrates that all required state
and federal permits have been obtained. The applicant shall submit a copy of
all required state and federal permits to the city concurrently with the
required variance application form, fee and all other required application
materials.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to city staff and other applicable
agencies for review.
      (2)   Public hearing.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with §
151.06.11(G).
         (b)   The applicant, or a representative thereof, should appear before
the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed
variance.
      (3)   Decision.
         (a)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the variance request and
shall transmit the variance request and application along with its
recommendations to the City Council.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there
is inadequate information.
         (c)   Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
variance application by majority vote. The City Council may remand the variance
request back to the Planning Commission for further consideration once during
the review process.
         (d)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
         (e)   Following the decision by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s action and reasons
thereof.
   (E)   Criteria for review.
      (1)   In consideration of the variance request, the City Council shall
make the following findings:
         (a)   The requested variance is in harmony with the general purposes
and intent of this chapter;
         (b)   The requested variance is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan; and
         (c)   The applicant has established that there are “practical
difficulties” as defined in
Chapter 154 Definitions in complying with
Chapter 151 Zoning.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may
impose, conditions in the granting of variances provided all conditions are
directly related to the variance request and each condition bears a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
      (3)   Variances in the Floodplain Overlay District. No variance shall
permit a lower degree of flood protection than required under state law. The
following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency must be satisfied for all properties located within floodplain which are
the subject of a variance considered under this chapter:
         (a)   Variances shall not be issued if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result;
         (b)   Variances shall only be issued if it is determined by the City
Council that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood
heights; and
         (c)   Variances shall be issued only upon the determination by the
City Council that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
      (4)   Variances in the Shoreland Overlay District. In reviewing variance
requests in the Shoreland Overlay District, the city must consider the
following criteria in addition to those listed in §
151.03.29 Administration and Enforcement:
         (a)   Whether property owners have reasonable use of the land without
the variance;
         (b)   Whether any existing sewage treatment systems on the property
need upgrading before additional development is approved;
         (c)   Whether the property is used seasonally or year-round;
         (d)   Whether the variance is being requested solely on the basis of
economic considerations; and
         (e)   The characteristics of development on adjacent properties.
   (F)   Effect of variance decision.
      (1)   Variances shall run with the property.
      (2)   Violations of the conditions of a variance shall void the variance.
      (3)   Recording.
         (a)   A certified copy of the authorizing resolution, containing
identifiable description and any specific requirements for approval, shall be
recorded by the City of Lindstrom with the Register of Deeds for Chisago County
for the subject property.
         (b)   A copy of a decision granting a variance in a Floodplain or
Shoreland Overlay District shall be mailed to the district office of the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources within ten days of the decision.
      (4)   Whenever within one year after granting a variance the work as
permitted by the variance shall not have been completed, then the variance
shall become null and void unless a petition for extension of time in which to
complete the work has been granted.
         (a)   The extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the
Zoning Administrator at least 30 days before the expiration of the original
variance. There shall be no charge for the filing of the petition. The request
for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete the
work permitted in the variance or appeal.
         (b)   An extension to a variance may be administratively approved by
the Zoning Administrator. After the initial one year extension, any future
extensions must be granted by the City Council.
      (5)   Security.
         (a)   Except in the case of non-income producing residential property,
upon approval of a variance or appeal the city may require a surety bond, cash
escrows, certificate of deposit, securities or cash deposit prior to the
issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements
or development. The security shall guarantee conformance and compliance with
the conditions of the variance and the ordinances of the city.
         (b)   The security shall be in the amount of the Council's estimated
costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or development.
         (c)   The city shall hold the security until completion of the
proposed improvement or development and certificate of occupancy indicating
compliance with the variance and ordinances of the city having been issued by
the Zoning Administrator.
         (d)   Failure to comply with the conditions of the variance and/or
ordinances of the city shall result in forfeiture of the security.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.06.14 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Applicability. The purpose of a conditional use permit is to permit a
use that would not be appropriate generally, but may be allowed within a
certain zoning district with appropriate restrictions to mitigate the impact of
the proposed use.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.06.11(C) Pre-Application Meetings is required prior to submitting a
conditional use permit application.
   (C)   Submittal. The application for a conditional use permit shall be filed
pursuant to §
151.06.11(D) Application Materials and Fees.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to city staff and other applicable
agencies for review.
      (2)   Public hearing.
2022 S-27
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with §
151.06.11(G) Public Hearing.
         (b)   The applicant or a representative thereof should appear before
the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed
conditional use.
      (3)   Decision.
         (a)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the conditional use
permit and shall transmit the conditional use permit application along with its
recommendations to the City Council.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there
is inadequate information.
         (c)   Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
conditional use permit application. The City Council may remand the conditional
use request back to the Planning Commission for further consideration once
during the review process.
         (d)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
         (e)   The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may
impose, conditions in the granting of conditional use permits to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, which may include,
but are not limited to, the following conditions:
            1.   Special setbacks or yard requirements;
            2.   Increased screening or landscaping requirements;
            3.   Standards pertaining to traffic, parking, circulation, noise,
lighting, emissions, signage, and hours of operation;
            4.   Provision of stormwater management and erosion and sediment
control;
            5.   Protections for environmentally sensitive areas;
            6.   Dedication or reservation of land; or
            7.   Development agreement.
         (f)   Following the decision by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s action and reasons
thereof.
   (E)   Criteria for review.
      (1)   In considering the conditional use permit application, the Planning
Commission and City Council shall consider the following factors:
         (a)   Consistency with the city’s Comprehensive Plan;
         (b)   Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area;
         (c)   The consistency of site and civil plans prepared by or under the
direction of an architect, civil engineer, and/or landscape architect with the
regulations, intent and purpose of the City Code;
         (d)   The availability and design capacities of existing or proposed
utilities and roadways;
         (e)   Whether the use will place an undue financial burden on the
city; and
         (f)   Consistency with any use specific standards identified in this
chapter.
      (2)   In addition to the standards for conditional uses in  subsection
(E)(1) of this section, the following standards must be used for reviewing
conditional uses located in the Shoreland Overlay District as listed in §
151.03.29 Administration and Enforcement:
         (a)   A thorough evaluation of the topographic, vegetation and soils
conditions on the site to ensure:
            1.   Prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction;
            2.   Limiting visibility of structures and other facilities as
viewed from public waters; and
            3.   Adequacy of the site for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment.
         (b)   An assessment of the types, uses and numbers of watercraft that
the development or use will generate in relation to the suitability of public
waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.
         (c)   The city may impose conditions when granting conditional use
permits that specify increased setbacks from public waters; vegetation allowed
to be removed or required to be established; sewage treatment system location;
design; the use's location and design; and use requirements for watercraft
launching or docking, and for vehicular parking, structure or other facility
design, use and location; phasing of construction; and other conditions
considered necessary.
   (F)   Effect of decision.
      (1)   Security.
         (a)   Upon approval of a conditional use permit, the city may require
a surety bond, cash escrow, certificate of deposit, securities or cash deposit
prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed
improvements or development. The security shall guarantee conformance and
compliance with the conditions of the conditional use permit and the ordinances
of the city.
         (b)   The security shall be in the amount of the Council’s estimated
costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or development. The
project can be handled in stages upon the discretion of the Council.
         (c)   The city shall hold the security until completion of the
proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating
compliance with the conditional use permit and ordinances of the city has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator.
         (d)   Failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use
permit and/or the ordinances of the city shall result in forfeiture of the
security.
      (2)   Whenever, within one year after granting a conditional use permit,
the use as permitted by the permit has not been commenced, the permit shall
become null and void unless a petition for extension shall be requested in
writing and filed with the Zoning Administrator or City Administrator at least
30 days before the expiration of the conditional use permit for a
recommendation and to the Council for a decision. The extension shall be
allowed only once for a singular action.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.06.15 INTERIM USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Applicability. The purpose of an interim use permit is to temporarily
permit a use, which would not be appropriate generally, but which may be
allowed within a certain zoning district with appropriate restrictions. An
interim use permit is not intended to last indefinitely, but is meant to have a
specific end date for when the use will no longer be allowed on the property.
Upon request, the City Council may determine that any principal or accessory
use listed in
Tables 151.02.01 and
151.02.02 may be an interim use.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.06.11(C) Pre-Application Meetings is required prior to submitting an
interim use permit application.
   (C)   Submittal. The application for an interim use permit shall be filed
pursuant to §
151.06.11(D) Application Materials and Fees.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to city staff and other applicable
agencies for review.
      (2)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
in accordance with §
151.06.11(G) Public Hearing.
      (3)   Decision.
         (a)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the interim use permit
and shall transmit the application along with its recommendations to the City
Council.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there
is inadequate information.
         (c)   Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
interim use permit application. The City Council may remand the interim use
permit request back to the Planning Commission for further consideration once
during the review process.
         (d)   The user agrees to any and all conditions that the city deems
appropriate for permission of the use. The conditions may include but are not
limited to:
            1.   A performance bond for the entire period of the interim use
sufficient to cover any future costs the city may incur to enforce the
provisions of the interim use permit; and
            2.   Hours of operation, parking restrictions, lighting
restrictions, screening, landscaping, fencing, signing restrictions, noise
restrictions and the like.
            3.   Failure of the city to specifically note conditions or
restrictions does not waive the city’s ability to enforce existing codes or
hold a subsequent hearing and delete or impose additional conditions upon the
property at any time.
            4.   All additional conditions pertaining to a specific site are
subject to change when the Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal
request, finds that the general welfare and public betterment can be served as
well or better by modifying or expanding the conditions set forth herein.
         (e)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
   (E)   Criteria for review. In considering the interim use permit
application, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the
following factors:
      (1)   Conformity of the proposed use with the zoning regulations;
      (2)   Ability of the date or event that will terminate the use to be
identified with certainty;
      (3)   Whether the use will impose additional costs on the public if it is
necessary for the public to take the property in the future; and
      (4)   Whether the user agrees to any conditions that the governing body
deems appropriate for permission of the use.
   (F)   Termination/expiration.
      (1)   Any interim use permit issued by the city automatically expires
upon the termination date or event noted in the permit or upon change of the
ownership of the property, whichever comes first.
      (2)   Any interim use permit may be terminated by a change in this
chapter or violations of any of the conditions imposed by the city.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.06.16 ZONING CODE OR MAP AMENDMENT.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good
zoning practice requires, the City Council may, by ordinance:
         (a)   Amend, change or supplement the text of the regulations
established by this chapter or amendments thereto; or
         (b)   Change the district boundaries established by this chapter and
the Zoning Map incorporated herein and/or the Supplementary Floodplain Zoning
Map incorporated herein.
      (2)   A request to amend the Zoning Code or Map may be made by:
         (a)   The Planning Commission;
         (b)   The City Council; or
         (c)   A property owner or representative of a property owner.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.06.11(C) Pre-Application Meetings is required prior to submitting a Zoning
Code or Map Amendment application.
   (C)   Submission. The application for a Zoning Code or Map Amendment shall
be filed pursuant to §
151.06.11(D) Application Materials and Fees.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and refer it to city staff and other applicable agencies for
review.
      (2)   Hearing on application. The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing in accordance with §
151.06.11(G) Public Hearing.
      (3)   Decision.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall review the application and
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the Zoning Code or Map
Amendment and shall transmit the application along with its recommendations to
the City Council.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there
is inadequate information.
         (c)   Following receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation,
the City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
amendment application by majority vote.
         (d)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial.
   (E)   Recording of amendment.
      (1)   The City Clerk shall ensure that any Zoning Code Amendment is made
in the city’s official code book and posted online as appropriate.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall be responsible upon adoption of the Zoning Map
or any amendments thereto for recording a true copy of the amended Zoning Map
with the Register of Deeds.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.06.17 ESTABLISHMENT OF A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The establishment of a planned unit development (PUD) provides
design flexibility to promote creative and efficient use of land. Planned unit
development provisions are also intended to create public and private benefit
by allowing improved site design; allowing developments on multiple lots to
function as one coordinated site; facilitating protection of natural features;
allowing flexibility for unique developments; and ensuring coordination of
phased development.
      (2)   Planned unit developments are processed using a development stage
PUD plan and final stage PUD plan process. Concurrent processing with platting
shall be allowed as appropriate. The development stage and final stage PUD plan
processes can also occur simultaneously when the complexity of the project will
allow.
      (3)   An approved development stage PUD plan shall be on file with the
city prior to applying for a final stage PUD plan that substantially conforms
to the development stage PUD plan. Substantial conformance means:
         (a)   The buildings, parking areas and roads are in essentially the
same location as previously approved;
         (b)   Open space has not been decreased or altered more than 10% from
its original design or use;
         (c)   The number of dwelling units, if any, has not increased or
decreased by more than 5%;
         (d)   The floor area of nonresidential areas has not been increased or
decreased by more than 5%;
         (e)   No building has been increased in the number of floors; and
         (f)   Lot coverage of any individual building has not been increased
or decreased by more than 10%.
      (4)   The final stage PUD plan may, if permitted by the City Council,
constitute only that portion of the approved development stage PUD plan which
the applicant proposes to record at the time.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting.
      (1)   A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.06.11(C) Pre-Application Meetings is required prior to submitting a
development stage PUD plan application.
      (2)   During the pre-application meeting, staff will determine if the
proposed project is eligible for concurrent review of the development and final
stage PUD plans.
      (3)   Applicants may choose to use the concept plan process identified in
§
152.05.14 Concept Plan to solicit input from the Planning Commission and City
Council prior to submitting a development stage PUD plan.
   (C)   Submittal.
      (1)   The application for a development stage or final stage PUD plan
shall be filed pursuant to §
151.06.11(D) Application Materials and Fees.
      (2)   If staff has determined a PUD to be eligible, applicants may apply
for concurrent development stage and final stage PUD plan approval by
submitting all information required for both applications simultaneously.
      (3)   The application for a final stage PUD plan shall be submitted no
later than one year after the date of approval of the development stage PUD
plan; otherwise the development stage PUD plan and final stage PUD plan will be
considered void unless an extension is requested in writing by the applicant
and granted by the city.
      (4)   The final stage PUD plan shall cover at least 20% of the area
approved by the development stage PUD plan unless otherwise allowed by the City
Council due to unique circumstances of the development stage PUD plan.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to city staff and other applicable
agencies for review.
      (2)   Public hearing.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
development stage PUD plan in accordance with §
151.06.11(G) Public Hearing.
         (b)   A public hearing is not required for a final stage PUD plan;
however, the City Council may set a public hearing if it is deemed to be
necessary.
      (3)   Decision.
         (a)   Development stage PUD plan.
            1.   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the development stage
PUD plan and shall transmit the plan and application along with its
recommendations to the City Council.
            2.   The Planning Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if
there is incomplete or inadequate information.
            3.   Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
development stage PUD plan application.
            4.   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
            5.   Following the decision by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s action and reasons
thereof.
         (b)   Final stage PUD plan.
            1.   The City Council shall review and approve, approve
conditionally, or deny the final stage plan application.
            2.   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
            3.   Following the decision by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s action and reasons
thereof.
   (E)   Criteria for review.
      (1)   The City Council shall base its actions regarding a development
stage PUD plan upon the following criteria:
         (a)   Compatibility of the PUD with the standards, purposes and intent
of this chapter;
         (b)   Consistency of the PUD with the Comprehensive Plan’s vision,
mission, values, and policies;
         (c)   The adequacy of internal site organization, circulation, parking
facilities, public facilities, recreational areas, open spaces, sidewalks,
trails, buffering and landscaping; and
         (d)   Other factors as the city deems relevant.
      (2)   The City Council shall base its actions regarding a final stage PUD
plan upon the following criteria:
         (a)   Substantial conformance with the approved development stage PUD
plan and all conditions of approval;
         (b)   Conformance with this Title and all other applicable ordinances,
rules, and regulations; and
         (c)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan’s vision, mission,
values, and policies.
   (F)   Effect of development stage PUD plan decision.
      (1)   Approval of the development stage PUD plan by the Council shall
constitute rezoning of the property to PUD and conceptual approval of the
elements of the plan. While approval of the development stage PUD plan shall
establish the basic right of use for the area in conformity with the plan as
approved, such plan shall be conditioned upon approval of a final stage PUD
plan and shall not make permissible any of the uses as proposed until a final
stage PUD plan is submitted and approved for all or a portion of the
development stage PUD plan.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit the final stage PUD plan to the City
Council within one year after the approval of the development stage PUD plan or
approval of the development stage PUD plan shall be considered void.
   (G)   Recording of final stage PUD plan.
      (1)   All approved PUD districts shall be designated on the city’s zoning
map as it is revised from time to time.
      (2)   No building permit shall be issued or development shall occur on
land for which a PUD district has been approved which does not conform to the
approved final plan.
      (3)   After the final stage PUD plan has been approved by the City
Council, all conditions of approval have been met, and required improvements
are either installed or a contract and sureties insuring their installation is
filed, the city shall file the final plan with the County Recorder. Recording
of the final stage PUD plan and all associated conditions of approval must be
completed within one year of final approval. Failure to do so shall result in
the requiring of a new development stage PUD plan which must be reviewed in
accordance with the procedure set out in this part to ensure compliance with
any new requirements.
      (4)   If, within one year following City Council approval of the final
stage PUD plan, no building permits have been obtained or, if within one year
after the issuance of building permits, no construction has commenced on the
subject property approved for the PUD district, the zoning for the parcel(s)
shall revert back to the original zoning and the PUD designation shall be
declared null and void.
   Prior to the expiration of any timeframe, the City Council may, upon request
of the property owner and by resolution and findings of fact, approve
extensions of any timeframe in up to 12 month increments.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.06.18 AMENDMENT TO A PUD.
   Proposed development of land for which a PUD has been approved or
modifications to existing project which does not conform to the approved final
stage PUD plan shall be processed as either an administrative amendment or a
major amendment.
   (A)   Any major amendment to the development plan may be approved by the
City Council following the same notice and hearing procedures specified in §
151.06.11(G). An amendment shall be considered major if it involves any change
greater than permitted by §
151.06.17(A)(3).
   (B)   Minor amendments meeting the requirements of §
151.06.17(A)(3) may be reviewed and approved administratively.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.06.19 APPEAL OF ZONING CODE INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The appeal of Zoning Code interpretation process shall facilitate
review of questions of interpretation that arise in the administration of this
chapter, including review of any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Appeals of an administrative decision or requests for
interpretation may be made by the owner, mortgagee, purchaser under a land
contract, optionee or occupant under a written lease for one year or more of
the property for which relief is sought.
   (B)   Submission. The application for an appeal of Zoning Code
interpretation shall be filed pursuant to §
151.06.11(D) Application Materials and Fees within 30 days of the alleged
grievance or judgment in question.
   (C)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal of Zoning Code interpretation shall put
on hold the decision appealed unless the officer whose decision is being
appealed certifies in writing to the City Council that a stay would, in their
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to applicable city staff for review.
      (2)   Decision.
         (a)   The City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may
make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made
and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
         (b)   The City Council shall render its decision either at the
termination of the hearing or within 30 days thereafter.
         (c)   The final disposition of an appeal or application shall be in
the form of a written decision or order signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk.
Such decision shall state the reasons for the City Council's determination with
findings of fact and conclusions of law. Conditions imposed in any permit shall
be stated in the decision or order embodying the City Council's decision and
shall also be set forth in any permits issued under that order by the Zoning
Administrator and/or Inspection Department.
   (E)   Criteria for review. In considering an appeal of Zoning Code
interpretation, the City Council shall consider, but not be limited to, the
following criteria:
      (1)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, including its goals,
objectives, and policies;
      (2)   The plain meaning of the regulation;
      (3)   Surplus language;
      (4)   Conflicting provisions; and
      (5)   Policy history.
   (F)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   A certified copy of the City Council decision, containing
identifiable description and any specific requirements for approval, may be
recorded by the City of Lindstrom with the Office of the Chisago County
Register of Deeds for the subject property.
      (2)   Interpretations approved by the City Council shall expire one year
after issuance if the performance of work is required and substantial work has
not commenced.
      (3)   A permit shall be valid only as long as the conditions upon which
it is granted are observed.
   (G)   Reconsideration. No application which has been denied wholly or in
part may be resubmitted for at least one year from the date of its denial,
unless substantial changes have been made which warrant reconsideration, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. IMPACT STUDY
§ 151.06.21 TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Applicability. The applicant shall be required to file a traffic
impact study if the Zoning Administrator, City Engineer, Planning Commission,
or City Council determines that the development meets conditions warranting
further study.
   (B)   Pre-study meeting.
      (1)   The individual parameters of the traffic impact study will be
agreed upon during an initial pre-study meeting between the applicant and
applicable city staff.
      (2)   The applicant, or their representative, shall document the
discussions at the pre-meeting and submit a letter of confirmation to the city
for approval.
      (3)   After review of the letter of confirmation, city staff shall
provide the applicant with a letter confirming approval of the study
parameters. This confirmation should be obtained prior to the beginning of
analysis.
      (4)   Failure to obtain approval for the methodologies, parameters or
assumptions used, in the traffic impact study, may result in rejection of the
entire study by the city.
   (C)   Study parameters and methodology.
      (1)   Parameters for a traffic impact study may include, but not be
limited to, the following and shall be determined as part of the pre-study
meeting:
         (a)   Boundary of the traffic impact area;
         (b)   Roadway segments and critical intersections to be included in
the study;
         (c)   Adequacy of available turning movement counts and need for
additional data;
         (d)   Period of analysis (a.m. and/or p.m. peak hour weekday and/or
weekend, depending on the development);
         (e)   Trip generation rates or acceptable sources to be used;
         (f)   Reductions to driveway trips due to internal circulation (if
applicable);
         (g)   Percentage of trip reassignment to account for pass-by and
diverted traffic;
         (h)   Directional distribution of site-generated traffic;
         (i)   Mode split assumptions (if applicable);
         (j)   Roadway capacity and trends in traffic growth;
         (k)   Acceptable methodologies to be used;
         (l)   The range of feasible traffic engineering and operational
improvements associated with the development;
         (m)   Feasibility of including measures in the development proposal to
promote transit ridership;
         (n)   Possibility of implementing other transportation system
management strategies such as flextime and variable work hour programs to
redistribute peak hour traffic, employer ridesharing programs, preferential
parking for ride sharers, etc.;
         (o)   Possibility of implementing provisions for alternative modes of
transportation, such as bikeways, pedestrian walkways, including the provision
of sidewalks along state highways and along the county through roads system;
         (p)   The identification of high accident locations; and
         (q)   A formal cost estimate of mitigation measures, including
construction, design, right-of-way and utility relocation cost.
      (2)   The methodology shall be in accordance with the following
guidelines:
         (a)   Operating capacity and level of service analysis shall be
provided for critical roadway segments and/or intersections within a
predetermined impact area.
         (b)   Capacity and level of service analysis will be conducted for the
following conditions:
            1.   Existing traffic, to establish the current conditions as a
point of reference;
            2.   Existing plus expected natural traffic growth, and approved
development projects not yet completed, if any, to establish the short-term
future traffic conditions without the proposed development;
            3.   Full development traffic condition (including existing
traffic, expected natural growth, approved development projects, and expected
site generated traffic), to estimate future traffic conditions once the project
is completed.
            4.   If the proposed development is expected to be constructed in
phases, over a period of years, analysis for each phase of development must be
provided for each of the above conditions and should include a predetermined
rate for natural growth of through traffic.
            5.   If the proposed development includes a request for rezoning,
the study should also include an analysis comparing the traffic generated by
the proposed development with the traffic generated by the existing zoning or
land use/zoning recommendations in the Comprehensive Plan or any applicable
area plans. This analysis should be very brief, possibly consisting only of a
table comparing the expected number of new trips generated by the recommended
zoning and the proposed development plan. In addition, a short narrative should
be present comparing the percentage or basic differences between the two
scenarios.
   (D)   Review process. Applicable city staff shall review the completed
traffic impact study in conjunction with the development plan and make a
recommendation to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 07: SIGNAGE
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.07.11 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Division is to regulate the location, size, placement,
and certain features of all signs placed on private property for public
observation to protect and promote the general welfare, health, safety, and
order within the city. The provisions contained within this Division are meant
to encourage creativity and opportunities for effective communication, while
ensuring that the public is not distracted or endangered by such communication.
This Division must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the First
Amendment guarantee of free speech.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.07.12 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions pertain to the regulations listed in this
division:
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign that advertises a business, lessor, owner, product,
service, or activity that is no longer located on the premises where the sign
is displayed and/or for which no legal owner can be found.
   A-FRAME/SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. A self-supporting sign with two faces made of
wood or other similar durable materials.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2363.png]
   BANNER SIGN. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, or other similar light
material which can be easily folded or rolled.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2365.png]
   BILLBOARD. A sign which directs attention to a business, product, service,
or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is located.
   CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN. Any sign which is part of or affixed to an awning,
canopy, marquee, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over
a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2367.png]
   DILAPIDATED SIGN. A sign where elements of the display area or structure are
visibly cracked, broken, discolored, dented, corroded, bent, or torn, or where
the message can no longer be read under normal viewing conditions.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A permanent sign that is placed in the ground and not
affixed to any part of a building. Freestanding signs include but are not
limited to pole, pylon, and ground signs.
   GROUND BANNER SIGN. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, or other similar
light material which is affixed to the ground.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2369.png]
   GROUND SIGN. A sign suspended or supported by one or more uprights or braces
anchored in the ground with no more than 30 inches clearance from the bottom of
the sign to the ground below.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A temporary ground sign, wider than it is tall, which is
often accompanied by landscaping.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2371.png]
   PENNANT. A sign which resembles flags and is of a paper, cloth or plastic-
like consistency.
   PERMANENT SIGN. A sign attached to a building, structure, or the ground or
displayed on a daily basis which is constructed of durable materials intended
for long-term use.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign so designed as to be movable from one location to
another and which is not permanently attached to the ground, sales display
device or structure. Portable signs include but are not limited to A-frame,
sandwich board, and ground banner signs.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a wall sign, which is affixed to a
building and which extends perpendicular from the building wall more than 18
inches.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2373.png]
   PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign communicating only a street address.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2375.png]
   PYLON SIGN. A freestanding sign permanently affixed to the ground by
supports, but not having the appearance of a solid base.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2377.png]
   SIGN. The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices or trademarks by
which anything is made known or displayed for informational or communicative
purposes, and which are visible to the general public.
   SIGN AREA. The area within the marginal lines created by the sign surface
which bears the advertisement or, in the case of messages, figures or symbols
attached directly to the part of a building, which is included in the smallest
geometric figure which can be made to circumscribe the message, figure or
symbol displayed thereon.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2379.png]
   SIGN FACE. The area or display surface used for the sign message.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2381.png]
   SIGN HEIGHT. The highest portion of the actual sign, including the pole.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2383.png]
   SIGN STRUCTURE. The supports, foundations, uprights, bracing and framework
for a sign, including the sign area.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign which is erected or displayed on a non-permanent or
non-regular basis for a specified period of time. Temporary signs include, but
are not limited to banner signs and monument signs.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN. All signs, signals, markings, and devices placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic, including signs denoting
names of streets and highways.
   WALL SIGN. A permanent sign which is affixed to the exterior wall of a
building. A WALL SIGN does not project more than 18 inches from the surface to
which it is attached, nor extend beyond the top of any parapet wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2385.png]
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to or inside of a window in view of the general
public.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2387.png]
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.07.13 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Prohibited signs include:
      (1)   Any sign which resembles, obstructs or interferes with an official
traffic control device, sign or signal or railroad sign or signal or which
obstructs or interferes with the driver’s view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic for a distance not to exceed 500 feet;
      (2)   Any sign which prominently displays the words “STOP” or “DANGER;”
      (3)   Signs containing statements, words or pictures of an obscene,
indecent or immoral character, or such as would offend the local standards of
public morals or decency;
      (4)   Signs located on private property without the consent of the owner
thereof;
      (5)   On trees, shrubs or which are painted or drawn upon rocks or
natural features, or on public utility (telephone/power) poles;
      (6)   Signs which include distracting flashing or moving lights which, by
existing standards, is found to be a traffic hazard;
      (7)   Structurally unsafe, dilapidated, or abandoned signs;
      (8)   Signs which incorporate lighting sources of the intensity or
brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of the operator of any motor
vehicle or which otherwise interferes with any driver’s operation of a motor
vehicle;
      (9)   Signs which prevent free access to and from driveways, parking
areas, doors, windows or fire escapes;
      (10)   Signs located in the public right-of-way unless otherwise
permitted elsewhere in this section;
      (11)   Billboards; and
      (12)   Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or placed
for the primary purpose of displaying said sign except for portable signs or
lettering on buses, taxis, or vehicles operating during the normal course of
business.
   (B)   Any object or structure that incorporates a sign is prohibited unless
specifically permitted by this Division.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.07.14 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are excluded from the provisions of this Division:
   (A)   Property identification information visible from the street for public
safety purposes;
   (B)   Traffic control signs authorized by federal, state, or municipal
governments with property jurisdiction;
   (C)   The flag of any nation, respectfully displayed;
   (D)   Pennants;
   (E)   Window signs encompassing no more than 25% of the window;
   (F)   Official notices authorized by a court, public body, or public safety
official; and
   (G)   Warning and restrictive signs, such as “No Trespassing” and “No
Hunting” signs placed upon private property by the owner, not to exceed two
square feet in area.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.07.15 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Temporary signs are exempt from permit requirements but must otherwise
be in conformance with all requirements of this Division.
   (B)   The following temporary signs may be placed on a property:
      (1)   Any property that is currently for sale or rent may place one sign
in the front yard. Such signs must be removed within ten days after the sale or
rental of the property. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area in
all residential districts and 32 square feet per side in area in all other
districts.
      (2)   Signs posted in accordance with M.S. § 211B.045.
      (3)   Any property where an open building permit has been issued may
place one non-illuminated sign on the property.
         (a)   The sign may not exceed six feet above grade in height if
located in a residential district, and eight feet above grade in height if
located in other districts.
         (b)   The sign shall not be erected before issuance of a building
permit or remain after issuance of certificate of occupancy.
      (4)   Banners and other similar temporary signs may be used no more than
three times per calendar year provided they are approved by the Zoning
Administrator and limited for a period not to exceed 14 days. These signs shall
be no larger than six square feet in area.
      (5)   One monument sign per entrance to a subdivision or development.
         (a)   The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area and six
feet in height.
         (b)   The monument sign shall not be placed outside the applicable
subdivision or development.
         (c)   Any monument sign shall require a permit issued by the city to
the property owner specifying the duration of time to be displayed and the
party responsible for maintenance and removal.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 151.07.16 PERMITTED SIGNS.
   The following signs are permitted in their respective zoning district:
   (A)   A-O District.
      (1)   All signs not requiring permits as set forth in this Division.
      (2)   For legally established non-residential uses:
         (a)   One freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and
six feet in height shall be permitted.
         (b)   One wall sign, not to exceed 20 square feet in area, shall also
be permitted.
   (B)   R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-M Districts.
      (1)   All signs not requiring permits as set forth in this Division.
      (2)   For legally established non-residential uses:
         (a)   One freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and
six feet in height shall be permitted.
         (b)   One wall sign, not to exceed 20 square feet in area, shall also
be permitted.
      (3)    One wall sign or one projecting sign shall be permitted per
frontage according to the following:
         (a)   Ground sign with a maximum area of 60 square feet per sign face.
The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 20 feet.
         (b)   Wall sign:
            1.   The total area a wall sign shall not exceed 15% of the wall
area of that wall when said wall area does not exceed 500 square feet.
            2.   When said wall area exceeds 500 square feet, the maximum sign
area for any wall sign shall be 200 square feet.
            3.   Wall area shall be computed individually for each tenant in a
multi-tenant building based proportionally on the floor area of the building
that the tenant occupies.
   (C)   CBD District.
      (1)   All signs not requiring permits as set forth in this Division.
      (2)   One ground sign with a maximum area of 60 square feet per sign
face. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 20 feet.
         (a)   Ground signs in the CBD shall be setback a minimum of five feet
from the public right-of-way, and any support structure shall be located no
closer than two feet from the property owner’s side of the property line.
      (3)   One wall sign or one projecting sign shall be permitted per
frontage according to the following:
         (a)   The total area of all wall signs on any wall of a building shall
not exceed 15% of the wall area of that wall when said wall area does not
exceed 500 square feet.
         (b)   When said wall area exceeds 500 square feet, the maximum sign
area for any wall sign shall be 200 square feet.
         (c)   Wall area shall be computed individually for each tenant in a
multi-tenant building based proportionally on the floor area of the building
that the tenant occupies.
         (d)   A projecting sign shall not:
            1.   Exceed a maximum sign area of 32 square feet per face.
Projecting signs are calculated as wall signs.
            2.   Extend more than four feet into the right-of-way;
            3.   Be located closer than two feet from the roadside edge of a
public sidewalk;
            4.   Be located closer than two feet from the back of a curb or
shoulder of a public roadway;
            5.   Be located less than eight feet above ground level;
            6.   Be supported by any other means other than being securely
attached to the building housing the business thereon advertised; or
            7.   Be otherwise located such that it will interfere with the safe
passage of a pedestrian or motor vehicle or impedes the removal of snow from
the right-of-way.
         (e)   Signs on the faces of any marquee or canopy may extend over the
right-of-way not more than two inches beyond the edge of the marquee or canopy
so long as the marquee, canopy and sign all comply with provisions above.
      (4)   One portable sign is allowed per property:
         (a)   The sign shall be displayed during building hours only.
         (b)   The sign shall be limited to eight square feet in area per side.
         (c)   The sign may be located in the right-of-way adjacent to the
property which it advertises, but shall not interfere with either pedestrian or
vehicular traffic circulation or create a potential traffic hazard.
         (d)   No portable sign shall occupy required parking spaces.
         (e)   In the case of multi-tenant structures, one portable sign may be
placed every 150 feet of street frontage rather than one sign per parcel.
      (5)   Signs in the CBD shall meet the following design requirements:
         (a)   Sign lettering shall not exceed 36 inches.
         (b)   Signs may be illuminated via internal lighting of individual
lettering or ground lighting.
   (D)   B-1 and B-2 Districts.
      (1)   All signs not requiring permits as set forth in this Division.
      (2)   One freestanding sign with a maximum area of 60 square feet per
sign face. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 20 feet.
      (3)    One wall sign shall be permitted per frontage according to the
following:
         (a)   The total area of all wall signs on any wall of a building shall
not exceed 15% of the wall area of that wall when said wall area does not
exceed 500 square feet.
         (b)   When said wall area exceeds 500 square feet, the maximum sign
area for any wall sign shall be 200 square feet.
         (c)   Wall area shall be computed individually for each tenant in a
multi-tenant building based proportionally on the floor area of the building
that the tenant occupies.
      (4)   One portable sign is allowed per property.
         (a)   Sign shall be displayed during building hours only.
         (b)   Sign shall be limited to eight square feet in area per side
         (c)   Sign shall not interfere with either pedestrian or vehicular
traffic circulation or create a potential traffic hazard.
         (d)   No portable sign shall occupy required parking spaces.
         (e)   In the case of multi-tenant structures, one portable sign may be
placed every 150 feet of street frontage rather than one sign per parcel.
   (E)   I-1 District.
      (1)   All signs not requiring permits as set forth in this Division.
      (2)   One freestanding sign with a maximum area of 60 square feet per
sign face. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 20 feet.
      (3)    One wall sign shall be permitted per frontage according to the
following:
         (a)   The total area of all wall signs on any wall of a building shall
not exceed 15% of the wall area of that wall when said wall area does not
exceed 500 square feet.
         (b)   When said wall area exceeds 500 square feet, the maximum sign
area for any wall sign shall be 200 square feet.
         (c)   Wall area shall be computed individually for each tenant in a
multi-tenant building based proportionally on the floor area of the building
that the tenant occupies.
      (4)   One portable sign is allowed per property.
         (a)   Sign shall be displayed during building hours only.
         (b)   Sign shall be limited to eight square feet in area per side.
         (c)   Sign shall not interfere with either pedestrian or vehicular
traffic circulation or create a potential traffic hazard.
         (d)   No portable sign shall occupy required parking spaces.
         (e)   In the case of multi-tenant structures, one portable sign may be
placed every 150 feet of street frontage rather than one sign per parcel.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20240515-01, passed 5-15-24)
§ 151.07.17 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All signs shall be constructed pursuant to the requirements of the
State Building Code.
   (B)   All signs shall be maintained by the owner in a safe condition. A sign
shall be repainted whenever its paint begins to fade, chip, or discolor.
   (C)   Anchorage requirements.
      (1)   No sign larger than four square feet in area shall be suspended by
non-rigid attachments that will allow the sign to swing in a wind.
      (2)   All freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures
permanently attached to concrete foundations.
      (3)   All portable signs on display shall be braced or secured to prevent
motion.
      (4)   No sign shall be attached to hang from any building until all
necessary wall attachments have been approved by the Building Official.
   (D)   Additional construction and placement requirements.
      (1)   No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to
obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening used as a means
of egress.
      (2)   No sign shall be attached in any form, shape, or manner which will
interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that signs may be
erected in front of and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the
provisions of the current Building or Fire Codes.
      (3)   Signs shall be located in such a way as to maintain horizontal and
vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with
present Electrical Code specifications.
      (4)   Lighting shall be directed away from road rights-of-way and
adjacent dwellings.
      (5)   External illumination for signs in all districts shall be so
constructed and maintained that the source of light is not visible from the
public right-of-way or residential property and does not interfere with or
obstruct any official traffic sign or signal.
      (6)   Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, no signs other than
governmental signs shall be erected or temporarily placed within any right-of-
way or upon any public lands or easements.
      (7)   When a free standing sign or sign structure is constructed so that
the sign faces are not back to back, the angle shall not exceed ten degrees. If
the angle is greater than ten degrees, the total area of both sides added
together shall not exceed the maximum allowable sign area for that district.
   (E)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Freestanding signs shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from
any public right-of-way measured to any portion of the sign.
      (2)   Freestanding signs shall have a minimum setback of five feet from
any side or rear property lines.
      (3)   No freestanding sign shall be located within 25 feet of any
intersection of street right-of-way lines and/or driveway entrances. This
distance may be reduced if the Zoning Administrator determines that the sign
will not affect traffic sight lines.
   (F)   Height. The top of any sign, including its super structure if any,
shall be no higher than the roofline for structures with peaked roofs. Signs
attached to flat roofs may extend no more than three feet higher than the
roofline, but not more than 35 feet above ground level.
   (G)   Procedural requirements.
      (1)   Permits required.
         (a)   Signs permitted by this Division may be erected only upon the
issuance of a sign permit by the city for each individual sign eligible
hereunder. Permit applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
with the appropriate fee determined from a fee schedule adopted by the City
Council. The permit is valid for the life of the sign so long as the sign is
kept in good repair and not altered in a way that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this Division. Signs exempted herein do not need a permit. Unused
sign permits expire six months after the issuance date. If a sign requires
inspection by the Building Inspector, the permittee is responsible for the
appropriate inspection fees.
         (b)   Signs located along state highways must also obtain a sign
permit issued by the state.
      (2)   Consent of property owner required. It is unlawful to erect or
maintain any sign on any property, public or private, without the consent of
the property owner thereof.
      (3)   Sign variance. Any person wishing to erect a sign which does not
comply with the provisions of this Division may submit an application for a
variance in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Division 151.06.
   (H)   Removal of signs. Signs erected on private property in violation of
this Division are hereby designated as a nuisance and subject to removal. Any
signs erected on public property in violation of this Division may be
immediately removed and confiscated by the city or its assigns.
   (I)   Nonconforming signs. Signs which do not conform to the provisions of
this Division applicable thereto, shall be a nonconforming use and subject to
the provisions of Part 151.01.4.
   (J)   Substitution. Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted
anywhere that advertising or business signs are permitted.
   (K)   Severability. If any section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this
Sign Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Division. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the Sign Chapter in each
section, subsection, sentence, or phase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be
declared invalid.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
Division 01: Introductory Provisions
Part 1. Authority
   
152.01.11   Purpose
   
152.01.12   Title
   
152.01.13   Applicability
   
152.01.14   Effective date and authority to adopt
Part 2. Interpretation
   
152.01.21   Relationship to Comprehensive Plan
   
152.01.22   Conflicting regulations or provisions
   
152.01.23   Severability
Division 02: Design Standards
Part 1. General Standards
   
152.02.11   Application
   
152.02.12   Land requirements
   
152.02.13   Wetland, shoreland, and floodplain areas
Part 2. Blocks & Lots
   
152.02.21   Blocks
   
152.02.22   Lots
Part 3. Easements & Utilities
   
152.02.31   Easements
   
152.02.32   Utilities
Part 4. Street Design
   
152.02.41   Road system
Part 5. Sidewalk and Trail Design
   
152.02.51   Sidewalk design
   
152.02.52   Trail design
Part 6. Drainage & Erosion Control
   
152.02.61   Drainage
   
152.02.62   Soil erosion and steep slopes
Part 7. Dedications
   
152.02.71   General standards
Division 03: Improvements
Part 1. General Provisions
   
152.03.11   Purpose
   
152.03.12   Improvements required
   
152.03.13   Installation; payment
   
152.03.14   Required agreements; proper installation
   
152.03.15   Construction plans
   
152.03.16   Inspection
   
152.03.17   Improvements completed prior to approval
   
152.03.18   Incomplete improvements
   
152.03.19   Utility charges
Division 04: Stormwater Management
Part 1. Authority
   
152.04.11   Purpose
   
152.04.12   Statutory authorization
   
152.04.13   Applicability
   
152.04.14   Exemptions
Part 2. Design Standards
   
152.04.21   Design criteria
   
152.04.22   Performance goals
   
152.04.23   Methodologies and computations
   
152.04.24   Site standards
Part 3. Inspections and Maintenance
   
152.04.31   Applicant responsibilities
   
152.04.32   City-owned stormwater facilities
   
152.04.33   Private stormwater facilities
   
152.04.34   Inventory of stormwater facilities
   
152.04.35   Right of entry and inspection
Part 4. Procedures
   
152.04.41   Process
   
152.04.42   Fees
   
152.04.43   Permit completion
Part 5. Enforcement
   
152.04.51   General provisions
   
152.04.52   Enforcement tools/stop work orders
   
152.04.53   Notification of failure of the permit
Division 05: Procedures and Enforcement
Part 1. Procedures
   
152.05.11   Common procedures and requirements
   
152.05.12   Administrative adjustment
   
152.05.13   Minor subdivision
   
152.05.14   Concept plan
   
152.05.15   Preliminary plat
   
152.05.16   Final plat
   
152.05.17   Appeal of subdivision chapter interpretation
   
152.05.18   Subdivision variance
   
152.05.19   Extraterritorial subdivision authority
DIVISION 01: INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
PART 1. AUTHORITY
§ 152.01.11 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect and provide for the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the city and its people, and to specifically
achieve the following purposes:
   (A)   The implementation of the Comprehensive Plan;
   (B)   The subdivision of land in an orderly manner which provides for the
wise use and management of land and natural resources throughout the city; and
   (C)   The provision of adequate public infrastructure, facilities, and
services.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.01.12 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “City Subdivision Chapter,” except as
referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this chapter.”
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.01.13 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land
contained herein shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of
Lindstrom and within the extraterritorial review boundary established in the
extraterritorial review boundary map, as may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter relate to any division of a tract of
land into one or more parcels by platting, replatting, conveyance, registered
land survey, or other means.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.01.14 EFFECTIVE DATE AND AUTHORITY TO ADOPT.
   (A)   The effective date of this chapter is January 20, 2022. This chapter
hereby supersedes and replaces in its entirety,
Chapter 153 of the Lindstrom, Minnesota Code of Ordinances on the effective
date hereof.
   (B)   The authority to adopt this chapter within the City of Lindstrom is
derived from M.S. Chapter 462, including but not limited to § 462.358, as well
as other applicable state statutes and rules. In the event of a conflict or
inconsistency between the provisions contained in this chapter and state
statutes or rules, state statutes and rules shall govern, unless such state
statutes or rules provide otherwise.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. INTERPRETATION
§ 152.01.21 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Lindstrom or “Comprehensive Plan,”
including amendments adopted by the City Council, is the guiding policy
document for the city. A primary intent of this chapter is to implement the
goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan while remaining consistent with
all applicable requirements of federal and state laws.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.01.22 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS OR PROVISIONS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Wherever this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or
by other rules, regulations, or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter
shall govern except as otherwise provided in state statutes or rules.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.01.23 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this
chapter, or application of any provision of this chapter to any circumstance,
is held invalid, the application of such provision to other circumstances, and
the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 02: DESIGN STANDARDS
PART 1. GENERAL STANDARDS
§ 152.02.11 APPLICATION.
   The following land subdivision principles, standards and requirements will
be applied by the city in evaluating plans for proposed subdivisions:
   (A)   Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is
clearly impractical, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, or, in the
absence of the recommendation, at its own discretion, the City Council may
modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property
while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of these
regulations, including the issuance of a variance, if appropriate, as provided
herein.
   (B)   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan of
the city.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.02.12 LAND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
No preliminary plans shall be approved if the site is not suitable for purposes
of the kind proposed by reason of potential flooding, topography, adverse earth
or rock formation, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities, or
any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the
future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
   (B)   Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property shall not be
subdivided for residential purposes until all hazards have been eliminated or
unless adequate safeguards against the hazards are provided by the subdivision
plan.
   (C)   No parcel of land or portion thereof shall be subdivided if such
action results in buildings and/or uses becoming non-conforming.
   (D)   Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with existing nearby
municipalities or neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may develop
harmoniously.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.02.13 WETLAND, SHORELAND, AND FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   (A)   Where the subdivision of a lot or tract of land contains watercourse,
floodable areas, or wetlands the land shall at the city’s option be:
      (1)   Dedicated to the city as a park, parkway, open space, outlot, or
other public use;
      (2)   Carried in a private easement in the individual deeds affected with
no allowance for building construction therein; or
      (3)   Developed in accordance with a plan setting forth provisions for
sediment control, water management, maintenance of landscaped features and
indicating any change which will be made in the natural condition of the earth
and its effect, if any, upon watercourses, lakes, streams, wetlands, and
drainage ways.
   (B)   The Planning Commission and City Council shall review the option
selected and approve or disapprove the dedication, private easement or
development plan. In no case shall land be subdivided which is held unsuitable
by the city or the Commissioner of the State Department of Natural Resources
for the proposed use because of flooding, inadequate water supply or sewage
disposal capabilities or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health,
safety or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the
city.
   (C)   If located within the Shoreland Overlay District and no central sewer
is available, a final plat shall not be approved until the subdivider has
submitted data from percolation tests and soil borings which ensure that each
lot in the subdivision has a suitable location and adequate area for the
installation of an on-site disposal system that meets the requirements of the
Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   (D)   A buffer strip shall be maintained around the perimeter of all
wetlands meeting the requirements listed in the Public Works Design Manual.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. BLOCKS & LOTS
§ 152.02.21 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Blocks shall not be greater than 1,200 feet in length, except if
necessary due to unusual topographic conditions, water frontage, or other
circumstances.
   (B)   In residential areas, blocks longer than 600 feet shall be provided
with ten foot pedestrian ways in locations deemed necessary for public welfare,
health, safety, or ease of use. Suitable easements, setbacks, paving,
landscaping, or fencing may be required.
   (C)   Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements
of design contained in this section if the nature of the use requires other
treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for employees and customers shall
be provided along with safe and convenient limited access to the street system.
Space for off-street loading shall also be provided with similar access.
Extension of roads, railroad access right-of-way and utilities shall be
provided as necessary.
   (D)   Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots, except lots
adjoining a lake, stream, railroad, or arterial, or where one tier of lots is
necessary because of topographic conditions.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.02.22 LOTS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   A lot’s dimensions, shape, and size shall conform to the
requirements listed in
Chapter 151 Zoning.
      (2)   Lots designed for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide
adequate area for off-street service, loading, stacking spaces, and parking
facilities.
      (3)   Lots designed for residential purposes shall take the following
into consideration:
         (a)   Corner lots shall be platted wider than interior lots to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets as required by
Chapter 151 Zoning.
         (b)   Butt lots should be avoided when possible. Where butt lots must
be used, they shall be platted at least five feet wider than the average width
of interior lots in the block.
         (c)   Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way, channel, or
stream shall have an additional depth or width, as required to assure house
sites that are not subject to flooding.
         (d)   Irregular shaped lots are discouraged. Where such lots are
proposed the development shall demonstrate to the city an ability to properly
place principal buildings and accessory structures on the site in a manner that
is compatible in size and character to the surrounding area.
      (4)   Lots with lakeshore frontage shall be designed so that the lot
lines extended shall maintain the closest approximation to riparian rights.
      (5)   In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all
natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots, or
similar conditions, which if preserved will add attractiveness and stability to
the proposed development.
      (6)   All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing
of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, dedicated to the public,
owned with specified restrictions by a homeowner association or comparable
association as allowed by M.S. Chapter 515B, or dedicated as an outlot with
specific restrictions.
      (7)   In case a tract is divided, and the subdivision results in parcels
of more than twice the minimum lot size provided for by
Chapter 151 Zoning for the zoning district in which the land is located, then a
build out plan may be required showing potential and feasible ways in which the
lot or lots may be re-subdivided in future years for more intensive use of the
land. The placement of buildings or structures upon these lots must allow for
potential subdivision.
   (B)   Lot size.
      (1)   Lots served with a central sewer system shall have a minimum lot
size, as outlined within
Chapter 151 Zoning.
      (2)   Lots with individual or private sewage disposal system shall have a
minimum lot size as recommended by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency in
accordance with state regulations, as amended.
      (3)   Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream
shall have an additional depth or width, as required to assure house sites that
are not subject to flooding.
      (4)   All lots fronting or abutting on arterials and collectors shall be
platted with additional depth necessary to provide for larger setbacks from
such traffic ways.
      (5)   Excessive depth in relation to lot width shall be avoided. (A
proportion of three to one shall normally be considered as appropriate, except
in the case of narrow lots).
      (6)   Corner lots shall be platted at least 15 feet wider than interior
lots.
      (7)   Butt lots shall be platted at least five feet wider than the
average width of interior lots in the block. Their use shall be avoided when
possible.
   (C)   Frontage.
      (1)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or straight
road lines or radial to curved road lines or radial to lake or stream shores
unless topographic conditions necessitate a different arrangement.
      (2)   Each lot shall front upon a public right-of-way or ingress
easement.
      (3)   Through lots or double frontage lots shall be avoided when
possible. When such lots cannot be avoided, an additional 20 feet shall be
required to allow for screen planting along the rear lot line.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 3. EASEMENTS & UTILITIES
§ 152.02.31 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements.
      (1)   Easements having a minimum width of ten feet shall be provided
along the side or rear lot lines as required for utility lines and underground
mains and cables.
      (2)   For lots abutting public right-of-way where the right-of-way width
is less than the minimum width specified herein or in the Public Works Design
Manual, an easement having a minimum width of ten feet shall be provided along
the street side lot line.
      (3)   Utility easements shall connect with easements established in
adjoining properties. All utility easements should be reviewed by the city
Public Works Department. Where feasible, all utilities shall be placed
underground.
      (4)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a floodage easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the 100-year high water elevation of
the water course.
   (B)   Pedestrian walkway easements with right-of-way of not less than ten
feet in width for a sidewalk or 20 feet in width for a multi-use trail shall be
required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities
as required by the City Council.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.02.32 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Extensions of the public water supply system shall, when available, be
designed so as to provide public water service to each lot.
   (B)   Water supply for all areas shall be designed to meet regulations and
recommended standards of the city and the Minnesota Department of Health.
   (C)   Where connection with a public water system is feasible and within 100
feet of the subject parcel, the public water facilities shall be utilized.
   (D)   When the subdivision is located within the service area of a public
water supply system, water mains not less than eight inches in diameter shall
be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such a manner as to serve
adequately all lots and tracts with connection to the public system together
with shut-off valves and fire hydrants at intervals of not greater than 400
feet.
   (E)   Extensions of the public sanitary sewer system shall, when available,
to designed so as to provide sewer service to each lot.
   (F)   Sewerage for all subdivisions shall be designed to meet regulations
and standards of the city and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Where
connection with a central sewer system is feasible, the central sewer
facilities shall be utilized.
   (G)   In subdivisions where municipal water and sewer services are not
presently available, the City Council may require that the lots in the
subdivision be consistent with the requirements for lots with central sewer, as
set forth in §
152.02.22(B), and that the developer convey two or more lots for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or building development, and further that any building
development be confined to one of the multiple lots conveyed. At the time as
municipal sewer service becomes immediately available, and upon connection of
the existing building development to same, the undeveloped lots may be conveyed
to other persons or entities and building development may be permitted on same.
   (H)   All utility service lines shall be placed underground and within
easements or dedicated rights-of-way. All drainage and other utility
installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by and
subject to proper easements and/or legal agreements.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 4. STREET DESIGN
§ 152.02.41 ROAD SYSTEM.
   (A)   Streets shall be designed to comply with the standards set forth in
the city’s Public Works Design Manual, standard specifications, and details.
   (B)   Proposed roads shall conform to the state, county and/or city plans as
have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
   (C)   Roads shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades. Access shall be given to all lots and
portions of the tract in the subdivision, and to adjacent unsubdivided
territory unless the topography clearly indicates that the connection is not
feasible. Reserved strips and land-locked areas shall not be created. Wherever
a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial road, the other
part of the road shall be platted within the tract.
   (D)   If adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be subdivided in the
future, the arrangement of streets must make provision for the proper
projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the
boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations.
   (E)   Streets shall not be arranged in a way that will cause undue hardship
to owners of adjoining property.
   (F)   Local roads shall be laid out to discourage their use by through
traffic.
   (G)   Where possible, arterials shall be protected for use by service roads
or marginal access roads.
   (H)   Cul-de-sac streets are discouraged when through streets are practical.
Cul-de-sac streets shall be no longer than 500 feet, unless otherwise approved
by the City Council at the recommendation of the City Engineer due to
topography, water, or other circumstances.
   (I)   In those instances where a street is terminated pending future
extension in conjunction with future subdivision, and there is more than 200
feet or two dwelling units accessed between the dead end and the nearest
intersection, a temporary turnaround that meets the following requirements
shall be placed at the closed end:
      (1)   The temporary cul-de-sac must be placed inside a temporary roadway
easement if it is located outside of street right-of-way.
      (2)   The temporary cul-de-sac shall be paved with bituminous within one
year of construction. Other surfaces may be considered and allowed by the
Zoning Administrator on a case by case basis.
      (3)   The developer shall submit a cash escrow in an amount determined by
the City Engineer for the removal of the temporary cul-de-sac and restoration
of the area, limited to placement of sod and asphalt driveway within the
temporary roadway easement.
      (4)   Temporary “dead-end” public streets associated with providing
access for future extension to and through adjacent undeveloped property
require concrete curb and gutter installation. Temporary dead-end streets that
will be extended as part of a future phase of a development shown on an
approved preliminary plat do not require concrete curb and gutter along the
radius of the cul-de-sac.
   (J)   In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on limited access
highways or arterials where there is no other alternative, a temporary entrance
may be granted with an interim use permit. As neighboring land becomes
subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become possible, the interim
use permit shall become void.
   (K)   Access of local streets or driveways onto state and county state aid
highways shall not be permitted at intervals of less than 500 feet.
   (L)   Intersections.
      (1)   The angle formed by the intersecting of streets shall not be less
than 60 degrees with 90-degree intersections preferred.
      (2)   Intersections of more than four corners shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Constructed roadways of street intersections shall be rounded by a
radius of not less than 20 feet.
   (M)   Concrete curb and gutter shall be included as a part of the required
street surface improvement and shall be designed for installation along both
sides of all roadways.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 5. SIDEWALK AND TRAIL DESIGN
§ 152.02.51 SIDEWALK DESIGN.
   (A)   Sidewalks are required on at least one side of every local street.
Sidewalks are not required along a cul-de-sac but may be required to extend
between residential properties at the end to connect to an adjacent
neighborhood.
   (B)   Sidewalks must be placed in public right-of-way or easement in favor
of the city.
   (C)   Sidewalks shall be at least six feet in width and meet specifications
set forth by the Public Works Design Manual or City Engineer, including
accessibility requirements.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.02.52 TRAIL DESIGN.
   (A)   Multi-use trails shall be required on one side of all collector and
arterial roadways. Where a sidewalk already exists on a collector or arterial
roadway, the City Council shall determine whether a sidewalk or a trail shall
be installed.
   (B)   Multi-use trails shall be placed in public right-of-way or easement in
favor of the city.
   (C)   Multi-use trails shall be at least ten feet in width and meet
specifications set forth by the Public Works Design Manual or City Engineer,
including accessibility requirements.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 6. DRAINAGE & EROSION CONTROL
§ 152.02.61 DRAINAGE.
   (A)   A complete and adequate drainage system design may be required for the
subdivision and shall include a storm sewer system or a system of open ditches,
culverts, pipes and catch basins, or both systems.
   (B)   Plans for surface water runoff and drainage shall be reviewed by the
City Engineer, prior to final plat approval.
   (C)   The subdivision should be so designed for the drainage system to
utilize, to the greatest extent possible, existing natural overland flows, open
channel and drainage routes.
   (D)   The drainage system shall be constructed and operational during the
initial phase of construction.
   (E)   Roads and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage.
   (F)   Surface water drainage shall be provided by storm sewers or drainage
courses adequate to drain surface water from the subdivision and protect
roadway pavements.
   (G)   Drainage courses. Where stormwater from adjacent areas naturally
passes through a subdivision, adequate provision shall be included in the
subdivision for facilities to safely route the stormwater through the
subdivision to its natural outlet or to maintain or replace the natural water
course.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.02.62 SOIL EROSION AND STEEP SLOPES.
   (A)   A minimum of four inches of topsoil shall be placed and vegetation
shall be re-established to minimize soil erosion.
   (B)   No construction or grading shall be allowed on slopes greater than
20%. The subdivider may dedicate steep slopes to an officially recognized
homeowner association or comparable association.
   (C)   During and after construction, slopes shall be protected from erosion
by quick establishment of vegetative cover, benches, terraces, mulches, or
other proper protection devices or practices. Stands of existing vegetation
adequate to control erosion should be preserved wherever possible.
   (D)   The City Council may require that a sufficient bond be posted and
payable to the city for use in correcting problems on public or private lands
caused by erosion and runoff from the development during the construction
phase. The bonds shall be maintained until completion of the development or
until the City Engineer shall certify that sufficient vegetative cover has been
re-established and other measures have been taken to protect the development
site to the approximate extent existing before vegetation removal, land
shaping, and improvement construction were commenced.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 7. DEDICATIONS
§ 152.02.71 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   As authorized by law, the City Council shall require as a condition of
subdivision approval for all tracts, lots or parcels created within the
jurisdictional boundaries of this chapter that a reasonable percentage of the
final gross area of the subdivision be dedicated to the public for public use
as parks, playgrounds, trails and public open space or, at the City Council’s
discretion, that the subdivider contribute an equivalent amount in cash in lieu
of the dedication of land, or combinations thereof. The final form and amount
of the dedication or contribution shall be determined solely by the city based
upon the conditions outlined below.
   (B)   In single-family and multiple-family residential subdivisions, the
subdivider shall:
      (1)   Pay the city a fee equal to the number of residential units
available in the subdivision times the per lot charge set by resolution of the
City Council;
      (2)   Dedicate land selected solely by the city as to its location and
configuration, in an amount equal to 7% of the total gross acreage of the land
proposed to be subdivided; or
      (3)   Any combination of  subsections  (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section
as determined by City Council.
   (C)   In nonresidential subdivisions, the subdivider shall dedicate an
amount equal to the quotient arrived at by making the following calculations:
      (1)   Divide the total square footage of the non-public portion of the
subdivision by the minimum square footage for a standard residential lot within
the city as set by ordinance; and
      (2)   Multiply that amount by the per lot charge referred to in
subsection  (A) of this section.
   (D)   It shall be deemed to be in the public interest to require said
contribution for public sites and open space when the Council, after review and
recommendation, makes one or more of the following findings of fact:
      (1)   In establishing the reasonable portion of each proposed subdivision
to be dedicated to the public for public use as provided above, the City
Council may take into consideration the open spaces, parks, recreational or
common areas and facilities which the subdivider has proposed for the exclusive
use of the residents or occupants of the subdivision.
      (2)   The contribution is necessary in order to protect adjacent land
uses from potential conflicting land uses which could exist on the land to be
subdivided.
      (3)   The increased number of residents to reside or to be employed
within the subdivision will increase the recreational demands upon the city.
      (4)   The contribution is necessary to provide proper surface water
runoff generated by the uses proposed within the subdivision.
      (5)   The land proposed to be subdivided contains or borders upon
existing unique topographical features including, but not limited to ponds,
lakes, streams, timber stands, water holding areas, hills, steep slopes,
drainage areas, or bluffs which should be preserved to prevent foreseeable
safety, pollution or erosion hazards.
      (6)   The contribution furthers the goals policies and programs of the
city.
   (E)   In subdivisions which include outlots, the subdivider shall pay a fee
equal to the fee charges for a buildable lot, as described in  subsection  (A)
of this section. When the outlot is then subsequently subdivided, the charges
applicable at the time of subdivision approval shall apply, less the amount
earlier tendered.
   (F)   All monies collected under this section shall be placed in a special
fund. The funds may only be used to purchase park property and park
infrastructure improvements.
   (G)   Upon petition by the subdivider, the Council may approve a delay in
the actual contribution of the cash required in lieu of land until the time as
development occurs on the property being subdivided provided that a proper
legal agreement is executed guaranteeing the contribution. Delayed contribution
payment shall include 8% interest per year. In such cases where the subdivider
is required to dedicate land area, the city shall have the right to determine
the geographic location and configuration of the dedication. The suitability of
the land proposed to be dedicated shall be determined by reference to the
following criteria:
      (1)   Whether the land is reasonably located and suited for its intended
use;
      (2)   Whether land has frontage on public streets;
      (3)   Size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access,
and location; and
      (4)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
   (H)   As part of the subdivision approval, the applicant shall be
responsible for making certain improvements to land dedicated for park, trail,
and public open space purposes, including, but not limited to, finish grading,
ground cover, construction of trails, and clearly identifying park and trail
boundaries with city-approved markers.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 03: IMPROVEMENTS
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.03.11 PURPOSE.
   Improvements are required in order to protect the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare of the population by providing greater
assurance to public health, assuring reliability of water supply, and providing
more effective firefighting through hydrants.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.03.12 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   The city may require the following improvements of any development:
   (A)   All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, road
intersection corners, and points of tangency and curvature shall be marked with
survey monuments meeting the minimum requirements of state law. All federal,
state, county and other official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation
stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position
unless a relocation is approved by the controlling agency;
   (B)   Drainage system;
   (C)   Sidewalks and trails;
   (D)   Streets;
   (E)   Street lighting;
   (F)   Street name signs;
   (G)   Traffic control signs;
   (H)   Tree planting;
   (I)   Utilities;
   (J)   Over-sized utility trunk lines; and
   (K)   Other improvements not listed.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.03.13 INSTALLATION; PAYMENT.
   (A)   The required improvements to be furnished and installed by the
subdivider, which are listed and described, are to be furnished and installed
at the sole expense of the subdivider.
   (B)   In the case of an improvement for which the cost would be divided
between an assessment of the improved property and general levy funds,
provision may be made for payment of a portion of the cost by the city.
   (C)   Improvement costs shall include all construction costs incurred in
making the improvements, all expense incurred by the city for engineering,
planning and legal fees, and all other expense in connection with the making of
the improvements.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.03.14 REQUIRED AGREEMENTS; PROPER INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to
approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall enter into a development
contract in writing with the city requiring the subdivider to furnish and
construct the improvements at his or her sole cost and in accordance with plans
and specifications and usual contract conditions.
   (B)   The development contract shall include provision for supervision of
details of construction by the City Engineer and grant to the City Engineer
authority to correlate the work to be done under the development contract by
any subcontractors authorized to proceed thereunder and with any other work
being done or contracted by the city in the vicinity.
   (C)   The developer shall provide to the city a written warranty that all
required improvements on the site meet or exceed all city standards and that
such improvements have been inspected and tested in regards to the city
standards. The developer is responsible for having all such inspections and
testing completed at their expense.
   (D)   The developer shall be required to maintain all improvements and
provide for snow removal and maintenance of streets, if required, until
acceptance of said improvements by the City Council in coordination of the
development contract.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.03.15 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all
respects with the standards of the City Engineer and the ordinances of the city
shall be prepared or approved at the subdivider’s expense by a professional
engineer who is registered in the state and the plans shall contain his or her
seal. The plans, together with the quantities of construction items and
estimate of total costs, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his or her
approval.
   (B)   Upon approval, they shall become a part of the contract required.
   (C)   The construction plans approved by the City Engineer and marked “For
Construction” plus two prints shall be furnished to the city to be filed by the
City Engineer as a record.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.03.16 INSPECTION.
   All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the
provisions of this chapter shall be inspected during the course of construction
by the City Engineer, Zoning Administrator, or Building Inspector.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.03.17 IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED PRIOR TO APPROVAL.
   Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to
application for approval of the final plat shall be accepted as equivalent
improvements in compliance with the requirements only if the City Engineer
certifies that he or she is satisfied that the existing improvements conform to
applicable standards.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.03.18 INCOMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS.
   In the event of small subdivisions or in subdivisions in which development
may proceed slowly, or in other events in which the provision of surfaced
streets, utility lines or other improvements is clearly not feasible
immediately following approval of the final plat, the city may elect to
commence assessment proceedings, utilize funds of a cash escrow agreement, or
otherwise move to finance and install improvements when the subdivision is
developed to the point of warranting the improvements.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.03.19 UTILITY CHARGES.
   The following utility area and unit connection charges shall be collected
with any new subdivisions and housing units in accordance with the public
improvement financing policy of the City of Lindstrom, as may be amended:
   (A)   Sewer availability charges (SAC); and
   (B)   Water availability charges (WAC).
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 04: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PART 1. AUTHORITY
§ 152.04.11 PURPOSE.
   The general purpose of this Division is to establish regulatory requirements
for land development and land disturbing activities within the city in order to
minimize the threats to public health, safety, public and private property, and
natural resources from construction site erosion and post-construction
stormwater runoff. The following performance goals are established for all
development under this Division:
   (A)   Meet minimum impact design standards (MIDS) performance goals;
   (B)   Assist in meeting construction stormwater general permit requirements;
   (C)   Assist in meeting total maximum daily load (TMDL) plan wasteload
allocations for impaired waters through quantification of load reductions;
   (D)   Protect life and property from dangers associated with flooding and
maintain or decrease the incidence and levels of flooding;
   (E)   Protect public and private property and natural resources from damage
resulting from stormwater runoff and erosion;
   (F)   Ensure the annual stormwater runoff rates and volumes from post
development site conditions mimic and/or reduce the annual runoff rates and
volumes from predevelopment site conditions;
   (G)   Minimize the generation of stormwater runoff and maximizes pervious
areas for stormwater treatment;
   (H)   Protect water quality from pollutant loadings of sediment, suspended
solids, nutrients, heavy metals, toxins, debris, bacteria, pathogens,
biological impairments, thermal stress, and other pollutants;
   (I)   Promote infiltration and groundwater recharge;
   (J)   Provide vegetated corridors (buffers) to protect water resources from
development;
   (K)   Protect functional values of all types of natural waterbodies (e.g.,
rivers, streams, wetlands, lakes, seasonal ponds); and
   (L)   Protect, sustain or enhance biodiversity (native plant and animal
habitat) and support riparian ecosystems.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.12 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   This Division is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies
contained in M.S. Chapter 103B and 462; Minn. Admin. Rules pts. 6120.2500 -
6120.3900; and Minn. Admin. Rules Ch. 8410 and 8420, as amended from time to
time.
   (B)   This Division is intended to meet the current construction site
erosion and sediment control and post-construction stormwater management
regulatory requirements for construction activity and small construction
activity (NPDES Permit) as defined in 40 C.F.R. pts. 122.26(b)(14)(x) and (b)
(15), respectively.
   (C)   This Division is intended to meet the Minimal Impact Design Standards
(MIDS) developed under M.S. § 115.03 Subd. 5c, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.13 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Land shall not be developed for any use without having provided
stormwater management measures and erosion and sediment control measures that
control or manage stormwater runoff from such developments.
   (B)   The city shall require that a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) or an erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan be completed, submitted
for review, and approved by the city. Applicants will complete either a SWPPP
or an ESC plan, but not both, as described in  subsections  (B)(1) and (B)(2)
of this section.
      (1)   An approved stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be
required prior to any proposed land development activity that meets any of the
criteria in  subsections  (B)(1)(a) through (B)(1)(e) of this section, unless
otherwise exempted in §
152.04.14:
         (a)   Any land development activity that may ultimately result in the
disturbance of one or more acres of land, including smaller individual sites
that are part of a common plan of development that may be constructed at
different times [NOTE: A construction stormwater general permit from the MPCA
is also required if one or more acres of land will be disturbed];
         (b)   Land development activity involving discharges to an impaired
water as described in the TMDL 303(d) list;
         (c)   A subdivision plat;
         (d)   The construction of any new public or private road; or
         (e)   Any land development activity, regardless of size, that the city
determines is likely to cause an adverse impact to an environmentally sensitive
area or other property.
      (2)   An approved erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan shall be
required prior to any proposed land disturbing activity that meets any of the
criteria in  subsections  (B)(2)(a) through (B)(2)(d) of this section, unless
otherwise exempted in §
152.04.14:
         (a)   Disturbs a total land surface area of between 3,000 square feet
and one acre;
         (b)   Involves excavation or filling, or a combination of excavation
and filling, in excess of 25 cubic yards of material;
         (c)   Involves the laying, repairing, replacing, or enlarging and/or
boring of an underground utility, pipe or other facility, or the disturbance of
road ditch, grass swale or other open channel for a distance of 300 feet or
more [NOTE: A right-of-way excavation permit from the City of Lindstrom,
Chisago County, or State of Minnesota may be required for work within the
public right-of-way];
         (d)   A land disturbing activity, regardless of size, that the city
determines is likely to cause an adverse impact to an environmentally sensitive
area or other property, or may violate any other erosion and sediment control
standard set forth in this Division.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.14 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following activities shall be exempt from all of the requirements of
this Division:
   (A)   Emergency work necessary to protect life, limb, or property, and
emergency repairs. If a plan would have been required, then the disturbed land
area shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the city's requirements
as soon as possible.
   (B)   Routine agricultural activity such as tilling, planting, harvesting,
and associated activities. Other agricultural activities are not exempt
including activities such as construction of structures.
   (C)   Silvicultural activity (i.e., forestry).
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.04.21 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Site design process.
      (1)   Whenever possible, new development projects shall be designed using
the “better site design techniques” of the current version of the Minnesota
Stormwater Manual available at: http://stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/
Better_site_design.
      (2)   Better site design involves techniques applied early in the design
process to preserve natural areas, reduce impervious cover, distribute runoff
and use pervious areas to more effectively treat stormwater runoff. Site design
should address open space protection, impervious cover minimization, runoff
distribution and minimization, and runoff utilization through considerations
such as:
         (a)   Open space protection and restoration:
            1.   Conservation of existing natural areas (upland and wetland);
            2.   Reforestation;
            3.   Re-establishment of prairies;
            4.   Restoration of wetlands;
            5.   Establishment or protection of stream, shoreline and wetland
buffers; and
            6.   Re-establishment of native vegetation into the landscape.
         (b)   Reduction of impervious cover:
            1.   Reduce new impervious cover through redevelopment of existing
sites and use of existing roadways, trails, etc.;
            2.   Minimize street width, parking space size, driveway length,
sidewalk width; and
            3.   Reduce impervious surface footprint (e.g. two-story buildings,
parking ramp).
         (c)   Distribution and minimization of runoff:
            1.   Utilize vegetated areas for stormwater treatment (e.g. parking
lot islands, vegetated areas along property boundaries, front and rear yards);
            2.   Direct impervious surface runoff to vegetated areas or to
designed treatment areas (roofs, parking, driveways drain to pervious areas,
not directly to storm sewer or other conveyances);
            3.   Encourage infiltration and soil storage of runoff through
grass channels, soil compost amendment, vegetated swales, rain gardens, etc.;
and
            4.   Plant vegetation that does not require irrigation beyond
natural rainfall and runoff from the site.
         (d)   Runoff utilization. Capture and store runoff for use for
irrigation in areas where irrigation is necessary.
      (3)   Stormwater criteria. The following general criteria shall be
incorporated in site design for stormwater runoff to protect surface and ground
water and other natural resources by maintaining pre-development hydrological
conditions:
         (a)   Reduce impacts on water;
         (b)   Protect soils;
         (c)   Preserve vegetation;
         (d)   Decrease runoff volume;
         (e)   Decrease erosion and sedimentation;
         (f)   Decrease flow frequency, duration, and peak runoff rates;
         (g)   Increase infiltration (groundwater recharge);
         (h)   Maintain existing flow patterns;
         (i)   Reduce peak flows;
         (j)   Store stormwater runoff on-site; and
         (k)   Avoid channel erosion.
      (4)   Erosion and sediment control criteria. The following general
criteria shall be incorporated in site design for erosion and sediment control:
         (a)   Minimize disturbance of natural soil cover and vegetation;
         (b)   Minimize, in area and duration, exposed soil and unstable soil
conditions;
         (c)   Protect receiving water bodies, wetlands, and storm sewer
inlets;
         (d)   Protect adjacent properties from sediment deposition;
         (e)   Minimize off-site sediment transport on trucks and equipment;
         (f)   Minimize work in and adjacent to water bodies and wetlands;
         (g)   Maintain stable slopes;
         (h)   Avoid steep slopes and the need for high cuts and fills;
         (i)   Minimize disturbance to the surrounding soils, root systems and
trunks of trees adjacent to site activity that are intended to be left
standing; and
         (j)   Minimize the compaction of site soils.
   (B)   Other design standards.
      (1)    All volume control for water quality and quantity and site design
specifications shall conform to the current version of the Minnesota Stormwater
Manual.
      (2)   All erosion and sediment control requirements shall conform to the
current requirements of NPDES/SDS construction stormwater general permit.
      (3)   Public stormwater detention facilities must be located on public
property or contained within an easement that provides sufficient access for
maintenance. Such lots or easements shall be adjacent to a public right-of-way
or accessed by an easement at least 30 feet wide.
      (4)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent
property owners any necessary easements or other property interests concerning
flowage of water.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20250416-01, passed 4-16-25)
§ 152.04.22 PERFORMANCE GOALS.
   (A)   Stormwater volume reduction performance goals. Any applicant for a
permit resulting in site disturbance that creates one or more acres of new
impervious surface or fully reconstructs one or more acres of impervious
surface must meet all of the following stormwater performance goals:
      (1)   New development volume control. For new, nonlinear developments
that create more than one acre of new impervious surface on sites without
restrictions, stormwater runoff volumes will be controlled and the post-
construction runoff volume shall be retained on site for one inch of runoff
from all impervious surfaces on the site.
      (2)   Redevelopment volume control. Nonlinear redevelopment projects on
sites without restrictions that create one or more acres of new and/or fully
reconstructed impervious surfaces shall capture and retain on site one inch of
runoff from the new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces.
      (3)   Linear development volume control. Linear projects on sites without
restrictions that create one acre or greater of new and/or fully reconstructed
impervious surfaces, shall capture and retain the larger of the following:
         (a)   0.55 inch of runoff from the new and fully reconstructed
impervious surfaces on the site; or
         (b)   One inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious area on
the site.
         (c)   Mill and overlay and other resurfacing activities are not
considered fully reconstructed.
      (4)   Stormwater management rate control. For all development sites (new
development, redevelopment and linear developments), site design shall provide
on-site treatment during construction and post-construction to ensure no
increase in offsite peak discharge for the one year, 24-hour storm event (2.42
inches); two-year, 24-hour storm event (2.81 inches); the ten-year, 24-hour
storm event (4.12 inches); and the 100-year, 24-hour storm event (6.72 inches)
or as defined by the NOAA Atlas 14 Precipitation Frequency Estimates for
Minnesota.
      (5)   All detention facilities shall be designed with a minimum of 24
inches of freeboard measured to the lowest opening of adjacent structures. A
spillway and overflow route must be able to safely pass overflows through the
structure without creating damaging conditions downstream of the facility nor
inhibit stormwater runoff from upstream development.
   (B)   Flexible treatment options for sites with restrictions (as found in
the MIDS design sequence flowchart). The MIDS design sequence flowchart can be
found in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual: http://stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/
index.php/Flexible_treatment_options. Applicant shall fully attempt to comply
with the appropriate performance goals described above. Options considered and
presented shall examine the merits of relocating project elements to address
varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site. If full
compliance is not possible due to any of the factors listed below, the
applicant must document the reason. If site constraints or restrictions limit
the full treatment goal, the following flexible treatment options shall be
used:
      (1)   Alternative #1. Applicant attempts to comply with the following
conditions:
         (a)   Achieve at least 0.55-inch volume reduction from all impervious
surfaces if the site is new development or from the new and/or fully
reconstructed impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site;
         (b)   Remove 65% of the annual total phosphorous (TP) load from all
impervious surfaces if the site is new development or from the new and/or fully
reconstructed impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site; and
         (c)   Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of
relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other
constraints across the site.
      (2)   Alternative #2. Applicant attempts to comply with the following
conditions:
         (a)   Achieve volume reduction to the maximum extent practicable;
         (b)   Remove 60% of the annual total phosphorous (TP) load from all
impervious surfaces if the site is new development or from the new and/or fully
reconstructed impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site; and
         (c)   Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of
relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other
constraints across the site.
      (3)   Alternative #3: off-site treatment. Mitigation equivalent to the
performance of 1.1 inches of volume reduction for new development or
redevelopment as described above in this section (including banking or cash)
can be performed off-site to protect the receiving water body. Off-site
treatment shall be achieved in areas selected in the following order of
preference:
         (a)   Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that
receives runoff from the original construction activity;
         (b)   Locations within the same Department of Natural Resource (DNR)
catchment area (Hydrologic Unit 08) as the original construction activity;
         (c)   Locations within the next adjacent DNR catchment area upstream;
and
         (d)   Locations anywhere within the city's jurisdiction.
      (4)   Applicant shall document the flexible treatment options sequence
starting with Alternative #1. If Alternative #1 cannot be met, then Alternative
#2 shall be analyzed. Applicants must document the specific reasons why
Alternative #1 cannot be met based on the factors listed below. If Alternative
#2 cannot be met then Alternative #3 shall be met. Applicants must document the
specific reasons why Alternative #2 cannot be met based on the factors listed
below. When all of the conditions are fulfilled within an alternative, this
sequence is completed.
      (5)   Volume reduction techniques considered shall include infiltration,
reuse and rainwater harvesting, and canopy interception and evapotranspiration
and/or additional techniques included in the MIDS Calculator and the Minnesota
Stormwater Manual.
      (6)   Higher priority shall be given to BMPs that include volume
reduction. Secondary preference is to employ filtration techniques, followed by
rate control BMPs.
      (7)   Factors to be considered for each alternative will include:
         (a)   Karst geology;
         (b)   Shallow bedrock;
         (c)   High groundwater;
         (d)   Hotspots or contaminated soils;
         (e)   Drinking water source management areas or within 200 feet of
drinking water well;
         (f)   Zoning, setbacks or other land use requirements;
         (g)   Excessive cost; and
         (h)   Poor soils (infiltration rates that are too low or too high,
problematic urban soils).
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.23 METHODOLOGIES AND COMPUTATIONS.
   (A)   Final site design and choice of permanent stormwater volume reduction
practices shall be based on outcomes of the MIDS calculator (or other model
that shows the performance goal can be met) and shall meet the performance
goals of this Division. The MIDS calculator is available at: http://
stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Calculator.
   (B)   Rate control calculations shall be modeled in HydroCAD, SWMM, or
equivalent as approved by the city.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.24 SITE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Wetlands. The Wetland Conservation Act, as administered by the city's
designated wetland authority, must be followed when encountering any wetlands.
   (B)   Storage piles. Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than ten
cubic yards of material should not be located with a down-slope drainage length
of less than 25 feet from the toe of the storage pile to a roadway or drainage
channel. If remaining for more than seven days, it must be stabilized by
mulching, vegetative cover, tarps or other means. Soil deposit piles that will
be in existence for less than seven days must be controlled by placing straw
bales or silt barriers around the storage pile. In-street utility repair or
construction soil or dirt storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a
roadway or drainage channel must be covered with tarps or suitable alternative
control, if exposed for more than seven days the storm drain inlets must be
protected with straw bales or other appropriate filtering barriers.
   (C)   Permanent stabilization. A uniform perennial vegetative cover (e.g.,
evenly distributed, without large bare areas) with a density of 70% of the
native background vegetative cover for the area must be established on all
unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent
permanent stabilization measures.
   (D)   Site dewatering.
      (1)   Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or
flooding of the site or receiving channels of a wetland.
      (2)   Dewatering may require a Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) water appropriation permit. If dewatering water is contaminated,
discharge of such water may require an individual MPCA NPDES/SES permit.
   (E)   Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building materials,
including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials or
hazardous materials, shall be properly disposed of off-site and not allowed to
be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer system.
   (F)   Tracking. Graveled roads, access drives and parking areas must be of
sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public
or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be
removed by street cleaning, not flushing, before the end of each workday.
   (G)   Drains.
      (1)   All storm drain inlets must be protected during construction with a
barrier approved by the city until control measures are in place which meets
accepted design criteria, standards and specifications.
      (2)   All drain leaders must be routed to storm sewer facilities or
pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to infiltrate.
      (3)   The flow rate of water from the leaders must be controlled so no
erosion occurs in the previous areas.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 3. INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE
§ 152.04.31 APPLICANT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The applicant is responsible for inspections and record keeping during
and after construction for all privately-owned stormwater treatment practices
on the site.
   (B)   Inspection by the city. The city reserves the right to conduct
inspections on a regular basis to ensure that both temporary and permanent
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control measures are properly
installed and maintained prior to construction, during construction, and at the
completion of the project. Mandatory inspections will be conducted as follows:
      (1)   Before any land disturbing activity begins;
      (2)   Before or during the installation of permanent stormwater treatment
systems;
      (3)   At the time of footing inspections;
      (4)   At the completion of the project; and
      (5)   Prior to the release of financial securities.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.32 CITY-OWNED STORMWATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   Before work under the permit is deemed complete, the permittee must
submit as-builts and a maintenance plan demonstrating at the time of final
stabilization that the stormwater facilities conform to design specifications.
A final inspection shall be required before the city accepts ownership of the
stormwater facilities.
   (B)   The city shall perform maintenance of city-owned stormwater facilities
in accordance with their comprehensive stormwater management plan and other
regulatory requirements.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.33 PRIVATE STORMWATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   No private stormwater facilities may be approved unless a maintenance
plan is provided that defines who will conduct the maintenance, the type of
maintenance and the maintenance intervals. At a minimum, all private stormwater
facilities shall be inspected annually and maintained in proper condition
consistent with the performance goals for which they were originally designed.
   (B)   Access to all stormwater facilities must be inspected annually and
maintained as necessary. The applicant shall obtain all necessary easements or
other property interests to allow access to the facilities for inspection or
maintenance for both the responsible party and the city.
   (C)   All settled materials including settled solids, shall be removed from
ponds, sumps, grit chambers, and other devices, and disposed of properly.
   (D)   All stormwater facilities within the city shall be inspected by the
city during construction, during the first year of operation, and at least once
every five years thereafter.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.34 INVENTORY OF STORMWATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   Upon adoption of this Division, the city shall inventory and maintain
a database for all private, public, and city-owned stormwater facilities within
the city requiring maintenance to assure compliance with this Division.
   (B)   The city shall notify owners of stormwater facilities of the need for
conducting maintenance on an appropriate schedule based on the stormwater
management practice.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.35 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION.
   The issuance of a permit constitutes a right-of-entry for the city or its
contractor to enter upon the construction site. The applicant shall allow the
city and their authorized representatives, upon presentation of credentials,
to:
   (A)   Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining
information, examination of records, conducting investigations or surveys;
   (B)   Bring such equipment upon the permitted development as is necessary to
conduct such surveys and investigations;
   (C)   Examine and copy any books, papers, records, or memoranda pertaining
to activities or records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of
the permit;
   (D)   Inspect the stormwater management measures;
   (E)   Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to stormwater
management measures; and
   (F)   Correct deficiencies in stormwater and erosion and sediment control
measures.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 4. PROCEDURES
§ 152.04.41 PROCESS.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting between the
applicant, city staff (or their authorized representative), and staff of
relevant partner agencies (e.g. SWCD, MPCA, DNR, etc.) is required prior to
submission of a permit application.
   (B)   Submittal. A permit application shall be filed following the
requirements listed in the city’s Application Manual.
   (C)   Review process.
      (1)   The City Engineer shall review the application and plans and refer
them to city staff and other applicable agencies for review.
      (2)   The City Engineer shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the permit application and provide the applicant with written notice of the
decision and reasons for approval or denial.
   (D)   Effect of decision.
      (1)   Construction shall commence in accordance with the plan within one
year after the approval of the plan, or approval of the plan shall be
considered void.
      (2)   Prior to the expiration of plan approval, the applicant may make a
written request to the city for an extension of time to commence construction,
specifying the reasons for the requested extension. The city may grant one
extension of not greater than one year.
      (3)   No work shall commence on any construction activity subject to this
Division until a permit has been authorized by the city.
      (4)   Prior to start of construction, the developer shall obtain all
regulatory agency permits and approvals including those from the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency for “General Storm Water Permit for Construction
Activity”, and the signature of the company responsible for erosion and
sediment control plan preparation, implementation and maintenance.
      (5)   Permit denial. If the city denies a permit application, a new
application must be resubmitted for approval before any activity may begin. All
land use and building permits shall be held until the applicant has an
authorized permit. The decision of the city may be appealed as provided in §
152.05.17.
   (E)   Amendment of permitted plans.
      (1)   The applicant must amend an approved ESC Plan or SWPPP to include
additional requirements such as additional or modified best management
practices (BMPs) designed to correct problems whenever:
         (a)   There is a change in design, construction, operation,
maintenance, weather or seasonal conditions that has a significant effect on
the discharge of pollutants to surface water or ground water;
         (b)   Inspections or investigations by site operators, local, state or
federal officials indicate the plans are not effective in eliminating or
significantly minimizing the discharge of pollutants to surface water or
underground water or that the discharges are causing water quality standard
exceedances; or
         (c)   The plan is not achieving the general objectives of minimizing
pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction activity.
      (2)   Plan amendments shall follow the same procedure outlined in this
section.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.42 FEES.
   (A)   All applications for a stormwater management plan approval must be
accompanied by a processing and approval fee as determined by ordinance of the
City Council. An escrow account may be required by the city to pay for actual
engineering costs incurred by the city.
   (B)   Financial securities.
      (1)   Amount.
         (a)   The city shall require financial securities from the applicant
in an amount sufficient to cover the entirety of the estimated costs of
permitted and remedial work based on the final design as determined by the
city.
         (b)   An escrow amount, as defined in the city’s fee schedule and
commensurate with the type of activity as determined by the city shall be paid
by cash deposit to the city and shall be designated for erosion and sediment
control. This deposit will be held by the city in a separate account.
      (2)   Financial securities shall not be released until all permitted and
remedial work is completed.
      (3)   Financial securities may be used by the city to complete work not
completed by the applicant.
      (4)   Form of security. The form of the securities shall be one or a
combination of the following to be determined by the city:
         (a)   Cash deposit;
         (b)   Irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the city; or
         (c)   Other forms and securities (e.g. disbursing agreement) as
approved by the city.
      (5)   Maintaining the financial security. If at any time during the
course of the work the available balance falls below 50% of the required
amount, the applicant shall make another deposit in the amount necessary to
restore the cash deposit to the required amount. If the applicant does not
bring the financial security back up to the required amount within seven days
after notification by the city that the amount has fallen below 50% of the
required amount the city may:
         (a)   Withhold the scheduling of inspections related to the project;
or
         (b)   Revoke any permit issued by the city to the applicant for the
project.
      (6)   Action against the financial security. The city may access
financial security for remediation actions if any of the conditions listed
below exist. The city shall use the security to finance remedial work
undertaken by the city or a private contractor under contract to the city, or
to reimburse the city for all direct costs incurred in the process of remedial
work including, but not limited to, staff time and attorney's fees.
         (a)   Abandonment. The applicant ceases land disturbing activities
and/or filling and abandons the work site prior to completion of the grading
plan.
         (b)   Failure to implement the SWPPP or ESC plan. The applicant fails
to conform to the grading plan and/or the SWPPP as approved by the city.
         (c)   Failure to perform. The techniques utilized under the SWPPP fail
within one year of installation.
         (d)   Failure to reimburse city. The applicant fails to reimburse the
city for corrective action taken.
      (7)   Proportional reduction of the financial security. When more than
one-third of the applicant's maximum exposed soil area achieves final
stabilization, the city can reduce the total required amount of the financial
security by one-third. When more than two-thirds of the applicant's maximum
exposed soil area achieves final stabilization, the city can reduce the total
required amount of the financial security to two-thirds of the initial amount.
This reduction in financial security will be determined by the city.
      (8)   Returning the financial security. The security deposited with the
city for faithful performance of the SWPPP or the ESC plan and any related
remedial work shall be released one full year after the completion of the
installation of all stormwater pollution control measures as shown on the SWPPP
or ESC plan.
      (9)   Emergency action. If circumstances exist such that noncompliance
with this Division poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety and
welfare, as determined by the city, the city may take emergency preventative
action. The city shall also take every reasonable action possible to contact
and direct the applicant to take any necessary action. Any cost to the city may
be recovered from the applicant's financial security.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.43 PERMIT COMPLETION.
   Before work under the permit is deemed complete, the permittee must submit
as-builts, a long term maintenance plan and information demonstrating that the
stormwater facilities conform to design specifications. The city will verify
that all design specifications have been met.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 5. ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.04.51 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The city shall be responsible for enforcing this Division.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with or violating
any of these regulations, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be
subject to a fine or imprisonment or both.
      (1)   Each day that a separate violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (2)   All land use and building permits must be suspended until the
developer has corrected the violation.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.52 ENFORCEMENT TOOLS/STOP WORK ORDERS.
   The city shall reserve the right to issue construction stop work orders when
cooperation on inspections is withheld or when a violation has been identified
that needs immediate attention to protect human health and/or the environment.
If stormwater and/or erosion and sediment control management measures
malfunction and breach the perimeter of the site, enter streets, other public
areas, or waterbodies the city will assess the need for issuing a stop work
order. The applicant shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan,
obtain the right of entry from the adjoining property owner if necessary, and
implement the cleanup and restoration plan within 48 hours. If in the
discretion of the city, the applicant does not repair the damage caused by the
stormwater runoff, the city can complete the remedial work required and charge
the cost to the applicant. If payment is not made within 30 days, payment will
be made from the applicant's financial securities. An inspection by the city
must follow before the construction project work can resume.
   (A)   Construction stop work order. The city may issue construction stop
work orders until stormwater management measures meet specifications and the
applicant repairs any damage caused by stormwater runoff. An inspection by the
city must follow before the construction project work can resume.
   (B)   Other actions to ensure compliance. The city can take any combination
of the following actions in the event of a failure by applicant to meet the
terms of this Division:
      (1)   Withhold inspections or issuance of certificates or approvals;
      (2)   Revoke any permit issued by the city to the applicant;
      (3)   Conduct remedial or corrective action on the development site or
adjacent site affected by the failure;
      (4)   Charge applicant for all costs associated with correcting the
failure or remediating damage from the failure; if payment is not made within
30 days, payment will be made from the applicant's financial securities; or
      (5)   Bring other actions against the applicant to recover costs of
remediation or meeting the terms of this Division.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with or violating
any of these regulations, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.04.53 NOTIFICATION OF FAILURE OF THE PERMIT.
   The city shall notify the permit holder of the failure of the permit's
measures.
   (A)   Initial contact. The initial contact will be to the party or parties
listed on the application and/or the SWPPP as contacts. Except during an
emergency action, 48 hours after notification by the city or 72 hours after the
failure of erosion and sediment control measures, whichever is less, the city
at its discretion, may begin corrective work. Such notification should be in
writing, but if it is verbal, a written notification should follow as quickly
as practical. If after making a good faith effort to notify the responsible
party or parties, the city has been unable to establish a contact, the city may
proceed with corrective work. There are conditions when time is of the essence
in controlling erosion. During such a condition the city may take immediate
action, and then notify the applicant as soon as possible.
   (B)   Erosion off-site. If erosion breaches the perimeter of the site, the
applicant shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan, obtain the
right-of-entry from the adjoining property owner, and implement the cleanup and
restoration plan within 48 hours of obtaining the adjoining property owner's
permission. In no case, unless written approval is received from the city, may
more than seven calendar days go by without corrective action being taken. If
in the discretion of the city, the permit holder does not repair the damage
caused by the erosion, the city may do the remedial work required. When
restoration to wetlands and other resources is required, the applicant should
be required to work with the appropriate agency to ensure that the work is done
properly.
   (C)   Erosion into streets, storm sewers, wetlands or water bodies. If
eroded soils (including tracked soils from construction activities) enter or
appear likely to enter streets, storm sewers, wetlands, or other water bodies,
prevention strategies, cleanup and repair shall be immediate. The applicant
shall provide all traffic control and flagging required to protect the
traveling public during the cleanup operations.
   (D)   Failure to do corrective work. When an applicant fails to conform to
any provision of this Division within the time stipulated, the city may take
the following actions:
      (1)   Issue a stop work order, withhold the scheduling of inspections,
and/or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
      (2)   Revoke any permit issued by the city to the applicant for the site
in question or any other of the applicant's sites within the city's
jurisdiction; and
      (3)   Correct the deficiency or hire a contractor to correct the
deficiency.
         (a)   The applicant will be required to reimburse the city for all
costs incurred in correcting stormwater pollution control deficiencies. If
payment is not made within 30 days after costs are incurred by the city,
payment will be made from the applicant's financial securities as described in
§
152.04.42.
         (b)   If there is an insufficient financial amount in the applicant's
financial securities as described in §
152.04.42, the city may certify the remaining amount to the County Auditor to
be collected with property taxes levied against the property, pursuant to M.S.
§§ 366.012 and 415.01.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
DIVISION 05: PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT
PART 1. PROCEDURES
§ 152.05.11 COMMON PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all
subdivision applications and procedures subject to development review under
this Code unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   Authority to file applications. Development review applications for an
individual property may be initiated by:
      (1)   The owner of the property that is the subject of the application;
or
      (2)   An agent authorized by the owner of the property that is the
subject of the application, which may include a lessee of the property.
Evidence of such authorization shall be the signature of the property owner.
      (3)   the property subject to an application is under more than one
ownership, all owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the
application.
   (C)   Exemptions. Subdivision approval is not required for any of the
following:
      (1)   Separations where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or
interests will be 20 acres or larger in size and 500 feet in width for
residential use and five acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial
use;
      (2)   Separations creating cemetery lots;
      (3)   Subdivision approval is not required for separations resulting from
court orders; or
      (4)   Separations resulting from the adjustment of a lot line by the
relocation of a common boundary.
   (D)   Conveyance by metes and bounds.
      (1)   No land shall be conveyed in which the land is described by metes
and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after
April 21, 1961, or to an unapproved plat made after such regulations became
effective.
      (2)   The provision of this section does not apply to the conveyance if
one or more of the following apply to the land described:
         (a)   Was a separate parcel of record April 1, 1945, or the date of
adoption of subdivision regulations under Laws 1945, chapter 287, whichever is
the later;
         (b)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into
prior to such time;
         (c)   Was a separate parcel of not less than two and one-half acres in
area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966;
         (d)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and
300 feet in width on July 1, 1980;
         (e)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less
than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance
does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels,
any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet in width; or
         (f)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not
less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots
or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet in
width.
      (3)   In any case in which compliance with the foregoing restrictions
will create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not interfere
with the purpose of the subdivision regulations, the City Council may waive
such compliance by adoption of a resolution to that effect and the conveyance
may then be filed or recorded.
      (4)   Any owner or agent of land who conveys a lot or parcel in violation
of the provisions of these regulations shall forfeit and pay to the city an
administrative penalty of not less than $100 for each lot or parcel so
conveyed. Appeals of an administrative civil penalty issued pursuant to this
section shall be heard in accordance with the procedure set forth in Title I, §
10.98 of Lindstrom City Code.
   (E)   Prohibition related to building permits.
      (1)   No lot, parcel, or tract created after the effective date of this
chapter shall be issued a building permit unless the lot, parcel or tract has
been created in compliance with the subdivision regulations of the city.
      (2)   Outlots are deemed unbuildable, and no building permit shall be
issued for such properties, except in the case of public park facilities and
essential services.
   (F)   Pre-application meetings.
      (1)   Pre-application meetings are required or recommended based on
development application type.
      (2)   A pre-application meeting is an informal discussion between a
potential application and city staff regarding a possible project subject to
this title. The Zoning Administrator shall determine which city staff shall
attend the pre-application meeting.
      (3)   The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to assist the
applicant in identifying the type of approvals needed, the potential review
criteria, and the information to be contained in the application(s).
      (4)   Discussions that occur during pre-application meetings are not
binding on the city and do not constitute official assurances or
representations on the city.
   (G)   Application materials and fees.
      (1)   City staff shall develop and amend a Development Application Manual
as needed.
      (2)   Each application for a permit or approval, of for an amendment of a
permit or approval, shall include all those application materials listed in the
Development Application Manual.
      (3)   To defray administrative costs of processing of development
requests, a base fee shall be paid by all applicants. The fee shall be set by
ordinance of the City Council, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   In order to defray the additional cost of processing development
applications, all applicants shall pay the total cost of staff and/or
consulting time spent exclusively in producing materials for the applicant’s
request, and all materials for the request.
         (a)   Materials shall include, but not be limited to maps, graphs,
charts, drawings and the like and all printing or reproduction of same.
         (b)   Staff and/or consulting time shall include any time spent in
either researching for or actual production of materials.
         (c)   The hourly rate for staff and/or consulting time shall be
established and made available to the applicant by city staff prior to
production of any materials and the applicant shall be given a reasonable
estimate of project time and/or materials costs.
      (5)   No application shall be deemed complete for processing until any
fee or escrow required has been paid.
      (6)   The city may reject an application not meeting the requirements of
this Code or where the required fee or escrow has not been paid.
      (7)   Applications for approvals under this chapter shall not be accepted
by the city until the Finance Director certifies that all real estate taxes,
personal property taxes, special assessments, and other fees or charges then
due and owing to the city by the applicant or which relate to the property for
which the license, permit, approval or application is requested, have been paid
in full.
      (8)   Application fees are not refundable, except where the Zoning
Administrator has determined that an application was accepted in error or when
the fee paid exceeded the amount due, in which case the overpayment shall be
refunded to the applicant.
   (H)   Technical assistance. In making its decision, the city may determine
that technical assistance is needed. The city may request technical assistance
from any of the firms with which it contracts. The applicant shall be
responsible for the actual costs of such assistance. Actual costs are
identified in the fee schedule and shall be paid by the applicant for building/
development application expenses which the city incurs in regard to the review
and processing of that application, and which exceeds the application fee. Such
fees shall come due immediately upon notification by the city. The city may
withhold any final action on a development application and/or rescind prior
actions until all fees are paid in full.
   (I)   Coordination of applications.
      (1)   Depending on the requirements of this title, multiple applications
may be required.
      (2)   City staff shall determine the order of application review based on
the City Code, including this chapter, and state requirements. Where possible,
applications will be reviewed in tandem.
   (J)   Time deadline for action.
      (1)   In compliance with M.S. § 462.358, the city shall take action to
preliminarily approve or deny a subdivision application within 120 days
following delivery of an application completed in compliance with this Title,
unless an extension for the review period has been agreed to by the applicant.
      (2)   In compliance with M.S. § 462.358, the city shall certify final
approval of a subdivision application within 60 days if the applicant has
complied with all conditions and requirements of applicable regulations and the
preliminary approval.
   (K)   Withdrawal of applications.
      (1)   Any request for withdrawal of an application shall be submitted in
writing to city staff.
      (2)   In all cases where the applicant has requested withdrawal of an
application, the associated fee paid and any costs incurred by the city in the
processing of the application shall not be refunded.
   (L)   Successive applications. No application which has been denied wholly
or in part may be resubmitted for at least one year from the date of its
submittal, unless substantial changes have been made which warrant
reconsideration, as determined by city staff.
   (M)   Public hearings and notices.
      (1)   Public hearings are required by this chapter and shall be conducted
pursuant to the rules established for each of the bodies, the Lindstrom City
Code, and in compliance with state law.
      (2)   All public hearings shall be open to the public.
      (3)   The applicant or a representative should attend the public hearing.
      (4)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality at least ten days prior to the date of the
hearing. The notice shall also be mailed not less than ten days prior to:
         (a)   All property owners of record according to the county assessment
records within 350 feet of the property.
         (b)   The Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources if the proposed subdivision is located in part or in total within the
MSN Shoreland Overlay District.
         (c)   The Commissioner of the State Department of Transportation and
the County Engineer if the proposed plat abuts or includes a state trunk
highway or a county state aid road, respectively.
         (d)   A copy of the notice and list of the individuals and/or property
owners and addresses to which the notices were sent shall be attested to by the
Zoning Administrator and made part of official record. The failure to give
mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice, shall
not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with
this chapter has been made.
   (N)   Appeals of City Council decisions. All decisions made by the city
regarding subdivision shall be final, except that any aggrieved person shall
have the right to appeal within 30 days after delivery of the decision to the
appellant, to the District Court in Chisago County. Any person seeking judicial
review under this chapter must serve the city and all necessary parties,
including any landowners, within the 30-day period defined above.
   (O)   As-built grading plan. Upon completion of site grading, the applicant
shall submit an as-built grading plan as specified in the Public Works Design
Manual to the city for review.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.05.12 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Applicability. An administrative adjustment application shall be
submitted to the city when any of the following apply:
      (1)   An applicant is proposing to relocate a property line(s) without
increasing or decreasing the number of parcels and where all parcels meet Code
requirements;
      (2)   Lot combination; or
      (3)   Conveyance by metes and bounds.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.05.11(F) is suggested prior to submitting an administrative adjustment
application.
   (C)   Submittal. The application for an administrative adjustment shall be
filed pursuant to §
151.05.11(G).
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to city staff for review.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny the application and
provide the applicant with written notice of the decision and reasons for
approval or denial.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.05.13 MINOR SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   Applicability. A minor subdivision application shall be submitted to
the city when all of the following apply:
      (1)   An applicant is proposing to divide land by the owner or applicant
resulting in the creation of not more than three parcels or building sites,
where all parcels meet Code requirements (platted);
      (2)   The land has been previously subdivided by plat or registered land
survey and is on file and of record in the office of the County Register of
Deeds or Registrar of Titles;
      (3)   The application will not cause the parcel or any structure on the
parcel to be in violation of this Code or the building code;
      (4)   With the exception of sidewalks or trails, the application will not
involve the construction of any new street or road, or the extension of
municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements; and
      (5)   The application does not involve an outlot.
      (6)   Two-family residential lots may be platted or subdivided in a
manner without further city action if the common lot lines for the residential
units will have a zero side yard setback and the lot size meets the
requirements specified in the applicable residential zoning district, provided
that:
         (a)   An existing residential structure built prior to January 20,
2022 exists on the lot.
         (b)   The original plat is accompanied by a properly executed
developer’s agreement addressing design standards and public facilities;
         (c)   Separate utility services are provided to each unit;
         (d)   An agreement addressing the rights and obligations of the
residents of the units is in existence;
         (e)   The development does not adversely affect neighboring properties
of the delivery of governmental services; and
         (f)   Any lots in the Shoreland Overlay District meet the lot
dimensional standards in §
151.03.22.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.05.11(F) is suggested prior to submitting a minor subdivision application.
   (C)   Submittal. The application for a minor subdivision shall be filed
pursuant to §
151.05.11(G).
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to city staff for review.
      (2)   The City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally,
or deny the minor subdivision application.
      (3)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval
or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
      (4)   Following the decision by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s action and reasons
thereof.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.05.14 CONCEPT PLAN.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The concept plan process is not mandatory. This process may be
initiated at any time by an applicant who wishes to gain information and
guidance from the Planning Commission and City Council regarding a specific
development concept before entering into binding agreements, incurring
substantial expense, or filing a preliminary plat application.
      (2)   For more complex proposals, city staff may suggest that the
applicant participate in a concept plan review process before proceeding to a
preliminary plat application.
   (B)   Submittal. The application for concept plan review shall be filed
pursuant to §
151.05.11(G).
   (C)   Review process.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and concept
plan and refer them to city staff for review.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall review the concept plan and provide
feedback to the applicant.
      (3)   The City Council shall review the concept plan and provide feedback
to the applicant.
      (4)   This process is intended to inform the applicant of the purpose and
objectives of these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, and duly adopted plan
implementation devices of the city.
      (5)   Discussions that occur as part of the concept plan process are not
binding on the city and do not constitute official assurances or
representations on the city.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.05.15 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Applicability. A preliminary plat application shall be submitted to
the city when any of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is proposing to create four or more lots as part of a
subdivision;
      (2)   The applicant is proposing to change the exterior boundaries of an
existing plat;
      (3)   Successive divisions within a five year period creating five or
more parcels or building sites (i.e. lots or outlots) of one to one and one-
half acres each or less; or
      (4)   The proposed subdivision does not qualify to be processed as a
minor subdivision.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. If an applicant has not completed a concept
plan process as specified in §
152.05.14, a pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.05.11(F) is required prior to submitting a preliminary plat application.
   (C)   Submittal. The application for a preliminary plat shall be filed
pursuant to §
151.05.11(G).
   (D)   Review criteria. In considering the preliminary plat application, the
Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   Consistency with the design standards and other requirements of
this chapter;
      (2)   Consistency with the city’s Comprehensive Plan or other development
plans;
      (3)   Consistency with
Chapter 151 of this Code of Ordinances;
      (4)   Consistency with the Public Works Design Manual;
      (5)   The physical characteristics of the site, including but not limited
to topography, erosion and flooding potential, development or use contemplated;
and
      (6)   The potential for the proposed development to create a negative
fiscal or environmental impact upon the city.
   (E)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to city staff and other applicable
agencies for review.
      (2)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
in accordance with §
151.05.11(M).
      (3)   Decision.
         (a)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the preliminary plat and
shall transmit the plat and application along with its recommendations to the
City Council.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there
is inadequate information.
         (c)   Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
preliminary plat application. The City Council may remand the preliminary plat
request back to the Planning Commission for further consideration once during
the review process.
         (d)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
         (e)   Following the decision by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s action and reasons
thereof.
   (F)   Effect of preliminary plat decision.
      (1)   The approval of a preliminary plat is an acceptance of the general
layout as submitted and indicates to the applicant that he or she may proceed
toward fulfilling the necessary steps for approval of the final plat in
accordance with the terms of approval.
      (2)   Upon approval of the preliminary plat, and if approved by the City
Engineer, the applicant may start work on all improvements. Depending on the
type of improvements, the City Engineer may require the establishment of a
development agreement before work commences.
      (3)   The applicant shall submit the final plat to the City Council
within one year after the approval of the preliminary plat or approval of the
preliminary plat shall be considered void.
      (4)   Prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat approval, the City
Council may extend the approval for an additional year. The extension shall be
in writing specifically designating the expiration date. The extension shall
not be subject to an additional fee and only one extension may be granted per
preliminary plat.
   (G)   Preliminary plat amendment. Requested amendments to the preliminary
plat shall follow the same procedure outlined in this section. Should the
applicant desire to amend the preliminary plat as approved, he or she may
resubmit an amended plat which shall follow the same procedure unless the
amendment is, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, of such scope as to
constitute a new plat, in which such case it shall be re-filed.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.05.16 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   An approved preliminary plat shall be on file with the city prior
to applying for a final plat that substantially conforms to the preliminary
plat.
      (2)   The final plat may, if permitted by the City Council, constitute
only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the applicant proposes
to record at the time.
   (B)   Submittal.
      (1)   The application for a final plat shall be filed pursuant to §
151.05.11(G).
      (2)   The application for a final plat shall be submitted no later than
one year after the date of approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise the
preliminary plat and final plat will be considered void unless an extension is
requested in writing by the applicant and granted by the city.
   (C)   Review criteria. In considering the final plat application, the City
Council shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   Substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat and all
conditions of approval;
      (2)   Conformance with this Title and all other applicable ordinances,
rules, and regulations; and
      (3)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan’s vision, mission, values,
and policies.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to city staff and other applicable
agencies for review.
      (2)   Decision.
         (a)   The City Council shall review and approve, approve
conditionally, or deny the final plat application.
         (b)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
         (c)   Following the decision by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s action and reasons
thereof.
   (E)   Effect of final plat decision.
      (1)   After the final plat has been approved by the City Council, the
city shall distribute copies of the approved final plat to all approving
agencies, affected utilities, and other affected agencies for their files. A
copy of all final plats located in total or in part within the Shoreland
Overlay District shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the State Department
of Natural Resources within ten days of the final plat approval.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the plat
with the appropriate county offices after final approval once all conditions of
the final plat have been met and required improvements are either installed or
a contract and sureties insuring their installation is filed. Failure to do so
within one year of final approval shall result in the requiring of a new
preliminary plat. This new preliminary plat must be reviewed in accordance with
the procedure set out in this part to ensure compliance with any new
requirements. Prior to the expiration of any timeframe, the City Council may,
upon request of the property owner and by resolution and findings of fact,
approve extensions in up to 12-month increments.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.05.17 APPEAL OF SUBDIVISION CHAPTER INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Applicability. The appeal of Subdivision Chapter interpretation
process shall facilitate review of questions of interpretation that arise in
the administration of this chapter, including review of any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by city staff.
   (B)   Submission. The application for an appeal of Subdivision Chapter
interpretation shall be filed pursuant to §
151.05.11(G) within 30 days of the alleged grievance or judgment in question.
   (C)   Criteria for review. In considering an appeal, the City Council shall
consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria:
      (1)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, including its vision,
mission, values, and policies;
      (2)   The plain meaning of the regulation;
      (3)   Surplus language;
      (4)   Conflicting provisions; and
      (5)   Policy history.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and refer it to applicable city staff for review.
      (2)   Decision.
         (a)   The City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed.
         (b)   The final disposition of an appeal shall be in the form of a
written decision or order signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk. Such decision
shall state the reasons for the City Council's determination with findings of
fact.
   (E)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   Interpretations approved by the City Council shall expire one year
after issuance if the performance of work is required and substantial work has
not commenced.
      (2)   A permit shall be valid only as long as the conditions upon which
it is granted are observed.
   (F)   Reconsideration. No appeal which has been dismissed or denied shall be
considered again without material alteration or revision within one year of the
City Council's decision, except pursuant to court order.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.05.18 SUBDIVISION VARIANCE.
   (A)   Applicability. The City Council may grant a property owner a variance
from compliance with the literal provisions of the Subdivision Chapter in an
instance where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship to the individual
property owner, and when it can be demonstrated that such action will be in
keeping with the spirit and intent of the Code.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to §
151.05.11(F) is suggested prior to submitting a subdivision variance
application.
   (C)   Submittal. The application for a subdivision variance shall be filed
pursuant to §
151.05.11(G).
   (D)   Review criteria. In considering the subdivision variance application,
the City Council shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   The requested subdivision variance is in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this chapter;
      (2)   The requested subdivision variance is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and all other applicable city plans;
      (3)   The applicant has established that there are special circumstances
or conditions, such as topography, drainage, or other naturally occurring
characteristics, affecting the property such that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
the land; and
      (4)   The impact the variance will have on the public health, safety, and
welfare of other property in the vicinity in which the property is situated.
   (E)   Review process.
      (1)   Application distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and plans and refer them to city staff and other applicable
agencies for review.
      (2)   Consideration of request.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall consider the subdivision variance
request.
         (b)   Notice of the Planning Commission’s consideration of the request
shall be mailed to all property owners immediately abutting the subject
property according to county assessment records, including those directly
across any street or public right-of-way.
         (c)   The applicant or a representative thereof should appear before
the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the requested
subdivision variance.
      (3)   Decision.
         (a)   Following its consideration of the request, the Planning
Commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the
subdivision variance request and shall transmit the request and application
along with its recommendations to the City Council.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there
is inadequate information.
         (c)   Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
subdivision variance application by majority vote. The City Council may remand
the variance request back to the Planning Commission for further consideration
once during the review process.
         (d)   The City Council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
         (e)   Following the decision by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s action and reasons
thereof.
   (F)   Effect of subdivision variance decision.
      (1)   Violations of the conditions of a subdivision variance shall void
the variance.
      (2)   Recording.
         (a)   A certified copy of the authorizing resolution, containing
identifiable description and any specific requirements for approval, shall be
recorded by the City of Lindstrom with the Register of Deeds for Chisago County
for the subject property.
         (b)   A copy of a decision granting a subdivision variance in a
Floodplain or Shoreland Overlay District shall be mailed to the district office
of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources within ten days of the
decision.
      (3)   Whenever within one year after granting a subdivision variance the
subdivision as permitted by the variance shall not have been completed, then
the variance shall become null and void unless a petition for extension of time
in which to complete the subdivision has been granted to the Council.
         (a)   The extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the
Zoning Administrator at least 30 days before the expiration of the original
subdivision variance. There shall be no charge for the filing of the petition.
The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to
complete the work permitted in the subdivision variance or appeal. The petition
shall be presented to the City Council for a decision.
         (b)   A second extension shall require a new public hearing.
      (4)   A subdivision variance application which has been denied shall not
be submitted, in an exact or substantially similar form, for at least 12 months
from the date of denial.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 152.05.19 EXTRATERRITORIAL SUBDIVISION AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The City of Lindstrom, with the authority granted to the city by M.S.
§ 462.358, as it may be amended from time to time, has extended its subdivision
regulation authority to include the areas identified in the Extraterritorial
Review Boundary Map kept on file at City Hall. The extraterritorial area has
been subdivided into two areas as identified on the aforementioned map. All of
the notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall have the
same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and thereby are made a part
of this chapter by reference.
   (B)   As subdivisions platted beyond the city limits where municipal sewer
and water are unavailable require different development criteria, the following
divisions establish design standards and procedures for the processing of plats
within the extraterritorial area.
   (C)   Although the city has assumed the regulatory authority for the
platting process within the extraterritorial area, the zoning authority is
retained by Chisago County. As part of the subdivision process, the applicant
shall be responsible to confirm with Chisago County that the property can be
subdivided in a manner which meets applicable zoning regulations.
   (D)   Properties created by subdivision within the extraterritorial area
must meet the following requirements based on the subarea assigned in
subsection  (A) of this section:
      (1)   Area A.
         (a)   Properties that are more than 1,000 feet from a designated
public water shall have a maximum lot size of 12,000 square feet.
         (b)   Properties that are within 1,000 feet of a designated public
water shall be limited in lot area and lot width based on the lot type and lake
type as identified in the tables below.
Table 152.05.01. Maximum Lot Size and Lot Width
 
Lake Type                Non-Riparian        Riparian
                         Lot Area  Lot Width Lot Area  Lot Width
                         (sq. ft.) (ft.)     (sq. ft.) (ft.)
General Development      15,000    125       18,000    125
Recreational Development 18,000    125       25,000    125
Natural Environment      25,000    150       50,000    150
 
Table 152.05.02. Public Water Designation
 
General Development Lakes Recreational Development Natural Environment Lakes
                          Lakes
North Center Lake         Kroon Lake               Boos Lake
South Center Lake                                 Linn Lake
Chisago Lake                                      Ogren Lake
North Lindstrom Lake                              Swamp Lake
South Lindstrom Lake                              Sunrise Lake
Wallmark Lake                                     Unnamed #13-15
 
      (2)   Area B. Properties within Area B shall have a minimum lot size of
ten acres and the ratio of lot frontage to lot depth shall be no more than one
to four.
   (E)   A complete subdivision application shall be processed as follows:
      (1)   Minor subdivisions, those which create not more than three parcels,
and administrative adjustments may be approved administratively unless other
land use or subdivision approvals are needed.
      (2)   Major subdivision, those creating three or more parcels or
requiring public infrastructure such as a road, will require Planning
Commission and City Council review. The major subdivision process shall follow
the processes as outlined in §§
152.05.14,
152.05.15, and
152.05.16.
   (F)   If the city denies a subdivision application, a subdivision for the
same property using the same general arrangement cannot be made for one year
after the denial.
   (G)   Property within the extraterritorial area shall remain under the
jurisdiction of Chisago County, or the appropriate township, until such time as
the property is annexed into the City of Lindstrom. Until annexation occurs, or
as otherwise formally approved by the City Council, all public improvements,
including, but not limited to streets, storm water management, street and
traffic signs, shall not be the responsibility of the City of Lindstrom.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
CHAPTER 153: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Division 01: General Provisions
Part 1. Administration
   
153.01.11   Duties of the Building Official
Part 2. Contractors; Licensing
   
153.01.21   License required
Part 3. Adoption of State Law
   
153.01.31   Application, administration, and enforcement
   
153.01.32   Permits and fees
   
153.01.33   Violations and penalties
   
153.01.34   Building code
DIVISION 01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
PART 1. ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.01.11 DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official or his/her designee shall administer, interpret, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall perform the following duties:
   (A)   Determine that all building permits comply with the terms of this
chapter; and
   (B)   Issue certificates of occupancy for any use, structure, or building
after the determination above.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 2. CONTRACTORS; LICENSING
§ 153.01.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is deemed in the interest of the public and the residents of the
city that any person, firm or corporation who engages in the business of
building construction or related work, as defined herein, shall first secure a
license therefor as provided herein. No city license or bond shall be required
to do business in the city for a plumber licensed by the State Commissioner of
Health under the provisions of M.S. §§ 326B.41 to 326B.49, as they may be
amended from time to time, or a residential building contractor, residential
remodeler, or other person required to be licensed by the State Commissioner of
Commerce under the provisions of M.S. §§ 326B.801 to 326B.89, as they may be
amended from time to time. No residential building contractor, residential
remodeler, or other person who is required to be licensed by the state under
the provisions of M.S. §§ 326B.801 to 326B.89, as they may be amended from time
to time, and no person employing a contractor, who is required to be licensed,
shall be issued a building, zoning or land use permit unless that contractor is
licensed. Any person applying for a permit who is required to have a state
license but who does not have a state license shall be reported to the State
Commissioner of Commerce who may begin an action against the person.
   (B)   Applications for the license shall be made to the City Administrator.
The licensee shall provide proof of insurance commensurate with state statute
requirements.
   (C)   The license fee shall be identified in the fee schedule. Each license
shall expire on the first day of January after the same is issued and shall not
be prorated.
   (D)   Licenses required.
      (1)   Licenses shall be obtained by every person engaged in the following
business or work in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city
except those exempted from city licensing in  subsection  (A) of this section:
         (a)   General contractors, including those involved in erection,
alteration or repair of buildings;
         (b)   Masonry, cement work, cement block work, block laying or brick
work;
         (c)   Heating and ventilation;
         (d)   Roofing;
         (e)   Plastering, stucco work and sheet rock taping;
         (f)   Excavation, including excavations for footings, basements and
grading of lots;
         (g)   Wrecking of buildings;
         (h)   Landscaping; and
         (i)   Signs, including the erection and hanging of same.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing any qualified
licensee from performing the work by an employee under his or her supervision
and control or from a property owner from performing his or her own work
providing all provisions of the State Building Code are adhered to.
      (3)   A license granted to a general contractor shall include the right
to perform all of the work included in his or her general contract. The license
shall include any or all persons performing the work which is classified and
listed in  subsection  (D) of this section, provided that each person
performing the work is in the regular employ of the general contractor and
qualified under state law and the provisions of this Code to perform the work.
In these cases, the general contractor shall be responsible for all of the work
so performed. Subcontractors on any work shall be required to comply with the
sections of this Code pertaining to license, bond, qualifications and the like,
for his or her particular type of work.
   (E)   Public utilities, including electrical, gas, telephone, and cable
communications, shall not be required to obtain licenses for work upon or in
connection with their own property, except as may be provided by other sections
of this Code.
   (F)   This section shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or
liability for any party owning, operating or installing the above described
work for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein nor shall
the city be held as assuming any liability by persons, firms or corporations
engaged in the work.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
PART 3. ADOPTION OF STATE LAW
§ 153.01.31 APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101
to 326B.16, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the
Building Code for the city. The application, administration, and enforcement of
the Code shall be in accordance with Minn. Rules Chapter 1300. The Code shall
be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121,
Subd. 2(d). The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
city. This Code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official
designated by the city to administer the Code (M.S. § 326B.133, Subd. 1).
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 153.01.32 PERMITS AND FEES.
   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in
M.S. Chapter 326B. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this Code
in accordance with the most current fee schedule adopted by the city in
accordance with law. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all
permits issued for work governed by this Code in accordance with M.S. §
326B.148.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 153.01.33 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A violation of the Building Code is a misdemeanor (M.S. § 326B.082 and Minn.
Rules, Chapter 1300).
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
§ 153.01.34 BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this
chapter.
   (B)   Chapters not adopted. The following optional chapters of the Minnesota
Building Code are not adopted:
      (1)   Minnesota Rules Chapter 1306, Special Fire Protection Systems; and
      (2)   Grading, IBC Appendix Chapter J.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22)
CHAPTER 154: DEFINITIONS
Section
Division 01: Definitions
Part 1. Definitions
   
154.01.11   General definitions
   
154.01.12   Use definitions
DIVISION 01: DEFINITIONS
PART 1. DEFINITIONS
§ 154.01.11 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply
to
Chapters 15
1,
152,
153, and
154 unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   A:
      (1)   ABUTTING USES AND DISTRICTS. Uses and districts having contiguous
lot lines but not including lot lines separated by streets, roads or water
bodies.
      (2)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A subordinate structure which is located on
the same lot on which the main building or principal structure is situated and
is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary or
principal use of the building or main use.
      (3)   ALLEY. A public vehicular right-of-way which affords a secondary
means of vehicular access to abutting property and which is not intended for
general traffic circulation.
      (4)   APPLICANT.
         (a)   Any person or entity that applies for a building permit,
subdivision approval or a permit to allow land disturbing activities.
         (b)   APPLICANT also means that person’s agents, employees and others
acting under this person’s direction.
      (5)   AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS. All land surface areas which by nature of
their surface and/or subsurface soil characteristics are determined to
contribute to the replenishment of subsurface water supplies.
      (6)   ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION. Any obstruction which is not a natural
obstruction.
   (C)   B:
      (1)   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having
its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless
of the depth of excavation below ground level.
      (2)   BERM. A man-made earthen mound in excess of two feet in vertical
height used for decorative, screening, or buffering purposes.
      (3)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMP. The most effective and
practicable means of erosion prevention and sediment control, and water quality
management practices that are the most effective and practicable means to
control, prevent, and minimize degradation of surface water, including
avoidance of impacts, construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil
areas are exposed, prohibitions, pollution prevention through good
housekeeping, and other management practices published by state or designated
area-wide planning agencies.
      (4)   BETTER SITE DESIGN. The control and management of stormwater
quantity and quality through the application of better site design techniques
as outlined in the current version of the Minnesota Stormwater Manual: http://
stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Main_Page. Better site design includes
preservation of natural areas, site reforestation, stream and shoreland
buffers, open space design, disconnection of impervious cover, rooftop
disconnection, grass channels, stormwater landscaping, compost and amended
soils, impervious surface reduction, and trout stream protection.
      (5)   BLOCK. The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property
lines or boundaries of the subdivision.
      (6)   BLUFF.
         (a)   A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment having
all of the following characteristics:
            1.   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
            2.   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water
level of the waterbody;
            3.   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25
feet or more above the ordinary high water averages 30% or greater; and
            4.   The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
         (b)   An area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance
for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff.
      (7)   BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the
top of a bluff.
      (8)   BLUFF, TOE OF. The lower point of a 50 foot segment with an average
slope exceeding 18%.
      (9)   BLUFF, TOP OF. The higher point of a 50 foot segment with an
average slope exceeding 18%.
      (10)   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high
water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
      (11)   BOATHOUSE. A structure used solely for the storage of boats or
boating equipment.
      (12)   BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb
line and property line.
      (13)   BUFFER. A protective vegetated zone located adjacent to a natural
resource, such as a water of the state that is subject to direct or indirect
human alteration. Acceptable buffer vegetation includes preserving existing
predevelopment vegetation and/or planting locally distributed native state
trees, shrubs and grassy vegetation. Alteration of the areas is strictly
limited buffer areas are designated with permanent signs. As a plant species
selection guide of what species not to plant, the State Department of Natural
Resources, Minn. Rules Chapter 6216, as it may be amended from time to time,
contains a list of exotic prohibited, regulated, unlisted and unregulated plant
species.
      (14)   BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required
yards have been provided.
      (15)   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
      (16)   BUILDING HEIGHT. A distance to be measured from the mean ground
level to the top of a flat roof to the mean distance of the highest gable on a
pitched or hip roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, the top uppermost
point on other roof types.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2410.png]
 
      (17 )   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The person or persons authorized by the
Council to administer the State Building Code, the Zoning Code and the
subdivisio n regulations .
      (18)   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority
charged with the administration and enforcement of the building codes and
ordinances, or the Building Official’s duly authorized representative.
   (D)   C:
      (1)   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree measured at six inches above
ground.
      (2)    CARPORT. A canopy constructed of metal or other materials
supported by posts either ornamental or solid and completely open on two or
more sides.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2412.png]
 
      (3)   CELLAR. An area of a structure, including crawl spaces, located
partially or fully underground on all four sides, and having more than one-half
of its floor to ceiling height below the average land grade as measured five
feet away from the structure.
      (4)   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent,
with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or
periodically.
      (5)   CLEAR-CUTTING. The removal of an entire stand of trees on a parcel
of land.
      (6)   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision development planned so as to
group housing units into relatively tight patterns while providing a unified
network of open space and wooded areas and meeting the overall density
regulations.
      (7)   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
      (8)   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A contiguous area where
multiple separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place
at different times, on different schedules, but under one proposed plan. The
common plan is broadly defined to include design, permit application,
advertisement or physical demarcation indicating that land disturbing
activities may occur.
      (9)   COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The plan or plans for the orderly
growth of the city and adopted as amended from time to time by the Planning
Commission and the Council.
      (10)   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Council in
accordance with procedures specified in this chapter, as a flexibility device
to enable the Council to assign dimensions to a proposed use or conditions
surrounding it after consideration of adjacent uses and their functions and the
special problems which the proposed use presents.
      (11)   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Includes “construction activity” as defined
in 40 C.F.R. pt. 122.26(b)(14)(x) and “small construction activity” as defined
in 40 C.F.R. pt. 122.26(b)(15) and construction activity as defined by Minn.
Rules 7090-0080, subd. 4. This includes a disturbance to the land that results
in a change in the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-
vegetative), or the existing soil topography that may result in accelerated
stormwater runoff, leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment into
surface waters or drainage systems. Examples of construction activity may
include clearing, grading, filling, and excavating. Construction activity
includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is a
part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan
will ultimately disturb one acre or more. Construction activity does not
include a disturbance to the land of less than five acres for the purpose of
routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility.
      (12)   CONTINUOUS MOOR. The mooring of a boat or watercraft during normal
nighttime hours.
      (13)   CONTROLLED ACCESS LOT. A separate riparian property owned and
maintained jointly by non-riparian property owners in the vicinity and used by
said non-riparian owners for lake-related recreation activities.
      (14)   COUNCIL. City Council.
      (15)   COUNTY. Chisago County, Minnesota.
      (16)   COURT. An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, which is
bounded on two or more sides by the walls of the buildings.
      (17)    COVERED PASSAGEWAY. A roofed structure at least five feet wide
which attaches a principal and accessory structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2414.png]
 
      (18)    CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. The root system within the drip line is
generally considered to be the critical root zone. The drip line is an
imaginary line, which extends from the outermost branches of a tree’s canopy to
the ground. To protect these critical root zones, a tree protection area shall
be established around each tree or group of trees to be retained.
         (a)   The tree protection area shall include no less than the total
area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the drip line of the tree or group
of trees collectively.
         (b)   Wherein authorized excavations it becomes necessary to expose or
cut roots more than one inch in diameter, it shall be the duty of the
contractor to protect such root(s) under advice of the city.
         (c)   All open trenching is prohibited. Utility installation within
the drip line of protected trees, during construction or thereafter, can only
occur using trench-less methods.
         (d)   The mowing, clearing, and grubbing of brush located under the
drip line of protected trees may be allowed, provided such mowing, cleaning, or
grubbing is accomplished by hand or by mower. The use of heavy equipment for
this purpose shall not be allowed.
   (E)   D:
      (1)   DECK. A horizontal platform constructed on posts, without windows
or insulated walls with or without attached railings, seats, or other features
attached or functionally related to a principal use.
      (2)   DEPOSITION. Any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material
deposited naturally or by man into a water body, watercourse, floodplains or
wetlands.
      (3)   DEVELOPER. A person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship,
partnership, state agency or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land
disturbance activity.
      (4)   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.
      (5)   DEVELOPMENT, NEW. Any development that results in the conversion of
land that is currently prairie, agriculture, forest, or meadow and which has
less than 15% impervious surface. Land that was previously developed, but now
razed and vacant, will not be considered new development.
      (6)   DEWATERING. The removal of surface or ground water to dry and/or
solidify a construction site to enable construction activity.
      (7)   DIAMETER. The measurement of a tree’s trunk measured four and one-
half feet above the ground.
      (8)   DISCHARGE. The conveyance, channeling, runoff or drainage of
stormwater, including snowmelt, from a construction site.
      (9)   DISTURBANCE ZONE. Any area that will be physically altered from its
natural state. This will include all areas of grading, utility installation,
building pads, driveways and parking areas.
      (10)   DIVERSION. A channel that intercepts surface water runoff and that
changes the accustomed course of all or part of a stream.
      (11)   DRAINAGE COURSE. A water course or indenture for the drainage of
surface water.
      (12)   DRAINING. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land.
      (13)   DREDGINGS. To enlarge or clean out a water body, watercourse or
wetland.
      (14)   DRIP LINE. The farthest distance away from the trunk of a tree
that rain or dew will fall directly to the ground from the leaves or branches
of the tree or one foot per one inch of diameter, whichever is greater.
      (15)   DRIVEWAY. A private road or path for vehicle access to a public
road, which is wholly located on the parcel which is afforded access.
      (16)   DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by one or
more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and
recreational vehicle sites.
   (F)   E:
      (1)   EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for the specific use by
persons other than the owner or the public.
      (2)   ENCROACHMENT LINES. The lateral limits or lines drawn along each
side and generally parallel to a stream or another body of water, which
delineates the floodway and within which the flood carrying capacity of the
stream or other body of water is to be preserved. Their location, if along a
stream, should be such that the floodway between them will effectively carry
and discharge a flood not less than a regional flood.
      (3)   ENERGY DISSIPATION. This refers to methods employed at pipe outlets
to prevent erosion. Examples include, but are not limited to aprons, riprap,
splash pads and gabions that are designed to prevent erosion.
      (4)   ENGINEER. City Engineer.
      (5)   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location
of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
      (6)   EROSION. Any process that wears away the surface of the land by the
action of water, wind, ice or gravity. Erosion can be accelerated by the
activities of people and nature.
      (7)   EROSION AND SEDIMENT PRACTICE SPECIFICATIONS OR PRACTICES. The
management procedures, techniques and methods to control soil erosion and
sedimentation as officially adopted by either the city, county or local
watershed group, whichever is more stringent.
      (8)   EROSION CONTROL. Methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples
include soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or
permanent cover and construction phasing.
      (9)   EROSION PREVENTION. Measures employed to prevent erosion. Examples
include but are not limited to soil stabilization practices, limited grading,
mulch, temporary erosion protection or permanent cover, and construction
phasing.
      (10)   EXPOSED SOIL AREAS. All areas of the construction site where the
vegetation (trees, shrubs, brush and the like) has been removed. This includes
topsoil stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the
construction site. It does not include stockpiles or surcharge areas of sand,
gravel, concrete or bituminous.
   (G)   F:
      (1)   FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier erected to enclose,
screen, or separate areas.
      (2)   FENCE, AGRICULTURAL. A wire fence constructed to enclose an area of
land for agricultural purposes.
      (3)   FILTER STRIPS. A vegetated section of land designed to treat runoff
as overland sheet flow. They may be designed in any natural vegetated form from
a grassy meadow to a small forest. Their dense vegetated cover facilitates
pollutant removal and infiltration.
      (4)   FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing or chart on which the
subdivider’s plan of subdivision which will be submitted to the County Recorder
of Deeds or Registrar of Titles. The plan must conform to all state laws.
      (5)   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site
have been completed, and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a
density of 75% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures has been established or equivalent permanent stabilization
measures have been employed. Simply sowing grass seed is not considered
stabilization.
      (6)   FISH HOUSE. A portable water-oriented structure duly licensed by
the state for use in the taking of fish through lake or river ice.
      (7)   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream, or in
the stage of a wetland or lake, that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
      (8)   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
      (9)   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in
the Flood Insurance Study for Chisago County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas.
      (10)   FLOODPLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.
      (11)   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
      (12)   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably
required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
      (13)   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several
floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
      (14)   FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE. The same as FLOOR AREA, defined above, except
measured from the interior faces of the interior walls excluding all areas
occupied by cellars, garage, porches, unoccupied attics, stairways, basements,
storage, utility and heating rooms.
      (15)   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The floor area of the building or
buildings on that zoning lot divided by the area of the zoning lot or, in the
case of planned developments or group housing projects, by the gross site
areas.
      (16)   FOOTPRINT. The portion of a lot covered by a building or structure
where it meets the earth.
   (H)   G:
      (1)   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in
which no business service or industry is carried on; provided that not more
than one-half of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons
not resident on the premises, except that all the space in a garage one- or
two-car capacity may be so rented.
      (2)   GRADE, ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION. The lowest point of elevation of
the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between
the building and the property line or when the property line is more than five
feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the
building.
      (3)   GRADING. Changing the natural or existing topography of land.
      (4)   GROUNDWATER. Water contained below the surface of the earth in the
saturated zone including, without limitation, all waters whether under
confined, unconfined, or perched conditions, in near surface unconsolidated
sediment or regolith, or in rock formations deeper underground. The term
groundwater shall be synonymous with underground water.
   (I)   H:
      (1)   HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded or ponded long
enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper
part.
      (2)   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic plant life growing in water,
soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a
result of excessive water content.
   (J)   I:
      (1)   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A constructed hard surface or natural surface
that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes
water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of
flow than prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios,
driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.
Decks constructed with at least quarter-inch spacing between deck slats and
pervious surface below are not considered impervious.
      (2)   INDECENT. Not decent; grossly unseemly or offensive to manners or
morals.
      (3)   INSPECTOR. The City’s Building Inspector.
      (4)   INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees,
shrubs or other vegetation in a contiguous patch strip row or block.
      (5)   INTERMITTENT. A stream or portion of a stream that flows only in
direct response to precipitation.
   (K)   L:
      (1)   LAND DISTURBANCE. Any activity that results in a change or
alteration in the existing ground cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative)
and/or the existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities include, but
are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction,
reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, stockpiling, excavation, and borrow
pits. Routine vegetation management, and mill and overlay/resurfacing
activities that do not alter the soil material beneath the pavement base are
not considered land disturbance. In addition, other maintenance activities such
as catch basin and pipe repair/replacement, lighting, and pedestrian ramp
improvements shall not be considered a land disturbance for the purposes of
determining permanent stormwater management requirements.
      (2)   LICENSE. A written document, issued by the Council, allowing a
person to establish, operate and maintain a mobile home park under the
provisions and regulations of this title.
      (3)   LINEAR PROJECT. Construction or reconstruction of roads, trails,
sidewalks, underground utilities, and rail lines that are not part of a common
plan of development or sale. Mill, overlay and other resurfacing projects are
not considered to be reconstruction.
      (4)   LIVING AREA. A finished space within a structure with walls, floor
(s), and ceiling(s) which is habitable year-round. Living area does not include
garages, unheated breezeways, or unfinished basements or attics.
      (5)    LOT or LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land, whether subdivided or
otherwise legally described, as of the effective date of this chapter, or
approved by the city as a lot subsequent to the date and which is occupied by
or intended for occupancy by one principal building or principal use together
with any accessory buildings and the open spaces as required and having its
principal frontage on a street or a proposed street approved by the Council.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2416.png]
 
      (6)    LOT, BUTT. A lot at the end of a block and located between two
corner lots.
      (7)    LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two
or more intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of defection in alignment
of a single street, the interior angle of which is 135 degrees or less.
      (8)    LOT, INTERIOR. A lot, other than a corner lot, including through
lots.
      (9)   LOT, THROUGH. A lot fronting on two parallel streets.
      (10)   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.
      (11)   LOT DEPTH. The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the rear lot line measured from a 90 degree angle from the street
right-of-way within the lot boundaries.
      (12)   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be, for purposes of
complying with this title, that boundary abutting a public right-of-way having
the least width.
      (13)   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or
separated ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the
abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or
alley right-of-way.
      (14)   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or
dedicated public street. In the case of the corner lot, it shall be the
shortest dimension on a public street or as otherwise designated by the Zoning
Administrator based on the practical front yard of the property as determined
by such factors as the existing or proposed building configuration of the
property and taking into consideration the characteristics of surrounding
properties. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front line shall
be designated by the owner and filed with the city.
      (15)   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot that is opposite the front
lot line. If the rear line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms
a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line 20 feet in length within
the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
      (16)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear
lot line.
      (17)   LOT WIDTH. The shortest horizontal distance between the side lot
lines measured at right angles at the midpoints of the building lines.
      (18)   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor.
   (L)   M:
      (1)   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. A plot of ground within a manufactured home
park designed and designated for the accommodation of one manufactured home.
      (2)   MANUFACTURED HOME PAD. The part of an individual lot which has been
reserved for the placement of one manufactured home unit.
      (3)   MARQUEE or CANOPY. A permanent roofed structure attached to and
supported by the building and projecting over public property.
      (4)   MATERIALS. Maps, graphs, charts, drawings and the like and all
printing or reproduction of same.
      (5)   MEAN GROUND LEVEL. The average of the elevation of a structure
where it meets the ground measured along a building line, excluding windows
wells. For the purposes of establishing building height, MEAN GROUND LEVEL
shall be measured on the street side of a property or 10 feet above the lowest
ground level along the building line, whichever is lower. If the structure
faces more than one street, the average shall incorporate all sides facing a
street.
      (6)   MINIMAL IMPACT DESIGN STANDARDS (MIDS). Standards developed by the
MPCA to minimize stormwater runoff and pollution.
      (7)   MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The guides, principles and
specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating among other
things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in
the preliminary plan.
      (8)   MOORING. Any containment of free-floating watercraft that provides
a fixed fastening for the craft.
   (M)   N:
      (1)   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The
program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring,
and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301, 318, 402, and
405) and 33 C.F.R. §§ 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345.
      (2)   NATURAL DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All land surface areas which, by nature of
their contour, configuration, collect, store and channel, surface water runoff.
      (3)   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR USE. Any structure or use which does
not, even though lawfully established, conform to the applicable conditions if
the structure or use was to be erected under the guidance of this chapter.
   (N)   O:
      (1)   OBSCENE. Disgusting to the senses, repulsive, abhorrent to morality
or virtue; specifically: designed to incite to lust or depravity, containing or
being language regarded as taboo in polite usage; repulsive by reason of crass
disregard of moral or ethical principles; so excessive as to be offensive.
      (2)   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or
projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory floodplain which may
impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself
or by catching or collecting debris carried by the water.
      (3)   OBSTRUCTION, NATURAL. Any rock, tree, gravel or analogous natural
matter that is an obstruction and has been located within a water body,
watercourse or wetland by a non-human cause.
      (4)   OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from the street, alley
or way in a building or on the lot, for the use of trucks while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials. The space shall be of a size as to
accommodate one truck of the type typically used in the particular business.
      (5)   OPERATOR. The person designated by the owner, who has day to day
operational control and/or the ability to modify project plans and
specifications related to the SWPPP. The operator must be named on the permit
as the permittee.
      (6)   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters and
wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating. The highest water level which
has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel.
      (7)   OWNER.
         (a)   The person or party possessing the title of the land on which
the construction activities will occur; or if the construction activity is for
a lease, easement, or mineral rights license holder, the party or individual
identified as the lessee, easement or mineral rights license holder; or the
contracting government agency responsible for the construction activity.
         (b)   OWNER also means an individual, firm, association, syndicate,
co-partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and
maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations.
   (O)   P:
      (1)   PARAPET. A low wall which is located perpendicular to the extension
of the front wall and a roof of a building.
      (2)   PARK MANAGER. The person who owns or has charge, care or control of
the manufactured home park.
      (3)   PARKING SPACE. An area, enclosed in the main building, in an
accessory building or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile
which has adequate access to a public street or alley and permitting
satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile.
      (4)   PATIO. A horizontal unenclosed structure, at or within five inches
of ground level with or without attached railings, seats, trellises or other
features attached or functionally related to a principal use or site.
      (5)   PAVED SURFACE. A constructed hard, smooth surface made of asphalt,
concrete or other pavement material. Examples include, but are not limited to
roads, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots.
      (6)   PEDESTRIAN WAY. Public or private right-of-way across a block or
within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the
installation of utility lines.
      (7)   PERMANENT COVER. Surface types that will prevent soil failure under
erosive conditions. Examples include gravel, asphalt, concrete, rip rap, roof
tops, perennial cover, or other landscaped material that will permanently
arrest soil erosion.
      (8)   PERMANENT COVER. Does not include the practices listed under
temporary erosion protection.
      (9)   PERMIT. A written permit or certification issued by the Building
Inspector permitting the construction, alteration and extension of any
permanent structure within the manufactured home park.
      (10)   PERMITTEE. A person or persons, firm, or governmental agency or
other entity that signs the application submitted to the MPCA and is
responsible for compliance with the terms and conditions of the construction
permit.
      (11)   PERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface maintained in its natural condition
or covered by a material that permits infiltration or percolation of water into
the ground.
      (12)   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development characterized by a
unified site design which may include a variety of land uses and structures.
The planned unit development is distinguished from the traditional subdivision
and site plan approval processes of development in that development standards
such as setbacks, height limits, and minimum lot sizes may be altered by
negotiation and agreement between the developer and the municipality, except
that land uses and densities shall be consistent with that permitted by the
Comprehensive Plan.
      (13)   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of
Lindstrom.
      (14)   PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES. As used in connection with the granting of
a variance, practical difficulties include:
         (a)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance;
         (b)   The plight of the property owner is due to circumstances unique
to the property and not created by the owner; and
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
         (d)   Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties.
         (e)   Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
      (15)   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary plat map, drawing or chart
indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Commission and the Council for their consideration, as compliance with
the comprehensive development plan and these regulations along with required
supporting data.
      (16)   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. All structures that are not accessory
structures.
      (17)   PRIVATE COMMON ACCESS. A privately-owned access road.
      (18)   PROTECTED, PRESERVED OR UNDISTURBED TREE. Any tree with no less
than 60% of the critical root zone left undisturbed or which has been protected
during the construction process by the tree protection methods described in
Chapter 151.
      (19)   PUBLIC WATER. A body of water capable of substantial beneficial
public use and further defined by M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 15, as it may be
amended from time to time. This shall be construed to mean any body of water
which has the potential to support any type of recreational pursuit or water
supply purpose. However, no lake, pond or floodage of less than ten acres in
size and no river or stream having a total drainage area less than two square
miles shall be considered a public water under this chapter. The PUBLIC WATER
shall be determined by the State Department of Natural Resources. Any body of
water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland for a
designated private use as approved by the Commissioner of the State Department
of Natural Resources is not included as a PUBLIC WATER.
   (P)   R:
      (1)   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
      (2)   REDEVELOPMENT. Any development that is not considered new
development.
      (3)   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods
known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of
what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the terms “base
flood,” “1 percent-annual-chance flood” and “100-year flood.”
      (4)   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than
one foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from the
designation of a floodway.
      (5)   RESTRICTED WATERCRAFT. Any boat or vessel, including jet skis, for
use on the public waters except for unrestricted watercraft as defined in this
section.
      (6)   RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts entered into between private
parties and constituting a restriction on the use of private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners to provide mutual protection
against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability
of values.
      (7)   RETAIN. To manage stormwater on site using a low-impact development
approach so that the rate and volume of predevelopment stormwater reaching
receiving waters is unchanged.
      (8)   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land dedicated and publicly owned for use as a public
street, alley or crosswalk.
      (9)   RIPARIAN LAND. Land adjacent to public waters, drainage systems,
wetlands, or locally designated priority waters.
      (10)   RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. The average annual fraction of total
precipitation that is not infiltrated into or otherwise retained by the soil,
concrete asphalt or other surface upon which it falls that will appear at the
conveyance as runoff.
   (Q)   S:
      (1)   SATURATED SOIL. The highest seasonal elevation in the soil that is
in a reduced chemical state because of soil voids being filled with water.
Saturated soil is evidenced by the presence of redoximorphic features or other
information.
      (2)   SEDIMENT. The product of an erosion process; solid material both
mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been
moved by water, air or ice, and has come to rest on the earth’s surface either
above or below water level.
      (3)   SEDIMENT CONTROL. Methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving
the site. Sediment control practices include silt fences, sediment traps, earth
dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, bio rolls, rock logs,
compost logs, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent
sedimentation basins.
      (4)   SEDIMENTATION. The process or action of depositing sediment caused
by erosion.
      (5)   SELECTIVE CUTTING. The removal of single scattered trees.
      (6)   SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management of
areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such
as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive
soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding or occurrence of flora or fauna
in need of special protection.
      (7)    SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure,
sewage treatment system or other facility and an ordinary high water level, top
of a bluff, road, highway, property line or other facility.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc1788441bf40b85708499721334c767b98c496f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2418.png]
 
      (8)    SETBACK, BUILDING. The minimum horizontal distance between the
building and the specified lot line.
      (9)   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A tank and soil absorption system or other
individual or cluster sewage treatment system.
      (10)   SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force main
and all other constructions, devices, appliances or appurtenances used for
conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.
      (11)   SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water
level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
structure setback.
      (12)   SHORELAND. Land located from public water 1,000 feet from the
ordinary high water level of a lake, ponds or flowage and 300 feet from a river
or stream or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a
river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced
whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend
landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources. Shoreland areas shall be
as designated on a map prepared by the city.
      (13)   SHRUB. A small perennial bush, having several woody stems that
grow from the base, is not tree-like in appearance, is planted from a #5
container or larger, and is not determined to be invasive or aggressive by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (14)   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing
structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the
National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under
the provisions of M.S. § 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is
presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the
qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota State Archaeologist or
the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are
automatically considered to be significant historic sites.
      (15)   SLOPE. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal,
usually expressed in percent or degrees.
      (16)   SLOPE, STEEP. Land where agricultural activity or development is
either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and
the site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county
soil surveys or other technical reports unless appropriate design and
construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations. Where specific information is not available,
STEEP SLOPES are lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over
horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
      (17)   SMALL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Small construction activity as
defined in 40 C.F.R. pt. 122.26(b)(15). Small construction activities include
clearing, grading and excavating that result in land disturbance of equal to or
greater than one acre and less than five acres. Small construction activity
includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is part
of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will
ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one and less than five acres.
      (18)   SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the
immediate surface of the earth. For the purposes of this chapter, stockpiles of
sand, gravel, aggregate, concrete or bituminous materials are not considered
“soil stockpile.”
      (19)   STABILIZED. Exposed ground surface has been covered by appropriate
materials such as mulch, staked sod, rip rap, erosion control blanket, mats or
other material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass, agricultural crop
or other seeding alone is not stabilization. Mulch materials must achieve
approximately 90% ground coverage (typically two tons/acre).
      (20)   STAFF AND/OR CONSULTING TIME. Any time spent in either researching
for or actual production of materials in excess of the base fee.
      (21)   STORMWATER. Defined under Minn. Rules 7077.0105(41)(b), and
includes precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and any
other surface runoff and drainage.
      (22)   STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITY. A permanent manmade structure for
the temporary storage of runoff that may contain a permanent pool of water.
      (23)   STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN. A joint stormwater and erosion
and sediment control plan that is a document containing the requirements
hereof, that when implemented will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land
and off-site non-point pollution and sediment damages.
      (24)   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan for
stormwater discharge that includes erosion prevention BMPs, sediment control
BMPs, and permanent stormwater management systems that, when implemented, will
decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and decrease off-site nonpoint
pollution.
      (25)   STORY. The portion of a building included beneath the upper
surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor next above. The topmost story
shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. A basement, cellar, or parking
structure which exceeds six feet above grade for more than 50% of the total
perimeter shall be considered a story.
      (26)   STREET. A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords
primary means of access to abutting property, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, lane, place
or however otherwise designated.
      (27)   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street primarily designated to carry large
volumes of traffic and provide for vehicular movement between and among large
areas.
      (28)   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from minor
streets to thoroughfares or from thoroughfare to thoroughfare. It includes the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and for circulation
within a development.
      (29)   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet and having
a turnaround.
      (30)   STREET, LOCAL. A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
      (31)   STREET, PRIVATE. A private access way that connects abutting
properties to a public street, differs from a private driveway in that it is on
a separate parcel from the structures it serves, and that is owned and
maintained by a homeowners association or similar entity.
      (32)   STREET, SERVICE. Marginal access street, or otherwise designated,
is a local street which is parallel and adjacent to a collector or arterial
street and which provides access to abutting properties.
      (33)   STREET FRONTAGE. The proximity of a parcel of land to one or more
streets. An interior lot has one street frontage and a corner lot has two
frontages.
      (34)   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the lines delineating
the right-of-way of a street.
      (35)   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including but not limited to,
buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, and
other similar items.
      (36)   STRUCTURE, HISTORIC. A structure as defined in 44 C.F.R. pt. 59.1.
      (37)   SUBDIVIDER. The owner, agent or person having control of the land
as the term is used in this chapter.
      (38)   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more
lots or parcels. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
      (39)   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
      (40)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period,
any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
that have been identified by the local code enforcement official, and that are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of an “historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
“historic structure.” For the purpose of this title, “historic structure” shall
be as defined in 44 C.F.R. pt. 59.1.
      (41)   SURFACE WATER OR WATERS. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
wetlands, reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways,
watercourses, and irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or
private, except that surface waters do not include treatment basins or ponds
that were constructed from upland.
      (42)   SURFACE-WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for
commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an
integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts and
restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of the use.
      (43)   SURFACE WATERS, GENERAL DEVELOPMENT. Those waters whose shores are
presently characterized by industrial or commercial or high density,
residential development.
      (44)   SURFACE WATERS, NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. Those waters whose shores are
presently characterized by low density, single-family residential development.
      (45)   SURFACE WATERS, RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. Those waters
characterized by medium density, residential development with or without
limited service-oriented commercial development.
      (46)   SURVEYOR. The registered surveyor appointed or engaged by the
Council for the purpose of attaining the goals and complying with the
requirements of this title.
      (47)   SWALE. A low tract of land, especially when moist or a shallow
trough-like depression that carries water mainly during rainstorms or snow
melts.
   (R)   T:
      (1)   TEMPORARY EROSION PROTECTION. Methods employed to prevent erosion
during construction activities. Examples of temporary erosion protection
include straw, wood fiber blanket, wood chips, vegetation, mulch, and rolled
erosion control products.
      (2)   TEMPORARY PROTECTION. Short term methods employed to prevent
erosion. Examples of the protection include: straw, mulch, erosion control
blankets, wood chips and erosion netting.
      (3)   TRANSPARENCY, FAÇADE. The percentage of a building façade which is
made up of transparent materials, including glass, etc.
      (4)   TREE. A woody stemmed perennial plant with lateral branching from
the main stem(s) occurring a minimum of six inches off the ground and a minimum
height of ten feet at maturity.
      (5)   TREE, CANOPY. A deciduous tree whose mature height and branch
structure provide foliage primarily on the upper half of the tree. The purpose
of the canopy tree is to provide shade to adjacent ground areas.
      (6)   TREE, DECIDUOUS. A tree which naturally sheds its leaves/foliage
annually.
      (7)   TREE, EVERGREEN. A tree with foliage that persists and remains
green year-round.
      (8)   TREE, ORNAMENTAL. A tree that does not exceed more than 25 feet in
height or crown diameter at maturity and has an ornamental characteristic to
include showy flowers, fruit, foliage, or bark.
      (9)   TREE, SIGNIFICANT. Trees which are healthy and measure a minimum of
eight inches in diameter four and one-half feet above the ground for hardwood
deciduous trees, measure a minimum of 12 inches in diameter four and one-half
feet above the ground for softwood deciduous trees, or measure greater than
eight feet in height for coniferous trees. Some examples of significant
deciduous trees include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Hardwood deciduous trees – elm, hickory, birch, oak, maple
(hard); and
         (b)   Softwood deciduous trees – cottonwood, box elder, poplars/aspen,
silver maple, willow.
      (10)   TREE CERTIFICATION. A certified inventory of trees on the site
after work is complete listing all trees and their final disposition. The tree
certification shall be signed by a licensed forester or landscape architect.
      (11)   TREE PRESERVATION PLAN. A plan and inventory certified by a
forester or landscape architect indicating all of the significant trees, which
trees are going to be preserved and what measures will be taken to preserve
them.
      (12)   TREE RESTORATION PLAN. A plan certified by a forester or landscape
architect that shows the number, type, size, and location of trees to be
planted to meet tree restoration requirements.
   (S)   U:
      (1)   UNRESTRICTED WATERCRAFT. A boat or vessel, 20 feet or less in
length and unmotorized, and which is propelled solely by human power on the
public waters.
      (2)   UPLAND. All lands at an elevation above the normal high water mark.
      (3)   URBAN. Of, relating to, characteristic of, constituting a city.
      (4)   USABLE OPEN SPACE. Designed outdoor space intended for passive or
active recreation that is accessible and suited to the needs of the
development’s residents and/or employees, and shall generally have the
following characteristics:
         (a)   Functional and aesthetic design that relates to the principal
building or buildings, with clear edges, including seating, landscaping,
recreational facilities, sidewalk connections, and other amenities;
         (b)   May be designed as courtyards, plazas, picnic areas, swimming
pools, play areas, rooftop patios/gardens, or trails within natural areas;
         (c)   Compatible with or expands upon existing pedestrian connections
and public parks or open space;
         (d)   May include both private common areas for use by all residents
of that development, as well as a private unit’s open space for exclusive use
by that unit’s residents; and
         (e)   Does not include driveways, parking areas, steep slopes, or
stormwater ponds.
   (T)   V:
      (1)   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this
Zoning Chapter as applied to a specific piece of property.
      (2)   VEGETATED OR GRASSED SWALES. A vegetated earthen channel that
conveys stormwater, while treating the stormwater by biofiltration. The swales
remove pollutants by both filtration and infiltration.
      (3)   VEGETATION. The sum total of plant life in some area or a plant
community with distinguishable characteristics.
      (4)   VERTICAL CURVE. The surface curvature on a street center line
located between lines of different percentage of grade.
   (U)   W:
      (1)   WATER BODY. A body of water (lake, pond) in a depression of land or
expanded part of a river or an enclosed basin that holds water and is
surrounded by land.
      (2)   WATERCOURSE. A channel or depression through which water flows,
such as rivers, streams or creeks, and may flow for year round or
intermittently.
      (3)   WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. A small, above
ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks and
retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface
water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the
normal structure setback. Examples of the structures and facilities include
gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses and detached decks.
      (4)   WATERS OF THE STATE. As defined in M.S. §
115.01(22), as it may be amended from time to time, all streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof. Under Minn. Rules Part 7050.0130 subp. 2, disposal systems or
treatment works operated under permit or certificate of compliance of the
agency are not WATERS OF THE STATE.
      (5)   WATERSHED. The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage
system, bounded peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing
drainage areas.
      (6)   WATERSHED MANAGEMENT OR FLOOD CONTROL STRUCTURE. A dam, flood wall,
wingdam, dike, diversion channel or an artificially depended or widened stream
channel following the same or approximately the same course as the natural
channel, or any other structure for altering or regulating the natural flow
condition of a river or stream. The term WATERSHED MANAGEMENT OR FLOOD CONTROL
STRUCTURE does not include pilings, retaining walls, gabon baskets, rock riprap
or other facilities intended primarily to prevent erosion and which must be
authorized by permit from the Commissioner of the State Department of Natural
Resources.
      (7)   WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Constructed wetlands designed
for wastewater treatment are not waters of the state. Wetlands must have the
following attributes:
         (a)   A predominance of hydric soils;
         (b)   Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and
         (c)   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such
vegetation.
         (d)   Two references of what is an existing identified wetland are the
National Wetlands Inventory maps distributed by the U.S. Department of the
Interior’s Fish and Wildlife Service and the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources’ maps of protected waters and wetlands.
      (8)   WILDLIFE. All free, living non-domesticated animals.
   (V)   Y:
      (1)   YARD. An open space on the lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed
from its lowest level to the sky. A YARD extends along a lot line at right
angles to the lot lines to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations
for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
      (2)   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the road side of the lot
between the side lot lines and lying between the road and the nearest line of
the principal building.
      (3)   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
      (4)   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest
line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
   (W)   Z:
      (1)   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator of the City of
Lindstrom.
      (2)   ZONING DISTRICT. A section or sections of the city for which the
regulations and provisions governing the use of buildings and lands are uniform
for each class of use permitted therein.
      (3)   ZONING MAP. The maps or map incorporated into
Chapter 151 as part thereof, and as amended, designating the zoning districts.
      (4)   ZONING ORDINANCE. 
Chapter 151 of this Code of Ordinances controlling the use of land as adopted
by the city.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20230420-01, passed 4-20-23; Am.
Ord. 20241120-01, passed 11-20-24)
§ 154.01.12 USE DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   A:
      (1)   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A self-contained dwelling unit with
a separate entrance, kitchen, sleeping area, and full bathroom facilities,
which is located within, attached to, or on the same lot as an existing
residential dwelling.
      (2)   ADULT ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. Any business that is
characterized by, or places a significant emphasis on, providing its patrons
with merchandise, services or entertainment that is characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction, exposing, describing, discussing of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". For purposes of this
definition, adult establishments include, without limitation, adult bookstores,
adult motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult
companionship establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty
businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotel
or motel, and adult body painting studios.
      (3)   AGRICULTURE. The growing of produce or livestock on farms. This use
includes field crop farming; pasture for hay; fruit growing tree, plant, shrub
or flower nursery without building; truck gardening; roadside stand for sale in
season; and livestock raising and feeding, but does not include fur farms,
poultry, commercial animal feed lots and animal boarding facilities.
      (4)   AMBULANCE OR MEDICAL CARRIER SERVICE. The provision of transporting
a patient via ambulance to or between hospitals. This public or private service
includes both emergency ambulance service and routine ambulance service.
      (5)   ANIMAL BOARDING, SHELTER, OR DAYCARE CENTER. Any structure or
premises on which more than three dogs or cats over six months of age are
temporarily or permanently boarded, including animal day care/spa facilities.
Veterinary clinics providing boarding as part of medical services are not
included in this use.
      (6)   ANIMAL/VETERINARY CLINIC OR HOSPITAL. A clinic operated by a
licensed veterinarian exclusively for the diagnosis, treatment, correction,
relief, or prevention of animal disease, deformity, defect, injury, or other
physical or mental conditions; the performance of obstetrical procedures for
animals, including determination of pregnancy and correction of sterility or
infertility; and the rendering of advice or recommendations with regard to any
of the above. The facility may also provide boarding for animals as part of
medical services.
      (7)   ANTENNA. Any pole, rod, monopole, tower, earth station, conical or
dish shaped or similar device that is free standing or held aloft by a support
structure and is used in whole or in part for the collection, communication,
transmission or receiving of telecommunications signals.
      (8)   APARTMENT UNIT. A room or suite of rooms which is designed for,
intended for or occupied as a residence by a single-family or an individual and
is equipped with cooking facilities, includes dwelling unit and efficiency
unit.
      (9)   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A residential facility licensed by the
state which provides services on a regular basis, such as personal services,
24-hour supervision, social activities, and health-related care and services,
to individuals who require the assistance, but who do not require the degree of
care and treatment that a hospital or skilled nursing facility provides.
      (10)   AUTOMOBILE FUELING AND SERVICE STATION. Any building, land area or
other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels. Additional services provided may
include, but are not limited to, the sale of automobile accessories and
groceries, greasing and oiling, and the replacement of parts and motor
services.
      (11)   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding, or
reconditioning engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service,
including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or
paint job; or vehicle steam cleaning.
      (12)   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR AND SERVICE, MINOR. Incidental body or fender
work, or other minor repairs, painting and upholstering, replacement of parts
and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding 9,000 pounds gross
weight, but not including any operation named under "automobile repair, major,"
or any other similar thereto.
      (13)   AUTOMOBILE SALES, LEASING, AND SERVICE. Any land or buildings,
other than a street, used for the display, sale, rental, or service of new or
used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work
is done.
   (B)   B:
      (1)   BAR OR DRINKING PLACE. An establishment or part of an establishment
used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor for consumption on the
premises.
      (2)   BREWPUB. A restaurant with an accessory small brewery.
      (3)   BREWERY, WINERY, OR DISTILLERY. A facility that produces beer, ale
or other beverages made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than
one-half of 1% alcohol by volume.
      (4)   BED AND BREAKFAST. An owner-occupied business within a residential
structure with no more than six guest rooms where short-term accommodations are
provided to guests for compensation. The service of food shall be limited to
breakfasts served to overnight guests only.
      (5)   BUSINESS. Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise
where merchandise is manufactured, exhibited or sold, or where services are
offered for compensation.
   (C)   C:
      (1)   CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A use involving the licensed growing and
harvesting of cannabis.
      (2)   CANNABIS MANUFACTURING. A use which involves the compounding,
processing, packaging, wholesaling, testing, transportation, or treatment of
cannabis products.
      (3)   CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESS. Any establishment with a license or
endorsement from the State of Minnesota allowing cannabis flowers, immature
cannabis plants and seedlings, and related products to be sold for adult or
medical use to individual consumers who are at least 21 years of age.
      (4)   CEMETERY. A parcel or tract of land used or intended to be used for
the burial of the human dead including columbaria, mausoleums and mortuaries
when operated within the boundaries of such cemetery.
      (5)   CLINIC. A facility used primarily for the provision of outpatient
medical, dental, chiropractic, therapeutic, optometric or mental health care
and treatment.
      (6)   CLUB OR LODGE. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying regular dues, with the use of premises being restricted to
members and their guests for receptions, social recreation, and other
gatherings.
      (7)   COMMERCIAL CENTER. Commercial sites that consist of primarily
retail establishments with two or more separate businesses managed as a total
entity and sharing common access, circulation, and pedestrian and parking areas
so that a public right-of-way does not need to be used to get from one business
to another.
      (8)   COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE, NURSERY, OR TREE FARM. A use involving the
growing, harvesting, and/or sale of trees, shrubs, decorative plants, or wood
products.
      (9)   COMMUNITY GARDEN. A private or public facility for the cultivation
of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person or
family.
      (10)   CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR YARD. A lot or portion of a lot or parcel
used to store and maintain construction equipment and other materials
customarily required in the building trades by a construction contractor.
      (11)   CONTINUING CARE FACILITY. A residential facility or complex which
provides a variety of senior living choices, from independent living to long-
term care, with a goal of helping residents to age in place.
      (12)   COTTAGE COURTYARD DEVELOPMENT. Cluster of single-family principal
dwellings (three to ten units total), in the form of smaller detached houses,
arranged around a shared courtyard or open space that is typically
perpendicular to the street. The shared courtyard takes the place of individual
rear yards and becomes an important community-enhancing element of this housing
type. Cottage courtyard housing may consist of site-built houses, manufactured
and modular houses, or tiny houses.
   (D)   D:
      (1)   DAYCARE CENTER. A state-licensed facility other than a private
residence that provides for the care of children during only part of a 24-hour
day. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care facilities, and
other similar uses but excludes public and private schools or any facility
offering care of individuals for a full 24-hour period.
      (2)   DAYCARE, FAMILY. A dwelling unit where a resident of the dwelling
is providing care under Minn. Rules 9502 for less than 24 hours at a time for
no more than ten children, of which no more than six children are under school
age.
      (3)   DAYCARE, GROUP FAMILY. A dwelling unit where a resident of the
dwelling is providing care under Minn. Rules 9502 for less than 24 hours at a
time for up to 14 children, of which no more than ten may be school age.
      (4)   DISTILLERY. A facility that produces ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide
of ethyl, sprits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or other distilled
spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof for non-industrial use.
      (5)   DRIVE-THRU ESTABLISHMENT. An accessory use, structure, or portion
of a principal structure where patrons may purchase products or receive service
without having to leave their motor vehicle (and enter a building).
      (6)   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family and multiple-family dwellings,
but not including hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, and mobile homes.
      (7)   DWELLING, FACTORY-BUILT. A dwelling unit which is, wholly or in
substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site.
Factory-built dwellings do not include manufactured or mobile homes.
      (8)   DWELLING UNIT. A residential building or portion thereof that
provides complete living facilities, including bathroom and kitchen facilities,
and is intended for occupancy by one family.
      (9)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A site-built or factory-built
residential structure designed to house a single family on a single lot which
is not attached to any other dwelling unit, excluding an accessory dwelling
unit.
      (10)   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in
width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected, on site, is 320 or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained in it, and which complies with the manufactured
home building code (M.S. § 327.31, Subd. 6).
      (11)   DWELLING, TWINHOME. A residential structure designed to house a
single family on a single lot which is attached by a common wall or walls to an
adjoining dwelling unit or units.
      (12)   DWELLING, TWO- TO FOUR-FAMILY. A single residential structure on a
single lot which is designed for the occupancy of two, three, or four families
living independently of one another.
      (13)   DWELLING, ATTACHED TOWNHOUSE OR ROWHOUSE. A single-family unit
which is located within a larger residential structure containing three or more
units and which is separated from the adjoining dwelling unit(s) by a common
wall. Each dwelling unit may be located on its own individual lot or on a
common lot containing all of the attached units, and each dwelling unit shall
have separate and individual front and rear entrances.
      (14)   DWELLING, APARTMENT BUILDING. A building consisting of five or
more apartment units designed exclusively for occupancy by five or more
families living independently of one another, but sharing hallways and main
entrances and exits.
      (15)   DWELLING, APARTMENT MIXED USE. A building designed for one or more
dwelling units as well as non-residential uses that are permitted in the zoning
district to be located on the ground story, with all dwelling units sharing a
joint entrance from the outside.
      (16)   DWELLING, LIVE/WORK. A dwelling unit used jointly for both
residential and commercial uses.
      (17)   DWELLING WITH RESIDENTIAL SUPPORT SERVICES. A residential building
intended primarily for persons over age 55 which provides regularly scheduled
supportive services to residents.
      (18)   DWELLING, EARTH SHELTERED. A detached dwelling unit constructed so
that 50% or more of the exterior surface is covered or in contact with earth.
Exterior surface includes all walls and roof, but excludes garages and other
accessory buildings. Earth covering on walls is measured from the floor of the
structure's lowest level. Earth covering on the roof must be at least 12 inches
deep to be included in calculations of earth covering. Partially completed
buildings shall not be considered earth sheltered.
   (E)   E:
      (1)   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam
or water distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or disposal
system including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables,
fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and
accessories in conjunction therewith; but not including buildings or
transmission services.
   (F)   F:
      (1)   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, adoption, or guardianship or a group of not more than five unrelated
persons living together on the premises or in a single housekeeping unit, as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel,
club lodge, sorority or fraternity house, as herein described.
      (2)   FUNERAL HOME. An establishment providing services such as preparing
the deceased for burial or cremation and arranging and managing funerals. The
facility may include a chapel for the conduct of funeral services and spaces
for funeral services and informal gatherings.
   (G)   H:
      (1)   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation, profession, or activity, whether
conducted for profit or not for profit, that is carried on by a resident of the
dwelling in a manner that the use is limited in extent and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for residential purposes. An occupation, profession, or
activity shall not be considered a home occupation if the resident is
performing administrative, clerical, or research work in their home for a
licensed entity located elsewhere. A family child care provider or a group
family child care provider shall also not be considered a home occupation.
      (2)   HOSPITAL. An establishment providing physical or mental health
services, inpatient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care
of the sick or injured.
      (3)   HOTEL. Any building containing six or more guest rooms in which
temporary lodging is offered to guests for compensation, and in which access to
and from each room or unit is through interior lobbies, courts, or halls.
Additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and
recreational facilities may also be provided.
   (H)   I:
      (1)   INDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL. Indoor facilities
operated as a business and which are open to the public for a fee that shall
include, but are not limited to, billiard parlors, skating rinks, indoor
swimming pools, bowling alleys, movie theaters, arcades, health clubs,
reception halls, and other similar businesses. Such businesses may also provide
a snack bar, restaurant, retail sales of related items, and other support
facilities.
   (I)   L:
      (1)   LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY. A facility that provides meals, lodging,
and nursing care to two or more individuals due to illness, age, or infirmity.
Long-term care facilities include skilled nursing facilities such as nursing
homes, rest homes, boarding care homes, convalescent care, and other
transitional care facilities.
      (2)   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE MANUFACTURING. A use which involves the
compounding, processing, packaging, wholesaling, or treatment of lower-potency
hemp edible products.
      (3)   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAIL. A licensed establishment where
lower-potency hemp edible products are sold to individual consumers who are at
least 21 years of age.
   (J)   M:
      (1)   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. All uses which include the compounding,
processing, packaging, treatment or assembly of products and material provided
the use will not generate offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust, noise, vibration
or other objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which the use
is located. Odors produced on-site shall not negatively affect other businesses
or properties in the area. Examples include, but are not limited to the
following: food; pharmaceuticals; clothes; furniture (where wood is milled off-
site); hardware; toys; light sheet metal products; mechanical components;
printing; recyclers that process indoors; small vehicle assembly; and computer
software.
      (2)   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. An approved manufactured home park which
has underground utility service to each site and only permits independent
manufactured homes.
      (3)   MARINA, PUBLIC. A sheltered harbor where one to six boats are kept
in the water and where services geared to the needs of recreational boating are
found. The marina may have daily and overnight boat mooring and parking of
vehicles.
      (4)   MARINA, COMMERCIAL. A marina is a sheltered harbor where boats are
kept in the water and where services geared to the needs of recreational
boating are found. The marina may have daily and overnight boat mooring, re-
fueling, winterizing services, winter storage, stores, restaurants, and parking
of vehicles.
      (5)   MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. A structure usually consisting of an aluminum,
steel or plastic frame which is covered with a plastic, fabric, canvas or
similar nonpermanent material and is used to provide for the storage of
vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles or other personal property. The term
"membrane structure" shall also apply to structures commonly known as hoop
houses, canopy-covered carports and tent garages and can be fully or partially
covered but shall not apply to boat lifts and canopies which are placed in
public waters.
      (6)   MOORING FACILITY. A concentrated area intended solely for the
mooring or containment of up to six watercraft or seaplanes by docks, mooring
buoys or other means.
      (7)   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing six or more
guest rooms in which temporary lodging is offered to guests for compensation,
and in which access to and from each room or unit is through an exterior door.
      (8)   MUNICIPAL, COUNTY, STATE, OR FEDERAL ADMINISTRATIVE OR SERVICES
BUILDING. A structure or structures in which municipal, county, state, or
federal administrative offices are located or services are provided.
      (9)   MUNICIPAL SOCIAL, CULTURAL, OR RECREATIONAL FACILITY. An area of
land, water or any building in which social and cultural events, amusement,
recreation or athletic sports are provided for public or semi-public use,
whether temporary or permanent.
   (K)   O:
      (1)   OFFICE. An establishment used primarily for conducting the
predominantly administrative or clerical service affairs of a business,
profession, service, industry or government, or like activity. This use may
include ancillary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee
shop, newspaper or candy stand and child care facilities.
      (2)   OPEN AND OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of personal or business
property for a period greater than 24 hours outside of an enclosed building.
      (3)   OUTDOOR DINING. A specified outdoor area for dining which is
accessory to a principal restaurant or food service establishment use.
      (4)   OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL. Land or outdoor
facilities operated as a business and which are open to the general public for
a fee that shall include, but is not limited to, golf courses, outdoor swimming
pools, amusement parks, and other similar businesses. Such facility may also
provide a snack bar, restaurant, retail sales of related items, and other
support facilities.
   (L)   P:
      (1)   PARK. Area of public land developed and maintained for both active
and passive recreational pursuits, including tot-lots, playgrounds,
neighborhood parks, play fields and special purpose areas.
      (2)   PARKING FACILITY. A land surface or facility providing off-street
vehicular parking spaces with drives and maneuvering lanes so as to provide
access for entrance and exit. Parking facilities may include public garages,
parking ramps, surface parking lots, and other similar uses.
      (3)   PLACE OF WORSHIP. Building(s) or structure(s) which by design,
construction, and/or adaptation are primarily intended for the conducting of
organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
   (M)   R:
      (1)   RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PUBLIC. An indoor or outdoor public place or
facility designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time
activities.
      (2)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis,
is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck,
and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this title, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be synonymous with
the term “travel trailer/travel vehicle”.
      (3)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT. Includes but is not limited to
boats, personal watercraft, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, and
related trailers.
      (4)   RESTAURANT. An establishment, where food and drink are prepared and
served for human consumption, principally within the establishment or for take-
out to be consumed off-premises.
      (5)   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. An in-home residential facility licensed
by the state which provides primarily nonmedical care to individuals who are in
need of personal assistance to manage the activities of daily life or for the
protection of the individual.
      (6)   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. A licensed 24-hour-per-day facility
under the supervision of a mental health professional that provides services
for adults or children with mental illness.
   (N)   S:
      (1)   SCHOOL, COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY/TRADE/BUSINESS. A building used for the
purpose of public or private post-secondary education.
      (2)   SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR SECONDARY. A building used for the purpose of
public or private elementary or secondary education, which meets all the
requirements of compulsory education laws of the State of Minnesota, and not
providing residential accommodations.
      (3)   SCRAP OR SALVAGE STORAGE YARD. Any area, lot, land, parcel,
building or structure, or part thereof, used for the storage, collection,
processing, purchase, sale, salvage or disposal of scrap, waste, reclaimable
material or debris.
      (4)   SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTAL. A dwelling, or portion thereof, that is
used for accommodations or lodging of guests paying a fee or other compensation
for a period of less than 30 consecutive days.
      (5)   SMALL-SCALE SOLAR ENERGY GENERATION SYSTEM. A solar collector or
other device mounted on a building, pole, or rack whose primary purpose is to
harvest energy by transferring solar energy into another form of energy. This
does not include ground-mounted solar systems.
      (6)   SMALL-SCALE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). An electrical
generating facility with 5,000 kW nameplate generating capacity or less that
consists of a wind turbine, feeder line(s), associated controls and may include
a tower.
         (a)   HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine design in which the
rotor shaft is parallel to the ground and the blades are perpendicular to the
ground.
         (b)   HUB. The center of a wind generator rotor, which holds the
blades in place and attaches to the shaft.
         (c)   HUB HEIGHT. The distance measured from natural grade to the
center of the turbine hub.
         (d)   MONOPOLE TOWER. A tower constructed of tapered tubes that fit
together symmetrically and are stacked one section on top of another and bolted
to a concrete foundation without support cables.
         (e)   TOTAL HEIGHT. The highest point above natural grade reached by a
rotor tip or any other part of a wind turbine.
         (f)   VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINE. A type of wind turbine where the
main rotor shaft runs vertically.
         (g)   WIND TURBINE. Any piece of electrical generating equipment that
converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy through the
use of airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
      (7)   SPECIALTY FOOD OR COFFEE SHOP. An establishment whose primary
business is the sale of a single specialty type of food or beverage that is not
considered a complete meal (e.g. candy, coffee, ice cream) for consumption on
or off-premises. The sale of other food, beverages, or merchandise is
incidental to the sale of the specialty food or beverage.
      (8)   STANDALONE STORE, RETAIL OR SERVICE. A detached structure where
goods or services are sold.
      (9)   STORAGE FACILITY, PERSONAL. A building or group of buildings
consisting of individual, self-contained units leased to individuals,
organizations, or businesses for self-service storage of personal property.
      (10)   STUDIO OR GALLERY. An establishment engaged in the sale, loan, or
display of visual works of art.
      (11)   SWIMMING POOLS. A constructed or pre-fabricated in-ground or
above-ground structure over 24 inches deep and containing more than 5,000
gallons of water designed or used for recreational purposes including swimming,
diving and bathing.
   (O)   T:
      (1)   THEATER, DANCE, OR MUSIC PERFORMANCE FACILITY. A facility used for
the production, preparation, and performance of dramatic, dance, musical, or
other live performances.
      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATION STRUCTURE OR TOWER. Any structure that is
designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas, (e.g., monopoles and similar structures).
   (P)   U:
      (1)   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon
is designated, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied, utilized or
maintained and shall include the performance of the activity, as defined by the
performance standards of this chapter.
      (2)   USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to and servicing the principal
use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereof.
      (3)   USE, INTERIM.
         (a)   A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the
occurrence of a particular event or until zoning regulations no longer permit
it.
         (b)   INTERIM USES are permitted in all zones of the city according to
the provisions hereof.
      (4)   USE, CONDITIONAL. A specific type of land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed, but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:
         (a)   Certain conditions, as detailed in zoning ordinance, exist; and
         (b)   The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land
use plan, if one exists.
      (5)   USE, PERMITTED. A land use which is specifically allowed in a
zoning district.
      (6)   USE, PERMITTED WITH STANDARDS. A land use which may be lawfully
established in a particular district or districts, provided certain standards
are met.
      (7)   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished
from subordinate or accessory uses.
      (8)   USE, SUBSTANDARD. Any use which is permitted within the applicable
zoning district, but does not meet the minimum lot area, frontage, setbacks or
other dimensional standards of this chapter.
   (Q)   W:
      (1)   WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITY. An establishment engaged in
the storage and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.
      (2)   WHOLESALE TRADE ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment primarily engaged
in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional
or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or
brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, individuals or
companies.
      (3)   WINERY. A processing facility used for the fermenting and
processing of fruit juice into wine; or the refermenting of still wine into
sparkling wine.
(Ord. 20220120-01, passed 1-20-22; Am. Ord. 20241120-02, passed 11-20-24)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
   
II.   MORATORIUM
TABLE I: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
87-1     - -         Granting a electricity distribution franchise agreement to
                     Northern States Power Company
87-2     - -         Granting a gas distribution franchise agreement to
                     Northern States Power Company
—      3-15-2001   Granting a cable television franchise agreement to
                     Mediacom Minnesota, LLC
02-01    1-17-2002   Transfer of cable television franchise and the assignment
                     of assets and the franchise as collateral
05-05-01 5-19-2005   Amending Ordinance No. 02-01
08-12-01 12-18-2008  Implementing an electric service franchise fee on Northern
                     States Power Company
08-12-02 12-18-2008  Granting an electric franchise to Northern States Power
                     Company
09-02-01 2-19-2009   Granting a gas franchise to Northern States Power Company
09-02-02 2-19-2009   Implementing a gas service franchise fee on Northern
                     States Power Company
                    
 
TABLE II: MORATORIUMS
 
Ord. No.    Date Passed Description
                        Moratorium on the construction, installation and/or
02-02       4-18-2002   expansion of overhead, non-city owned electrical
                        transmission utilities within the city
                        Moratorium on the use and development of buildings and
20191121-01 11-21-2019  lands located within the designated, unincorporated
                        area
20191219-01 12-19-2019  Moratorium on use and development of unincorporated
                        territory
                        Amending moratorium established by Ordinance 20191121-
20200716-01 7-16-2020   01, passed November 21, 2019, by lengthening its
                        duration
                        Moratorium on the commercial manufacturing,
20231019-01 10-19-2023  distributing, and selling of cannabis flower and
                        cannabis products, and the operation of any such
                        cannabis business
                       
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to 1987 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. References Code Section
M.S. References      Code Section
Chapter 13           111.065
14.57—14.69        111.096
65B.45               74.03
Chapter 84           74.07
84.415               151.03.32
84.771               74.02
84.797, Subd. 7      74.02
84.81—84.88        72.04
84.87                72.02
84.87, Subd. 3       72.02
84.872               72.06
84.92, Subd. 8       74.02
88.16—88.22        93.70
Chapter 103B         152.04.12
Chapter 103F         151.03.21,
                     151.03.31
103G.005, Subd. 15   154.01.11
Chapter 103G         151.03.39
103G.245             151.03.32
115.01               151.03.31
115.01(8)            53.01
115.01(22)           154.01.11
115.03, Subd. 5c     152.04.12
115.07               53.01
116.07               91.11
149A.96              97.10
151.72               130.03
161.242              91.02
168.10               91.02
Chapter 168B         91.01
Chapter 169          70.10,
                     74.03
169.01               70.01,
                     91.02
169.011, Subd. 40a   74.02
169.041              91.02,
                     91.04
169.045              74.03
169.045, Subd. 7     74.03
169.121              72.02,
                     72.07
169.69               70.09
169.693              70.09
176.011(9)(5)        30.09
211B.045             151.07.15
216C.06, Subd. 14    151.06.13
237.162              90.10
237.163              90.10
243.166              92.03
243.167              92.03
244.052              96.02
Chapter 253B         96.02
260.185              130.99
272.67               33.01
300.06               90.04
303.06               116.05
307.08               154.01.11
333.01               116.05
325J.01 et seq.      116.07
325J.04, Subd. 2     116.09
Chapter 326B         153.01.32
326B.082             153.01.33
326B.101—326B.16   153.01.31
326B.121, Subd. 2(d) 153.01.31
326B.133, Subd. 1    153.01.31
326B.148             153.01.32
326B.41—326B.49    153.01.21
326B.801—326B.89   153.01.21
327.31, Subd. 6      154.01.12
327C.04              151.05.19
Chapter 329          113.03
Chapter 340A         111.001—
                     111.003
340A.409             111.044,
                     111.048
340A.504, Subd. 3(d) 111.048
340A.509             111.002
340A.802             111.044
342.01               130.03
343.325              92.09
347.50               92.12
364.03               111.023
364.03, Subd. 2      116.05
364.03, Subd. 3      116.05
364.03.2             115.99
364.03.3             115.99
364.06               111.065
364.09               111.065
366.012              152.04.53
412.221, Subd. 7.    54.01
412.231              130.03
412.521              32.01
415.01               152.04.53
Chapter 429          54.02
                     54.04,
                     93.01,
429.101              93.02,
                     93.21,
                     93.43
                     151.01.14,
                     151.03.21,
Chapter 462          151.03.31,
                     152.01.14,
                     152.04.12
462.354(1)           32.02
462.357              151.01.14
462.357, Subd. 1e    151.02.31
462.357, Subd. 6     151.03.26
                     151.01.14,
462.358              152.01.14,
                     152.05.11,
                     152.05.19
463.15—463.26      93.01
463.17               93.20
469.190              117.12
Chapter 505          151.03.28
514.67               93.01
Chapter 515B         152.02.22
Chapter 609          93.03
609.0332             130.03
609.342              92.02
609.343              92.02 
609.344              92.02 
609.345              92.02
609.352              92.02
609.365              92.02
617.23               92.02
617.246              92.02
617.247              92.02
617.293              92.02
Chapter 624          112.02
624.42—624.54      112.02
626.862              10.20
                     
 
REFERENCES TO 1987 CODE
1987 Code Section 2004 Code Section
1987 Code Section 2004 Code Section
201.01            30.01
201.02            30.02
201.03            30.03
201.05            30.05
201.06            30.06
201.07            30.07
202.01            32.05
202.02            32.05
202.03            32.05
202.05            32.05
203.01            32.04
203.02            32.04
203.03            32.04
203.04            32.04
203.05            32.04
203.06            32.04
203.07            32.04
203.08            32.04
203.09            32.04
203.10            32.04
203.11            32.04
203.12            32.04
204.01            32.02
204.02            32.02
204.03            32.02
204.04            32.02
205.01            32.01
205.02            32.01
205.03            32.01
205.04            32.01
205.05            32.01
206.02            34.01
207.01            31.01
207.02            31.01
207.03            31.01
207.04            31.01
208.01            33.01
208.02            33.02
208.03            33.03
208.04            33.04
208.05            33.05
208.06            33.06
401.01            51.01
401.02            51.02
401.03            51.03
401.04            51.04
402.01            52.01—
                  52.07
402.02            51.05
402.03            51.06
402.04            52.08
402.05            51.07
403.01            53.01
403.02            53.20—
                  53.23
403.03            53.24
403.04            53.25—
                  53.36
403.05            53.02
403.06            53.03
403.07            53.04
403.08            53.05
403.09            53.99
501.01            110.01
501.02            110.02
501.03            110.03
501.04            110.04
502.01            114.01
502.02            114.02
502.03            114.03
502.04            114.04
502.05            114.05
502.06            114.06
502.07            114.07
502.08            114.08
502.09            114.09
502.10            114.10
502.11            114.11
                  114.05,
502.12            114.12,
                  114.13,
                  114.99
503.01            112.02
503.02            112.02
503.03            112.02
503.04            112.02
503.05            112.02
506.01            50.01
506.02            50.02
506.03            50.03
506.04            50.04
506.05            50.05
506.06            50.06
506.07            50.07
506.08            50.08
506.09            50.09
506.10            50.10
506.11            50.11
506.12            50.12
506.13            50.10
507.01            112.01
507.02            112.01
507.03            112.01
507.04            112.01
508.01            92.01
508.02            92.02
508.03            92.02
508.04            92.03
508.05            92.04
508.06            92.05
508.07            92.06
508.08            92.07
508.09            92.08
508.10            92.09
508.11            92.09
508.12            92.10
508.13            92.11
508.14            92.12
508.15            92.08
508.16            92.02
508.17            92.13,
                  92.14
508.18            92.99
601.01            111.001,
                  111.03
601.02            111.040
601.03            111.044
601.04            111.045
601.05            111.046,
                  111.065
601.06            111.043
601.07            111.043
601.08            111.047
601.09            111.096
601.25            111.041
601.26            111.042
601.27            111.043
602.01            111.010
602.02            111.011
602.03            111.012
602.04            111.014
602.05            111.014
603.01            111.001
603.02            111.020
603.03            111.021
603.04            111.022
603.06            111.023
603.07            111.024
603.08            111.025
603.09            111.095
701.01            70.01
701.02            70.02
701.03            70.03
701.04            70.04
                  71.01—
701.05            71.06,
                  72.10
701.06            71.07
701.07            70.05
701.08            70.06
701.09            70.07
701.10            71.08
701.11            71.09
701.12            70.08
701.13            71.10,
                  71.11
702.01            72.01
702.02            72.02
702.03            72.03
702.04            72.04
702.05            72.05
702.06            72.06
702.07            72.07
702.08            72.08
702.09            72.08
702.10            72.09
702.11            72.07
702.12            72.10
803.01            130.01
                  
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.       Date Passed Code Section
01-01          1-18-2001   51.04
01-03          6-18-2001   92.06
01-04          8-15-2001   52.08
02-08          5-16-2002   93.03
                           110.20—
02-06          6-27-2002   110.26,
                           110.99
02-11          11-21-2002  110.22
—            - -2003     111.043
                           115.01—
03-03          9-21-03     115.05,
                           115.99
04-01          1-15-04     35.01
04-01          4-15-04     Adopting Ordinance
04-03          4-29-04     93.18
04-11-02       11-18-04    90.23
05-05-01       5-19-05     T.S.O. I
05-11-01       11-17-05    92.01,
                           92.08
05-12-01       12-15-05    35.01
06-02-01       2-16-06     72.02,
                           72.08
06-03-01       3-16-06     94.01—
                           94.06
06-07-01       7-20-06     30.08,
                           30.10
06-07-02       7-20-06     94.02,
                           130.02
07-02-01       2-15-07     35.01
07-06-01       6-21-07     91.01—
                           91.04
08-01-01       1-24-08     35.01
08-02-01       2-6-08      32.02
                           93.37,
08-06-02       6-19-08     93.38,
                           93.40—
                           93.42
08-12-01       12-18-08    T.S.O. I
08-12-02       12-18-08    T.S.O. I
09-01-01       1-15-09     35.01
09-02-01       2-19-09     T.S.O. I
09-02-02       2-19-09     T.S.O. I
                           72.01—
                           72.07,
09-02-03       2-19-09     72.09—
                           72.11,
                           72.99
10-02-01       2-18-10     35.01
10-11-01       11-18-10    54.01—
                           54.05
—            1-20-11     93.03
11-04-01       4-21-11     92.06
                           35.01,
11-05-01       5-19-11     95.01—
                           95.16
                           92.01,
                           92.03,
11-06-01       6-16-11     92.13,
                           92.15,
                           Ch. 92, App.
11-11-01       11-17-11    96.01—
                           96.04
12-01-01       1-19-12     35.01
12-05-01       5-17-12     92.16
13-01-01       1-17-13     35.01
13-03-01       3-21-13     92.17
13-19-01       12-19-13    92.17
                           114.01—
13-19-02       12-19-13    114.13,
                           114.99
                           97.01—
94             11-20-14    97.20,
                           97.99
                           111.001—
                           111.003,
                           111.010—
                           111.012,
                           111.014,
                           111.020—
—            11-20-14    111.025,
                           111.040—
                           111.047,
                           111.065—
                           111.068,
                           111.095—
                           111.100
                           116.01—
20141120-01    11-20-14    116.18,
                           116.99
—            1-6-15      35.01
—            8-20-15     35.01
                           50.02,
—            11-19-15    50.03,
                           50.08—
                           50.10
—            11-19-15    53.05
—            12-17-15    35.01
20160218-04    2-18-16     32.02,
                           32.03
20161117-01    11-17-16    93.16
—            1-3-17      35.01
20170316-01    3-16-17     71.04
20170420-01    4-20-17     53.23
20170720-02    7-20-17     35.01
20180104-01    1-4-18      35.01
20180315-01    3-15-18     70.10
20180419-01    4-19-18     71.12
                           117.01—
20180621-03    6-21-18     117.13,
                           117.99
20180621-04    6-21-18     94.02
                           111.040,
20180719-01    7-19-18     111.045,
                           111.048
—            1-3-19      35.01
20190620-02    6-20-19     35.01
20191121-01    11-21-19    T.S.O. II
20191219-01    12-19-19    T.S.O. II
20200716-01    7-16-20     T.S.O. II
                           114.01,
                           114.04,
20200820-01    8-20-20     114.07,
                           114.11,
                           114.12,
                           114.99
                           114.01-
20201015-01    10-15-20    114.13,
                           114.99
--             1-21-21     35.01
20210415-02    4-15-21     110.26
20210520-01    5-20-21     51.04
20210715-01    7-15-21     97.03,
                           97.07
                           151.01.11-
                           151.01.16,
                           151.01.21,
                           151.01.22,
                           151.01.31-
                           151.01.33,
                           151.01.41-
                           151.01.47,
                           151.01.51-
                           151.01.54,
                           151.02.11,
                           151.02.21-
                           151.02.23,
                           151.02.31-
                           151.02.33,
                           151.02.41,
                           151.03.11-
                           151.03.14,
                           151.03.21-
                           151.03.29,
                           151.03.31-
                           151.03.39,
                           151.04.11,
                           151.04.21-
                           151.04.27,
                           151.04.31-
                           151.04.36,
                           151.04.41,
                           151.04.42,
                           151.04.51-
                           151.04.58,
                           151.04.61-
                           151.04.63,
                           151.05.11-
                           151.05.19,
                           151.05.21,
                           151.05.31-
                           151.05.36,
                           151.05.41,
                           151.05.51-
                           151.05.59,
20220120-01    1-20-22     151.05.61-
                           151.05.67,
                           151.06.11-
                           151.06.19,
                           151.06.21,
                           151.07.11-
                           151.07.17,
                           152.01.11-
                           152.01.14,
                           152.01.21-
                           152.01.23,
                           152.02.11-
                           152.02.13,
                           152.02.21,
                           152.22,
                           152.02.31,
                           152.02.32,
                           152.02.41,
                           152.02.51,
                           152.02.52,
                           152.02.61,
                           152.02.62,
                           152.02.71,
                           152.03.11-
                           152.03.19,
                           152.04.11-
                           152.04.14,
                           152.04.21-
                           152.04.24,
                           152.04.31-
                           152.04.35,
                           152.04.41-
                           152.04.43,
                           152.04.51-
                           152.04.53,
                           152.05.11-
                           152.05.19,
                           153.01.11,
                           153.01.21,
                           153.01.31-
                           153.01.34,
                           154.01.11,
                           154.01.12
20220421-01    4-21-22     151.03.22
20230216-01    2-16-23     151.02.31
20230420-01    4-20-23     151.02.33,
                           154.01.11
20230615-01    6-15-23     151.02.23
20230615-02    6-15-23     92.15
20230817-01    8-17-23     130.03
20231019-01    10-19-23    T.S.O II
20231221-02    12-21-23    151.02.33
20231221-03    12-21-23    30.01
                           151.02.31 -
                           151.02.33,
                           151.04.55,
20240515-01  5-15-24     151.05.11,
                           151.05.52,
                           151.05.63,
                           151.07.16
20241120-01  11-20-24    154.01.11
                           151.02.22,
20241120-02    11-20-24    151.05.37,
                           151.05.38,
                           154.01.12
20241120-03    11-20-24    151.02.41
                           111.003,
20250115-01    1-15-25     111.043,
                           111.047
20250416-01    4-16-25     152.04.21
20250618-01    6-18-25     97.07
                           72.01—
20250820-01    8-20-25     72.11,
                           74.01—
                           74.07
20251015-01    10-15-25    32.01
                          
 
 
