LUVERNE, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 57, Fourth Series, effective 8-28-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
HOME RULE CHARTER
Section
Chapter 1: Name, Form of Government, Boundaries, Powers, and General Provision
   
1.01.   Name
   
1.02.   Form of government
   
1.03.   Boundaries
   
1.04.   Powers
   
1.05.   Wards
   
1.06.   Charter a public act
   
1.07.   Word usage
Chapter 2: The City Council
   
2.01.   Composition and election
   
2.02.   Powers and duties
   
2.03.   Incompatible offices
   
2.04.   Vacancies
   
2.05.   Salaries
   
2.06.   Boards and commissions
   
2.07.    The Mayor
   
2.08.   The Acting Mayor
Chapter 3: The City Administrator
   
3.01.   The office
   
3.02.   Specific powers and duties
   
3.03.   Appointment and removal
Chapter 4: Council Procedure 
   
4.01.   Council meetings
   
4.02.   Rules of procedure and quorum
   
4.03.   Ordinances, resolutions, and motions
   
4.04.   Ordinance adoption, amendment and repeal procedure
   
4.05.   Codification of ordinances
   
4.06.   Resolutions
Chapter 5: Nominations and Elections
   
5.01.   Filing for primary; affidavit of candidacy
   
5.02.   Affidavit of candidacy
   
5.03.   City primary election
   
5.04.   City general election
   
5.05.   Special elections
   
5.06.   Election notice
   
5.07.   Canvas of elections
   
5.08.   Procedure at elections
Chapter 6: Initiative, Referendum, and Recall
   
6.01.   Powers reserved by the people
   
6.02.   Further regulations
   
6.03.   Initiation of measures
   
6.04.   Form of petition and of signature papers
   
6.05.   Filing of petitions and action thereon
   
6.06.   Action of council on petition
   
6.07.   Initiative ballots
   
6.08.   Initiation of charter amendments
   
6.09.   The referendum
   
6.10.   Referendum petitions
   
6.11.   Referendum ballots
   
6.12.   The recall
   
6.13.   Recall petitions
   
6.14.   Filing of petition
   
6.15.   Recall election
   
6.16.   Procedure at recall election
   
6.17.   Form of recall ballot
Chapter 7: Taxation and Finances
   
7.01.   Council to control finances
   
7.02.   Fiscal year
   
7.03.   System of taxation
   
7.04.   Submission of budget
   
7.05.   Capital improvement program
   
7.06.   Council action on budget
   
7.07.   Enforcement of the budget
   
7.08.   Alterations in the budget
   
7.09.   Funds
   
7.10.   City indebtedness
   
7.11.   Anticipation certificates
   
7.12.   Emergency debt certificates
   
7.13.   Bank loans
Chapter 8: Public Improvements and Special Assessments
   
8.01.   Power to make improvements and levy
   
8.02.   Assessments for services
   
8.03.   Local improvements regulations
   
8.04.   Public work; how performed
Chapter 9: Eminent Domain
   
9.01.   Power to acquire property
Chapter 10: Franchises
   
10.01.   Franchises required
   
10.02.   Term
   
10.03.   Public hearing
   
10.04.   Power of regulation reserved
   
10.05.   Renewals or extensions
Chapter 11: Public Ownership and Operation of Utilities
   
11.01.   Acquisition and operation of utilities
   
11.02.   Rates and finances
   
11.03.   Purchase in bulk
   
11.04.   Lease of plant
   
11.05.   Public utility; how sold
Chapter 12: Miscellaneous and Transitory Provisions
   
12.01.   Official publications
   
12.02.   Oath of office
   
12.03.   City officers not to be interested in contracts
   
12.04.   Official bonds
   
12.05.   Sale of real property
   
12.06.   Vacation of streets
   
12.07.   City to succeed to rights and obligations of former city
   
12.08.   Terms of present mayor and council members
   
12.09.   Statutes not affected by charter
   
12.10.   Existing ordinances continued
   
12.11.   Pending condemnations and assessments
   
12.12.   Ordinances to make charter effective
   
12.13.   Purchases and contracts
   
12.14.   Certifications of documents
CHAPTER 1: NAME, FORM OF GOVERNMENT,
BOUNDARIES, POWERS, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1.01. NAME.
   The City of Luverne, in the County of Rock and State of Minnesota (herein
the “City”), shall continue to be a municipal corporation under that name.
SEC. 1.02. FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government established by this Charter is the “Mayor-Council
Plan.”
SEC. 1.03. BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the City are the same as they now are or hereafter may be
established.
SEC. 1.04. POWERS.
   The City shall have all powers which it may now or hereafter be possible for
a municipal corporation in this State to exercise in harmony with the
Constitutions of this State and of the United States. It is the intention of
this Charter to confer upon the City every power which it would have if it were
specifically mentioned. The Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of
the City and the specific mention of particular municipal powers in other
Sections of this Charter does not limit the powers of the City to those so
mentioned.
SEC. 1.05. WARDS.
   The City shall be divided into two wards. Each ward shall be composed of
contiguous territory as regular and compact in form as practical, depending
upon the geography of the area involved and shall
be as nearly equal in population as possible. That portion of the City lying
north of a line running east and west as established by ordinance shall be
termed Ward Number 1, and that portion of the City lying south of said line
shall be termed Ward Number 2. The Council may at any time reapportion the
wards using a statistically verifiable means to estimate population so as to
make the wards as nearly equal in population as practicable, and to adopt such
change by ordinance.
SEC. 1.06. CHARTER A PUBLIC ACT.
   This Charter shall be a public act and need not be pleaded or proved in any
case. It shall take effect thirty days from and after its adoption by the
voters.
SEC. 1.07. WORD USAGE.
   For purposes of this Chapter, words used in the present tense shall include
the future; words in the singular shall include the plural, the plural the
singular; the words in the masculine shall include the feminine, and the
feminine the masculine.
CHAPTER 2: THE CITY COUNCIL
SECTION 2.01. COMPOSITION AND ELECTION.
   The Council shall be composed of a Mayor and four Council Members, all of
whom must be eligible to hold office under the Constitution of this State. Two
Council Members shall be elected from each Ward and the Mayor shall be elected
at-large. Each Council Member shall serve for a term of four years and until
his or her successor is elected and qualifies. The Mayor shall serve for a term
of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualifies. The
Council shall be judges of the election returns.
SEC. 2.02. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Council shall exercise exclusive legislative authority. The Council may
make investigations into the affairs of the City and the conduct of any City
department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. The
Council shall provide for an audit of the City's accounts at least once a year
by the State department in charge of such work or by a certified public
accountant. The Council may at any time provide for an examination or audit of
the accounts of any officer or department of the city and it may cause to be
made any survey or research study of any subject of City concern. The Council
shall fix and determine salaries
to be paid employees and employee benefits. The Council shall appoint a City
Administrator and fix his compensation and benefits. All powers and authority
to determine matters of policy, are vested in the Council unless they are
specifically granted or delegated to some other officer, body or agency.
SEC. 2.03. INCOMPATIBLE OFFICES.
   No member of the Council may hold any paid municipal office or employment
under the City other than that to which elected, and until thirty days after
the expiration of his term as Mayor or Council Member, no former member shall
be appointed to any paid appointive office or employment under the City, which
office or employment was created or the emoluments of which were increased
during his term as a member of the Council.
SEC. 2.04. VACANCIES.
   A vacancy in the Council, whether it be in the office of Mayor or Council
Member, shall be deemed to exist in case of the failure of any person elected
thereto to qualify on or before the date of the second regular meeting of the
new Council, or by reason of the death, resignation, removal from office,
removal from the City, continuous absence from the City for more than three
months, or conviction of a felony of any such person whether before or after
his qualification, or by reason of the failure of any member of the Council
without good cause to perform any of the duties of membership in the Council
for a period of three months. In each such case the Council shall by resolution
declare such vacancy to exist and shall forthwith appoint an eligible person to
fill the same until the next regular municipal election when the office shall
be filled for the unexpired term. In the event aCouncil Member moves his
residence from the ward from which he was elected to the other ward within the
City, no vacancy shall be deemed to exist during the unexpired portion of the
current term, but he should serve to the end of such term as though there had
been no such removal. Nor shall a change in ward boundaries as herein provided
in any way affect the current term of any Council Member. However, a candidate
for election or re-election to the office of Council Member must be a bona fide
resident of the ward from which he seeks election and meet all other
requirements of such candidate.
SEC 2.05. SALARIES.
   The members of the Council shall serve with reasonable compensation. The
Council, by ordinance, may change the annual salary of its members. No
ordinance changing such salaries shall take effect before sixty days following
the publication thereof.
SEC 2.06. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   The Council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish and regulate any
board or commission to advise the Council with respect to any City function or
activity, to investigate any subject of interest to
the City, or to perform quasi-judicial functions. The Council may, by
ordinance, establish and regulate any administrative board or commission, and
by such ordinance specify the powers and duties of such board or commission.
Any board or commission may be abolished by action of the Council similar to
that by which it was established.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
SEC. 2.07. THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council. The Mayor shall
have a vote, as a member of the Council, only in case of a tie, or in cases
where by this Charter or by law an exceptional majority vote of more than 60
percent of the entire Council membership is required to take an action. He
shall exercise all powers and perform all duties conferred and imposed upon him
by this Charter, the ordinances of the City, and the laws of the State. He
shall be recognized as the official head of the City for all ceremonial
purposes, by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process, and by the
Governor for the purpose of martial law. In time of public danger or emergency
he may, with the consent of the Council, take command of the police, maintain
order and enforce the law.
(Source: Ordinance No. 89, Third Series; Effective Date: 9-26-90)
SEC 2.08. THE ACTING MAYOR.
   The Council shall choose from the Council Members, an Acting Mayor, who
shall hold such office at the pleasure of the Council. The Acting Mayor shall
serve as presiding officer in the Mayor's absence and as Mayor in case of the
Mayor's temporary disability or absence from the City. The Acting Mayor, while
serving as presiding officer or performing other duties as Mayor, shall have
full voting privileges as an Council Member.
(Ordinance No. 12, Fourth Series; Effective Date: 4-22-2020)
CHAPTER 3: THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION 3.01. THE OFFICE.
   The City Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer and all
administrative functions of the City, as such are from time to time
specifically defined by the Council, shall be performed by him.
SEC. 3.02. SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Unless specifically modified, revoked, amended or altered by ordinance, the
City Administrator shall have the following specific powers and duties: (1)
supervision over all departments and employees;
(2) he shall appoint, suspend, remove, promote, demote and transfer all
employees of the City to accomplish efficiency and economy, but all in
accordance with laws pertaining thereto; (3) attend Council meetings; (4)
prepare and submit the annual budget; (5) keep minutes of all Council meetings,
or designate another person to perform this function; (6) act in the capacity
of City Clerk as to all matters relating to statutes and other laws; (7)
negotiate and make such purchases as can be accomplished without competitive
bidding and obtain estimate, quotations, sealed bids, or contracts in excess of
such amount; (8) keep the Council advised of the financial condition of the
City and recommend from time to time the adoption of such measures as he may
deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the
community; (9) recommend salaries to be paid City officers and employees; and,
(10) perform other duties specified by this Charter or necessary to carry out
the duties of Chief Administrative Officer.
SEC. 3.03. APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
   The City Administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of training,
experience and administrative qualifications and he need not be a resident of
the City at the time of appointment. The City Administrator shall be appointed
for an indefinite term and may be removed by the Council at any time by an
affirmative vote of the majority of the Council upon specified grounds which
shall be reduced to writing and served upon him at the time of said dismissal
or removal. After receipt of said written notice, the Administrator may demand
a public hearing which shall be held prior to the time his removal or dismissal
shall become effective.
(Source: City Code; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
CHAPTER 4: COUNCIL PROCEDURE
SECTION 4.01. COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   At the first regular meeting in January following a general City election,
the newly elected members of the Council shall assume their duties. Thereafter
the Council shall meet at such times each month as may be prescribed by
ordinance or resolution. The Mayor or any two members of the Council may call
special meetings of the Council. The City Administrator shall forewith give
notice of the special meeting as required by State law and shall cause each
member to be personally contacted with notice of the meeting. If a member
cannot be contacted, a notice of the meeting shall be delivered to his usual
place of residence and, if possible, left with some responsible person. All
meetings of the Council shall be public, and any citizen shall have access to
the minutes and records thereof at all reasonable times, unless the meeting or
portion of a meeting is an executive session as permitted by and under the
terms of State law.
(Source: Ordinance No. 90, Third Series; Effective Date: 9-26-90)
SEC. 4.02. RULES OF PROCEDURE AND QUORUM.
   The Council shall determine it's own rules and order of business. Three
Council Members shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number
may adjourn from time to time. The Council may by rule provide a means by which
a minority may compel the attendance of absent members.
SEC. 4.03. ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND MOTIONS.
   Except as in this Charter otherwise provided, all legislation shall be by
ordinance. The aye and no vote on ordinances, resolutions and motions shall be
recorded unless the vote is unanimous. An affirmative vote of at least three
members of the Council shall be required for the adoption of all ordinances and
resolutions, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
SEC. 4.04. ORDINANCE ADOPTION, AMENDMENT AND REPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Subd. 1. Form and Adoption. The ordaining clause of all ordinances shall be
in the words, “The City of Luverne ordains.” Every ordinance shall be
introduced in writing. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject which
shall be clearly expressed in its title.
   Subd. 2. Signing and Publication. Every ordinance adopted by the Council
shall be signed by the Mayor or by two other members, attested by the City
Administrator and filed and preserved by him. Every ordinance shall be
published once in the official newspaper. However, as to lengthy ordinances, or
ordinances which include charts or maps, the Council may, by unanimous vote,
determine that publication of the title and a summary of an ordinance would
clearly inform the public of the intent and effect of such ordinance, and
direct that only the title and summary be published with a notice that a
printed copy of the ordinance is available for inspection during regular office
hours at the office of the City Administrator and at the City Library. The text
of the summary shall be approved by the Council prior to publication. Such
publication shall be deemed to fulfill all legal requirements for publication
as completely as if the entire ordinance had been published. Proof of
publication shall be attached to and filed with the ordinance. To the extent
and in the manner provided by law an ordinance may incorporate by reference a
statute of Minnesota, a State administrative rule or a regulation, a code, or
ordinance or part thereof without publishing the material referred to in full.
   Subd. 3. Emergency. An emergency ordinance is an ordinance necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare
in which the emergency is defined and declared in a preamble thereto. No
prosecution shall be based upon the provisions of any emergency ordinance until
twenty-four hours after the ordinance has been filed with the City
Administrator and posted in three conspicuous places or until the ordinance has
been once published in the official newspaper, unless the person charged with
violation had actual notice of the passage of the ordinance prior to the act or
omission of which complaint is made.
   Subd. 4. When Effective. An emergency ordinance shall take effect
immediately upon its adoption or at such later date as is fixed in it. Every
other ordinance shall take effect seven days after publication or at such later
date as is fixed therein. Every ordinance adopted by the voters of the City
shall take effect immediately upon its adoption, or at such later time as is
fixed therein.
   Subd. 5. Amendment or Repeal. Every ordinance repealing a previous ordinance
or section or subdivision of a codification shall give the number, if any, and
the title of the ordinance or section or subdivision to be repealed in whole or
in part. No ordinance or section or subdivision shall be amended by reference
to the title above, but such an amending ordinance shall set forth in full each
section or subdivision so amended.
SEC. 4.05. CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The City may revise, rearrange and codify it's ordinances with such
additions and deletions as may be deemed necessary by the Council. Such
ordinance code shall be published in book, pamphlet or continuously revised
loose-leaf form and copies shall be made available by the Council at the office
of the City Administrator for general distribution to the public free or at a
reasonable charge. Distribution in such published form shall be a sufficient
notice of any ordinance provision not previously published.
SEC. 4.06. RESOLUTIONS.
   Every resolution shall be presented in writing unless such form is waived by
the unanimous consent of the Council. All resolutions shall be signed by the
Mayor or two other members of the Council, attested by the City Administrator
and filed and preserved by him. All resolutions take effect immediately upon
adoption or at such later date as is fixed therein.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87; Ordinance No. 12, Fourth
Series; Effective Date: 4-22-2020)
CHAPTER 5: NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
SECTION 5.01. FILING FOR PRIMARY; AFFIDAVIT OF CANDIDACY.
   Any individual who is eligible and desires to become a candidate for either
the office of Mayor or Council Member shall file an affidavit for candidacy
with the City Administrator. Filing for City primary shall be concurrent with
the filing dates for state-elected offices. In addition, the City Administrator
shall also accept an application signed by not less than five voters and filed
on behalf of an eligible voter in the City whom they desire to be a candidate
for a specified office, if service of a copy of the application has been made
upon the candidate and proof of service is endorsed upon the application being
filed. All affidavits of candidacy or applications must be filed not later than
5:00 o'clock P. M. on the day that filings close. Any candidate may withdraw
from the election by filing an affidavit of withdrawal with the City
Administrator by 5:00 o'clock P. M. on the second day after the last day for
filing affidavits of candidacy or applications.
(Source: Ordinance No. 315, Third Series; Effective Date: 9-28-10)
SEC. 5.02. AFFIDAVIT OF CANDIDACY.
   An affidavit of candidacy or application shall state the name of the office
sought, shall state that the candidate is an eligible voter, has no other
affidavit on file as a candidate for any office at the same primary or next
ensuing general City election; is, or will be on assuming the office, twenty-
one years of age, will have maintained residence in the City if seeking the
office of Mayor or in the ward if seeking the office of Council Member, for
thirty days before the general City election, and include a statement that the
candidate's name, as written on the affidavit for candidacy or application is
as the candidate's true name or the name by which the candidate is commonly and
generally known in the community.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
SEC. 5.03. CITY PRIMARY ELECTION.
   The City primary election shall be held in conjunction with the State of
Minnesota's primary election at such place or places as the Council may
designate. The City Administrator shall place upon the City primary election
ballot without party designation, the names of individuals whose candidacy has
been filed. The two candidates receiving the highest number of votes for any
single office shall be placed on the City general election ballot as nominees
for that office. When no more than two individuals file for nomination for any
single office, their name shall not be placed upon the City primary election
ballot but shall be placed upon the City general election ballot as the
nominees for that office.
(Source: Ordinance No. 313, Third Series; Effective Date: 6-7-10)
SEC. 5.04. CITY GENERAL ELECTION.
   The City general election shall be held in conjunction with the State of
Minnesota's general election at such place or places as the Council may
designate.
(Source: Ordinance No. 313, Third Series; Effective Date: 6-7-10)
SEC. 5.05. SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   The Council may by resolution order a special election and provide all means
for holding it. The procedure at such election shall conform as nearly as
possible to that prescribed for other municipal elections.
SEC. 5.06. ELECTION NOTICE.
   The City Administrator shall give at least two weeks previous notice of the
time and place of holding all elections and of the officers to be elected, or
the issue to be decided, by posting in at least one public place in each voting
precinct and by publication at least once in the official newspaper, but
failure to give such notice shall not invalidate such election.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
SEC. 5.07. CANVAS OF ELECTIONS.
   The Council shall meet and canvass the election returns as provided by law
after any election, and shall make full declaration of the results as soon as
possible, and file a statement thereof with the City Administrator. This
statement shall include: (a) the total number of good ballots cast; (b) the
total number of spoiled or defective ballots; (c) the vote for each candidate,
with an indication of those who were elected, or the result of any issue
decided; (d) a true copy of the ballots used; (e) the names of the judges and
clerks of election; and (f) such other information as may seem pertinent. The
City Administrator shall forthwith notify all persons elected of their
election.
(Source: Ordinance No. 315, Third Series; Effective Date: 9-28-10)
SEC. 5.08. PROCEDURE AT ELECTIONS.
   Subject to the provisions of this Charter and applicable State laws, the
Council may by ordinance further regulate the conduct of municipal election.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter or in ordinances adopted pursuant
thereto, the general laws of the State of Minnesota pertaining to elections
shall apply to municipal elections.
(Ordinance No. 12, Fourth Series; Effective Date: 4-22-2020)
CHAPTER 6: INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
SECTION 6.01. POWERS RESERVED BY THE PEOPLE.
   The people of the City reserve to themselves the power, in accordance with
the provisions of this Charter, to initiate and adopt any ordinance, except an
ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, to require such
an ordinance when passed by the Council to be referred to the registered voters
for approval or disapproval, and to recall elected public officials. These
powers shall be called the initiative, the referendum, and the recall,
respectively.
SEC. 6.02. FURTHER REGULATIONS.
   The Council may provide by ordinance such further regulations for the
initiative, referendum, and recall, not inconsistent with this Charter, as it
deems necessary.
   Initiative
SEC. 6.03. INITIATION OF MEASURES.
   Any five registered voters may form themselves into a committee for the
initiation of any ordinance except as provided in Section 6.01. Before
circulating any petition they shall file a certified copy of their proposed
ordinance with the City Administrator together with their names and addresses
as members of such committee. They shall also attach a verified copy of the
proposed ordinance to each of the signature papers herein described, together
with their names and addresses as sponsors therefor.
SEC. 6.04. FORM OF PETITION AND OF SIGNATURE PAPERS.
   The petition for the adoption of any ordinances shall consist of the
ordinance, together with all signature papers and affidavits thereto attached.
Such petition shall not be complete unless signed by fifty registered voters.
All the signatures need not be on one signature paper, but the circulator of
every such paper shall make an affidavit that each signature appended to the
paper is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Each
signature paper shall be in substantially the following form:
   Initiative Petition
proposing an ordinance to
                                                                                               
(stating the purpose of the ordinance), a copy of which ordinance is hereto
attached. This ordinance is sponsored by the following committee of registered
voters:
Name:                              Address:
1.
                                                                                                                         
2.
                                                                                                                         
3.
                                                                                                                         
4.
                                                                                                                         
5.
                                                                                                                         
The undersigned registered voters understanding the terms and the nature of the
ordinance hereto attached, petition the Council for it's adoption, or, in lieu
thereof, for it's submission to the registered voters for their approval.
1.
                                                                                                                         
2.
                                                                                                                         
3.
                                                                                                                         
   At the end of the list of signatures shall be appended the affidavit of the
circulator mentioned above.
SEC. 6.05. FILING OF PETITIONS AND ACTION THEREON.
   All the signature papers shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator as one instrument. Within five days after the filing of the
petition, the City Administrator shall ascertain by examination the number of
registered voters whose signatures are appended thereto and whether this number
is at least fifty. If he finds the petition insufficient or irregular, he shall
at once notify one or more of the committee of sponsors of that fact,
certifying the reasons for his findings. The committee shall then be given 30
days in which to file additional signature papers and to correct the petition
in all other particulars. If at the end of that period the petition is found to
be still insufficient or irregular, the Administrator shall file it in his
office and shall notify each member of the committee of that fact. The final
finding of the insufficiency or irregularity of a petition shall not prejudice
the filing of a new petition for the same purpose, nor shall it prevent the
Council from referring the ordinance to the registered voters at the next
regular or any special election at its option.
SEC. 6.06. ACTION OF COUNCIL ON PETITION.
   When the petition is found to be sufficient, the City Administrator shall so
certify to the Council at its next meeting, stating the number of petitioners
and the percentage of the total number of voters which they constitute, and the
Council shall at once read the ordinance and refer it to an appropriate
committee, which may be a committee of the whole. The Council shall thereupon
provide for public hearings upon the ordinance, after the holding of which the
ordinance shall be finally acted upon by the Council not later than 65 days
after the date upon which it was submitted to the Council by the City
Administrator. If the Council fails to pass the proposed ordinance, or passes
it in a form different from that set forth in the petition and unsatisfactory
to the petitioners, the proposed ordinance shall be submitted by the Council to
the vote of the registered voters at the next election; but if the number of
signers of the petition is at least 200, the Council shall call a special
election upon the measure. Such special elections shall be held not less than
30 nor more than 45 days from the date of final action on the ordinance by the
Council or after the expiration of 65 days from the date of submissions to the
Council when there has been no final action; but if a regular election is to
occur within three months, the Council may submit the ordinance at that
election. If the Council passes the proposed ordinance with amendments and at
least
four-fifths of the committee of petitioners does not express their
dissatisfaction with such amended form by a statement filed with the City
Administrator within 10 days of the adoption thereof by the Council, the
ordinance need not be submitted to the registered voters.
SEC. 6.07. INITIATIVE BALLOTS.
   The ballots used when voting upon any such proposed ordinance shall state
the substance of the ordinance and shall give the voters the opportunity to
vote either “yes” or “no” on the question of adoption. If a majority of the
registered voters voting on any such ordinance vote in favor of it, it shall
thereupon become an ordinance of the City. Any number of proposed ordinances
may be voted upon at the same election but the voter shall be allowed to vote
for or against each separately. In case of inconsistency between two initiated
ordinances approved at one election, the one approved by the higher percentage
of registered voters voting on the question shall prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.
SEC. 6.08. INITIATION OF CHARTER AMENDMENTS.
    Nothing in this Charter shall be construed as in any way affecting the
right of the registered voters under the Constitution and statutes of Minnesota
to propose amendments to this Charter.
   Referendum
SEC. 6.09. THE REFERENDUM.
   If prior to the date when an ordinance takes effect a petition is signed by
at least 100 qualified registered voters of the City, if filed with the City
Administrator requesting that any such ordinance be repealed or be submitted to
a vote of the registered voters, the ordinance shall thereby be prevented from
going into operation. The Council shall thereupon reconsider the ordinance at
it's next regular meeting, and either repeal it or by aye and no vote reaffirm
it's adherence to the ordinance as passed. In the latter case the Council shall
immediately order a special election to be held thereon, or submit the
ordinance at the next election, pending which the ordinance shall remain
suspended. If a majority of the registered voters voting thereon is opposed to
the ordinance, it shall not become effective; but if a majority of the
registered voters voting thereon favors the ordinance, it shall go into effect
immediately or on the date therein specified.
SEC. 6.10. REFERENDUM PETITIONS.
   The requirements laid down in Sections 6.03 and 6.04 above as to the
formation of committees for the initiation of ordinances and as to the form of
petitions and signature papers shall apply to the
referendum as far as possible, but with such verbal changes as may be
necessary. A referendum petition shall read as follows:
   Referendum Petition
proposing the repeal of an ordinance to (stating the purpose of the ordinance),
a copy of which ordinance is hereto attached. The proposed repeal is sponsored
by the following committee of registered voters:
Name:                              Address:
1.
                                                                                                                         
2.
                                                                                                                         
3.
                                                                                                                         
4.
                                                                                                                         
5.
                                                                                                                         
The undersigned petitioners understanding the nature of the ordinance hereto
attached and believing it to be detrimental to the welfare of the City,
petition the Council for it's submission to a vote of the registered voters for
their approval or disapproval.
Name:                              Address:
1.
                                                                                                                         
2.
                                                                                                             
3.
                                                                                                                         
SEC. 6.11. REFERENDUM BALLOTS.
   The ballots used in any referendum election shall conform to the rules laid
down in Section 6.07 of this Charter for initiative ballots.
   Recall
SEC. 6.12. THE RECALL.
   Any five registered voters may form themselves into a committee for the
purpose of bringing about the recall of any elected officer of the City. The
committee shall certify to the City Administrator the name of the officer whose
removal is sought, a statement of the grounds for removal in not more than 250
words and their intention to bring about his recall. A copy of this certificate
shall be attached to each signature paper and no signature paper shall be put
into circulation previous to such certification.
SEC. 6.13. RECALL PETITIONS.
   The petition for the recall of any official shall consist of a certificate
identical with that filed with the City Administrator together with all the
signature papers and affidavits thereto attached. All the signatures need not
be on one signature paper, but the circulator of every paper shall make an
affidavit that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of
the person whose name it purports to be. Each signature paper shall be in
substantially the following form:
   Recall Petition
proposing the recall of                                          from his
office as                                       which recall is sought for the
reasons set forth in the attached certificate. This movement is sponsored by
the following committee of registered voters:
Name:                              Address:
1.
                                                                                                                         
2.
                                                                                                                         
3.
                                                                                                                         
4.
                                                                                                                         
5.
                                                                                                                         
The undersigned registered voters understanding the nature of the charges
against the officer herein sought to be recalled, desire the holding of a
recall election for that purpose.
Name:                              Address:
1.
                                                                                                                         
2.
                                                                                                                         
3.
                                                                                                                         
At the end of the list of signatures shall be appended the affidavit of the
circulator.
SEC. 6.14. FILING OF PETITION.
   Within 30 days after the filing of the original certificate, the committee
shall file the completed petition in the office of the City Administrator. The
City Administrator shall examine the petition within the next five days, and if
he finds it irregular in any way, or finds that the number of signers is less
than 500, he shall so notify one or more members of the committee. The
committee shall then be given ten days in which to file additional signature
papers and to correct the petition in all other respects, but they may not
change the statement of the grounds upon which the recall is sought. If at the
end of that time
the City Administrator finds the petition still insufficient or irregular, he
shall notify all the members of the committee to that effect and shall file the
petition in his office. No further action shall be taken thereon.
SEC 6.15. RECALL ELECTION.
   If a petition or amended petition is found sufficient, the City
Administrator shall transmit it to the Council without delay, and shall also
officially notify the person sought to be recalled of the sufficiency of the
petition and of the pending action. the Council shall at its next meeting, by
resolution, provide for the holding of a special election not less than 45, nor
more than 60 days, after such meeting, but if any other election is to occur
within 60 days after such meeting, the Council may in its discretion provide
for the holding of the recall election at that time.
SEC. 6.16. PROCEDURE AT RECALL ELECTION.
   The City Administrator shall include with the published or posted notice of
the election the statement of the grounds for the recall and also, in not more
than 500 words, the answer of the officer concerned in justification of his
course in office. Candidates to succeed the officer to be recalled shall be
nominated in the usual way, and the election shall be conducted as far as
possible, in accordance with the usual procedure in municipal elections.
SEC. 6.17. FORM OF RECALL BALLOT.
    Unless the officer whose removal is sought resigns within ten days after
the receipt by the Council of the completed recall petition, the form of the
ballot at such election shall be as near as may be:
“Shall                                               be recalled?” the name of
the officer whose recall is sought being inserted in the blank, and the
registered voters shall be permitted to vote separately “yes” or “no” upon this
question. The ballot shall also contain the names of the candidates to be voted
upon to fill the vacancy, in case the recall is successful, under the caption:
“Candidates to fill the place of                , if recalled”; but the officer
whose recall is sought shall not himself be a candidate upon such ballot. If a
majority of those voting on the question of recall vote in favor of recall, the
official shall be thereby removed from office, and the candidate who receives
the highest number of votes for his place shall be elected thereto for the
remainder of the unexpired term. If the officer sought to be recalled resigns
within ten days after the receipt by the Council of the completed recall
petition, the form of ballot at the election shall be the same, as nearly as
possible, as the form in use at a regular election.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
CHAPTER 7: TAXATION AND FINANCES
SECTION 7.01. COUNCIL TO CONTROL FINANCES.
   The Council shall have full authority over the financial affairs of the
City. It shall provide for the collection of all revenues and other assets, the
auditing and settlement of accounts, and the safekeeping and disbursement of
public moneys.
SEC. 7.02. FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City shall be the calendar year.
SEC. 7.03. SYSTEM OF TAXATION.
   Subject to the State Constitution, and except as forbidden by it or by State
law, the Council shall have full power to provide by ordinance for a system of
local taxation. This authority includes the power by ordinance to assess, levy,
and collect taxes on all subjects or objects of taxation except as limited or
prohibited by the State Constitution, by this Charter or by laws imposing
restrictions upon the City irrespective of Charter provisions.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
SEC. 7.04. SUBMISSION OF BUDGET.
   Annually the City Administrator shall submit to the Council his recommended
budget as directed by a budget calendar to be established by the Council which
meets the requirements of State law or, in the absence thereof, by September 1.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for all City funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or
Charter, shall contain such information and be in such form as the City
Administrator deems desirable or the Council may require. It shall include a
summary and show in detail all estimated income and all proposed expenditures,
including debt service and comparative figures for the current fiscal year,
actual and estimated, and the preceding fiscal year. In addition to showing
proposed expenditures for current operations, it shall show proposed capital
expenditures to be made during ensuing years and the proposed method of
financing each such capital expenditure. For each utility operated by the City,
the budget shall show anticipated net surplus or deficit and the proposed
method of it's disposition. The total proposed operating budget to be provided
from the property tax shall not exceed the amounts authorized by law and this
Charter.
(Source: Ordinance No. 92, Third Series; Effective Date: 9-26-90)
SEC. 7.05. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
    Prior to submitting the annual budget, the City Administrator shall prepare
and submit to the Council a recommended five-year capital improvement program.
The capital improvement program shall include a list of all capital
improvements proposed to be undertaken during the next five fiscal years, with
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements;
cost estimate, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such
improvement; and for major improvements the estimated annual cost of operating
and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. This information
shall be revised and extended each year for capital improvements still pending
or in process. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the capital
improvement program and adopt it with or without amendment prior to the
adoption of the annual budget.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
SEC. 7.06. COUNCIL ACTION ON BUDGET.
   The budget shall be considered by the Council in accordance with its budget
calendar but not later than at the first regular monthly meeting of the Council
in September and at subsequent meetings until a budget is adopted for the
ensuing year. The meetings shall be so conducted as to give interested citizens
a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The Council may revise the proposed
budget but no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized
expenditures to an amount greater than the estimated fund balances. The Council
shall hold a public hearing on the budget and proposed tax levy prior to
adoption by resolution. The budget resolution shall set forth the total for
each budgeted fund and each department with such segregation as to objects and
purposes of expenditures as the Council deems necessary for purposes of budget
control. The Council shall also adopt a resolution levying the amount of taxes
provided in the budget and the City Administrator shall certify the tax
resolution to the County Auditor in accordance with law. Adoption of the budget
resolution shall constitute appropriations at the beginning of the fiscal year
of the sums fixed in the resolution for the several purposes named.
Appropriations for capital projects may be continuing appropriations extending
into the next fiscal year. The budget resolution may be supported by further
background information detailing the particulars of each line item budget
appropriations and shall serve only as a guide for the internal financial
budget control of the City.
SEC. 7.07. ENFORCEMENT OF THE BUDGET.
   The City Administrator shall enforce strictly the provisions of the budget
resolution. He shall not authorize any payment or the incurring of any
obligation by the City unless an appropriation has been made for the same and
there is a sufficient unexpended balance left after deducting the total past
expenditures and encumbrances against the appropriation. No officer or employee
of the City shall place any order or make any purchase for a purpose not
authorized in the budget resolution. Any obligation incurred by any person for
any purpose not authorized in the budget resolution or for any amount exceeding
an appropriation shall be a personal obligation upon the person incurring the
obligation. No check shall be issued or transfer made to any account other than
one owned by the City until the claim
to which it relates has been supported by an itemized bill, payroll, or time-
sheet or other document approved and signed by the responsible City officer who
vouches for its correctness and reasonableness.
(Source: Ordinance No. 92, Third Series; Effective Date: 9-26-90)
SEC. 7.08. ALTERATIONS IN THE BUDGET.
   After the budget resolution has been adopted, the Council shall not increase
the appropriations beyond the estimated revenue sources except to the extent
that such sources exceed the estimate. At any time the Council may, be
resolution approved by a majority of its members, reduce the sums appropriated
for any purpose by the budget resolution, or authorize the transfer of sums
from unencumbered balances of appropriations in the budget resolution to other
purposes.
SEC. 7.09. FUNDS.
   There shall be maintained in the City Treasury a general fund and such other
funds as may be required by statute, ordinance or resolution. The Council may,
by ordinance or resolution, make inter-fund loans, except from trust and agency
funds, as it may deem necessary and appropriate.
SEC. 7.10. CITY INDEBTEDNESS.
   Except as provided in Sections 7.11 and 7.12, no obligations shall be issued
to pay current expenses, but the Council may issue and sell obligations for any
other municipal purpose in accordance with law and within the limitations
prescribed by law. Except in the case of obligations for which an election is
not required by this Charter or by law, no such obligations shall be issued and
sold without the approval of the majority of the voters voting on the questions
at a general or special election.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
SEC. 7.11. ANTICIPATION CERTIFICATES.
   At any time after January 1, the Council may issue certificates of
indebtedness in anticipation of State and Federal aids and the collection of
taxes levied the previous year for any fund and not yet collected. The total
amount of certificates issued against any fund for any year together with
interest thereon until maturity shall not exceed the total of State and Federal
aids and current taxes due to the fund and uncollected at the time of issuance.
Such certificates shall be issued on such terms and conditions as the Council
may determine, but they shall become due not later than the earlier of the
estimated date of collection of said revenues or 18 months after the date of
issuance. The proceeds of the tax levied and such State or Federal aids as the
governing body may have allocated for the fund against which tax anticipation
certificates are issued and the full faith and credit of the City shall be
irrevocably pledged for the redemption of the certificates.
(Source: Ordinance No. 92, Third Series: Effective Date: 9-26-90)
SEC. 7.12. EMERGENCY DEBT CERTIFICATES.
   If in any year the receipts from taxes or other sources should from some
unforeseen cause become insufficient for the ordinary expenses of the City, or
if any calamity or other public emergency necessitates the making of
extraordinary expenditures, the Council may by ordinance issue on such terms
and in such manner as the Council determines emergency debt certificates to run
not to exceed three years. A tax sufficient to pay principal and interest on
such certificates with the margin required by law shall be levied as required
by law. The ordinance authorizing an issue of such emergency debt certificates
shall state the nature of the emergency and be approved by a unanimous vote of
the Council. It may be passed as an emergency ordinance.
SEC. 7.13. BANK LOANS.
   Whenever the Council, by resolution, deems it necessary and advantageous, it
may borrow money from any bank for the purpose of financing any authorized
capital improvement or other purpose as allowed by this Charter or by law. Such
loans shall be payable within a maximum period of ten (10) years and shall be
issued on such terms and in such manner as the Council may determine. If the
amount of the obligations to be issued exceeds twenty-five hundredths of one
percent (0.25%) of the assessor's latest gross market value, as finally
equalized, of all taxable property within the City, excluding money and
credits, they shall not be issued for at least ten days after publication in
the official newspaper of a Council resolution determining to issue them; and
if before the end of that time, a petition asking for an election on the
proposition signed by 100 registered voters is filed with the City
Administrator, such obligations shall not be issued until the proposition for
their issuance has been approved by a majority of the votes cast on the
question at a regular or special election. A tax levy shall be made for the
payment of the principal and interest on such obligations as in the case of
bonds as prescribed by law. In addition, the City may borrow money in
accordance with the provisions of this section from sources other than banks.
(Source: Ordinance No. 64, Third Series; Effective Date: 4-11-89)
CHAPTER 8: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
SECTION. 8.01. POWER TO MAKE IMPROVEMENTS AND LEVY ASSESSMENTS.
   The City shall have the power to make any and every type of public
improvement not forbidden by the laws of this State and to levy special
assessments to pay all or any part of the cost of such improvements as are of a
local character. The amounts assessed to benefited property to pay for such
local improvements may equal the cost of the improvement, including all costs
and expenses connected therewith, with interest, until paid, but shall in no
case exceed the benefits to the property.
SEC. 8.02. ASSESSMENTS FOR SERVICES.
   The Council may provide by ordinance that the cost of sprinkling, snow or
rubbish removal, or of any other service to streets, sidewalks, or other public
property, or the costs of any services to other property undertaken by the City
may be assessed against the property benefited and collected in like manner as
are special assessments.
SEC. 8.03 LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS REGULATIONS.
   After this Charter takes effect local improvements commenced prior thereto
shall be completed and assessments may be levied and securities issued for the
financing thereof as prescribed by the law (or Charter provisions) applicable
thereto. The Council may prepare and adopt a comprehensive ordinance
prescribing the procedure which shall be followed thereafter in making all
local improvements and levying assessments therefor. The Council may elect to
use State law or the local improvement ordinance for the purpose of providing
local improvements and assessments thereof.
SEC. 8.04. PUBLIC WORK; HOW PERFORMED.
    Public works, including all local improvements, may be constructed,
extended, repaired, and maintained either directly by day labor or by contract.
The City shall require contractors to give bonds for the protection of the City
and all persons furnishing labor and materials pursuant to the laws of the
State.
CHAPTER 9: EMINENT DOMAIN
SECTION 9.01. POWER TO ACQUIRE PROPERTY.
   The City may acquire, by purchase, gift, devise, or condemnation, any
property corporeal or incorporeal, either within or without its corporate
boundaries, which may be needed by the City for any public use or purpose.
Easements for slopes, fills, sewers, building lines, poles, wires, pipes, and
conduits for water, gas, heat, and power or for any other public use, may be
acquired by gift, devise, purchase, or condemnation in the manner provided by
law. All such property acquisitions, including condemnation, shall be made
under provisions of State law or other applicable law or regulation.
CHAPTER 10: FRANCHISES
SECTION 10.01. FRANCHISES REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, firm, or corporation shall
place or maintain any permanent or semipermanent fixtures in, over, upon, or
under any street or public place for the purpose of operating a public utility
or for any other purpose, without a franchise therefor from the City. A
franchise shall be granted only or ordinance, which shall not be an emergency
ordinance. Every ordinance granting a franchise shall contain all the terms and
conditions of the franchise. The grantee shall bear the costs of publication of
the franchise ordinance and shall make a sufficient deposit with the City
Administrator to guarantee publication before the deposit with the City
Administrator to guarantee publication before the ordinance is passed.
SEC. 10.02. TERM.
   No exclusive or perpetual franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise for
a term exceeding twenty years shall be effective until approved by a majority
of the registered voters voting thereon.
SEC. 10.03. PUBLIC HEARING.
   Before any franchise ordinance is adopted or any rates, fares, or prices to
be charged by a public utility are fixed by the Council, the Council shall hold
a public hearing on the matter. Notice of such hearing shall be published at
least once in the official newspaper not less than ten days prior to the date
of the hearing.
SEC. 10.04. POWER OF REGULATION RESERVED.
   Subject to any applicable law the Council may by ordinance reasonably
regulate and control the exercise of any franchise, including the maximum
rates, fares, or prices to be charged by the grantee. No franchise value shall
be included in the valuation of the grantee's property in regulating utility
rates, fares, or prices under any applicable law, ordinance, or regulation or
in proceedings for municipal acquisition of the grantee's property by purchase
or eminent domain.
SEC. 10.05. RENEWALS OR EXTENSIONS.
   Every renewal or modification of a franchise, including an existing
franchise, shall be subject to the same limitations and shall be granted in the
same manner as a new franchise.
CHAPTER 11: PUBLIC OWNERSHIP AND OPERATION OF UTILITIES
SECTION 11.01. ACQUISITION AND OPERATION OF UTILITIES.
   The City may own and operate any gas, water, heat, power, light, telephone
or other public utility for supplying its own needs for utility service or for
supplying utility service to private consumers or both. It may construct all
facilities reasonably needed for that purpose and may acquire any existing
utility properties so needed; but no proceedings to acquire any such public
utility shall be consummated unless the City has the money in the treasury to
pay for acquisition or has made provision for paying for the property proposed
to be acquired. The operation of all public utilities owned by the City shall
be under the supervision of the Council.
SEC. 11.02. RATES AND FINANCES.
   Upon recommendations made by the City Administrator or upon its own motion,
the Council may fix rates, fares and prices, for municipal utilities but such
rates, fares and prices shall be just and reasonable. In like manner the
Council may prescribe the time and manner in which payments for all such
service shall be made, and may make such other regulations as may be necessary,
and prescribed penalties for violation of such regulations.
SEC. 11.03. PURCHASE IN BULK.
   The Council may, in lieu of providing for the local production of gas,
electricity, water, and other utilities, purchase the same in bulk and resell
them to local consumers at such rates as it may fix.
SEC. 11.04. LEASE OF PLANT.
   The Council may, if the public interests will be served thereby, contract
with any responsible person, co-partnership, or corporation, for the operation
of any utility owned by the City, upon such rentals and conditions as it may
deem necessary; but such contract shall be embodied in and let only by an
ordinance approved by unanimous vote of the Council and subject to popular
referendum. Such ordinance shall not be an emergency ordinance. In no case
shall such contract be for a longer term than ten years.
SEC. 11.05. PUBLIC UTILITY; HOW SOLD.
   No public utility owned by the City shall be sold or otherwise disposed of
by the City unless the full terms of the proposition of sale or other
disposition are embodied in an ordinance approved by a majority
of the registered voters voting thereon at a general or special election. In
the case of a water works or light plant, any sale, lease, or abandonment shall
be subject, in addition, to the requirements of State law.
CHAPTER 12: MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
SECTION 12.01. OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.
   The Council shall annually designate a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the City as its official newspaper in which shall be published
ordinances and other matters required by law to be so published as well as such
other matters as the Council may deem it in the public interest to have
published in this manner.
SEC. 12.02. OATH OF OFFICE.
    Every officer of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, take and subscribe an oath of office in substantially the following
form: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) to support the constitution of the
United States and of this State and to discharge faithfully the duties
devolving upon me as (Mayor, Council Member, City Administrator, etc.) of the
City of Luverne to the best of my judgment and ability.”
SEC. 12.03. CITY OFFICERS NOT TO BE INTERESTED IN CONTRACTS.
   Except as otherwise permitted by law, no officer of the City who is
authorized to take part in any manner in any contract with the City shall
voluntarily have a personal financial interest in such contract or personally
benefit financially therefrom.
SEC. 12.04. OFFICIAL BONDS.
   The City Administrator, and such other officers or employees of the City as
may be provided for by ordinance, shall each before entering upon the duties of
his respective office or employment, give a corporate surety bond to the City
in such form and in such amount as may be fixed by the Council as security for
the faithful performance of his official duties and the safekeeping of the
public funds. Such bonds may be either individual or blanket bonds in the
discretion of the Council. They shall be approved by the City Council, and
approved as to form by the City Attorney, and filed with the City
Administrator. The provisions of the laws of the State relating to official
bonds not inconsistent with this Chapter shall be complied with. The premiums
on such bonds shall be paid by the City.
SEC. 12.05. SALE OF REAL PROPERTY.
   The sale or conveyance of any interest in real property of the City may be
negotiated and a purchase agreement entered into by any practicable means,
including a public auction or private sale, subject to approval by the Council
in the form of adoption of an ordinance. The proceeds of any sale of such
property shall be used as far as possible to retire any outstanding
indebtedness incurred by the City in the purchase, construction, or improvement
of this or other property used for the same public purpose. If there is no such
outstanding indebtedness, the Council may by ordinance or resolution designate
some other public use for the proceeds.
SEC. 12.06. VACATION OF STREETS.
   The Council may by resolution approved by unanimous vote, vacate any street,
alley, public grounds, public way or any part thereof within the City. Such
vacation may be made only after published notice and an opportunity has been
given to affected property owners and the public to be heard, and upon such
further terms and by such procedure as the Council by ordinance may prescribe.
A notice of completion of such proceedings shall be filed with the proper
County officers in accordance with law.
SEC. 12.07. CITY TO SUCCEED TO RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF FORMER CITY.
   The City shall succeed to all the property, rights, and privileges, and
shall be subject to all the legal obligations of the City under the former
charter.
SEC. 12.08. TERMS OF PRESENT MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The present Mayor and Council Members shall, upon adoption of this Charter,
continue to serve their current terms.
SEC. 12.09. STATUTES NOT AFFECTED BY CHARTER.
   All general laws and statutes of the State applicable to all cities
operating under home rule charters, or applicable to cities of the same class
as the City operating under home rule charters, and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Charter, shall apply to the City, and shall be construed as
supplementary to the provisions of this Charter.
SEC. 12.10. EXISTING ORDINANCES CONTINUED.
   All ordinances and regulations of the City in force when this Charter takes
effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, are hereby continued
in full force and effect until amended or repealed.
SEC. 12.11. PENDING CONDEMNATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS.
   Any condemnation or assessment proceedings in progress when this Charter
takes effect shall be continued and completed under the laws under which such
proceedings were begun. All assessments made by the City prior to the time when
this Charter takes effect shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in
the same manner as if this Charter had not been adopted.
SEC. 12.12. ORDINANCES TO MAKE CHARTER EFFECTIVE.
   The Council shall by ordinance make such regulations as may be necessary to
carry out and make effective the provisions of this Charter.
SEC. 12.13. PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS.
   All written contracts entered into on behalf of the City shall be approved
by the Council and executed by the Mayor and the City Administrator in the name
of the City. All purchases and contracts shall be made or let in accordance
with applicable State law and requirements thereof for bidding, quotations, or
direct negotiated purchases.
(Source: City Charter; Effective Date: 10-1-87)
SEC. 12.14. CERTIFICATIONS OF DOCUMENTS.
   As to all documents, certified copies of which are appropriate, it shall be
the duty of the City Administrator, or his designee, to make certifications.
(Source: Ordinance No. 124, Third Series; Effective Date: 4-29-92; Ordinance
No. 12, Fourth Series; Effective Date: 4-22-2020)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
 
   
10.98   Administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Luverne City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The chief executive officer of any law
enforcement agency with which the city contracts for law enforcement services.
      CITY.
         (a)   The City of Luverne, Minnesota.
         (b)   The term CITY, when used in this code, may also be used to refer
to the City Council and its authorized representatives.
      CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The person duly appointed by the City Council and
acting in such capacity, or his or her duly authorized representative.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      CONVICTION. Either of the following accepted and recorded by the court.
         (a)   A plea of guilty; or
         (b)   A verdict of guilty by a jury, or a finding of guilty by the
court.
      COUNTY. Rock County, Minnesota.
      CRIME. Conduct which is prohibited by ordinance and for which the actor
may be sentenced to imprisonment or fine.
      EX-OFFICIO MEMBER. A person who is not counted for the purpose of
determining a quorum and who has no right to vote, but who shall have the right
and obligation (within his or her discretion) to speak to any question coming
before the board, commission or other deliberative body of which he or she is a
member.
      INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of
the lateral curb line or, if no curb, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways or streets which join one another at,
or approximately at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any licensed peace officer authorized to direct
or regulate traffic, or to perform other law enforcement duties employed either
directly by the city or employed and acting under the authority of any other
governmental body with which the city has contracted for law enforcement
services.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MISDEMEANOR. The crime for which a sentence of not more than 90 days or a
fine of not more than $700, or both, may be imposed.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      ORDINANCE. An ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of Luverne,
Minnesota.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PETTY MISDEMEANOR. An offense which does not constitute a crime and for
which a sentence of a fine of not more than $200 may be imposed.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PREMISES. Any lot, piece or parcel of land within a continuous boundary
whether publicly or privately owned, occupied or possessed.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property not included within the definition of
public property or public place.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY and PUBLIC PLACE. Any place, property or premises
dedicated to public use, owned by the city, occupied by the city as a lessee,
or occupied by the city as a street by reason of an easement, including, but
not limited to, streets, parks or parking lots so owned or occupied.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire area dedicated to public
use or contained in an easement or other conveyance or grant to the city, and
shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, streets,
alleys and other public property between lateral property lines in which a
roadway lies.
      ROADWAY.
         (a)   The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
         (b)   In the event a street includes two or more separate roadways,
the term ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer to any roadway separately, but
not to all such roadways collectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
(Prior Code, § 1.02) (Ord. 235, Third Series, effective 12-21-2000)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided,
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
      (2)   If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be
excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   (1)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.
      (2)   In addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the
proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the
ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk
for public inspection. The complete City Code is available on the city website,
www.cityofluverne.org.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to
any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or
referenced in this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if
they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is
clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future supplements
are hereby adopted as if they had been in existence at the time this code was
enacted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, the County
Sheriff or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision
of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk shall have the authority to administer and enforce this
code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals
designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall have the
authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any
person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or
continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by this
code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the
permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident of
a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise
enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause
exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the
inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Clerk or any other authorized city officer or employee
only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce
these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance
to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all permits,
licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given to the
licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating
the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other
person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Clerk to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to
appeal of the Clerk’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or
special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.98 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   Administrative citations and civil penalties. This section governs
administrative citations and civil penalties for violations of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
   (B)   Violation. The city code provides that any person, firm, corporation
or other group found to be in violation of any ordinance or law of the city, as
defined in this section, shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor. Every
day any violation of the municipal code or any other ordinance continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of the code or any ordinance is deemed to be a public nuisance and
may be summarily abated as such.
(Prior Code, § 13.02)
   (C)   Applicability of ordinance. The administrative enforcement program
shall apply only to the following provisions of the municipal code:
Code Section Regulations
Code Section   Regulations
§§
90.01 through  Animals and fowl
90.06
Ch.
150,           Building regulations
151
§§
91.15 through  Nuisances
91.26
§             Recreational fires
91.02
§
72.02
§
72.04
§
72.09
§
72.10          Parking regulations
§
72.12
§
72.17
§
72.18
§
72.20
§§
91.40,         Shade tree disease and prevention
91.41
Ch. 152        Streets and sidewalks
§             Unlawful deposit of garbage, litter and the like
130.01
Ch. 153        Zoning regulations
 
(Prior Code, § 13.03)
   (D)   General provisions.
      (1)   Administrative offense. A violation of any provision of the city
code noted in division (C) above is an administrative offense that may be
subject to an administrative citation and civil penalties. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Code Compliance Officer. The City Administrator shall designate a
city employee to act as the Code Compliance Officer.
      (3)   Exemption. Alcohol and tobacco license violations are not subject
to administrative citation under this section.
      (4)   Civil penalty. Any violation for which an administrative citation
shall be issued pursuant to this section may be subject to a civil penalty not
to exceed the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor violation under state law.
      (5)   Schedule of fines and fees. The standard fine for a violation under
this section shall be $75 per offense per day, plus $50 assessment of costs.
The City Council shall annually review the schedule of fines and fees and may
amend or modify by resolution the schedule of fines and fees for offenses
initiated by administrative citation.
(Prior Code, § 13.04)
   (E)   Administrative citation procedures.
      (1)   Notice of violation.
         (a)   Upon the discovery of a violation, the Code Compliance Officer
shall issue an administrative citation to the person alleged to be responsible
for the violation. The citation shall state the date, time and nature of the
alleged offense, the actions required to correct the alleged offense, the name
of the issuing Code Compliance Officer, the amount of the scheduled fine and
the manner for paying the fine or appealing the citation.
         (b)   The city shall deliver the administrative citation to the person
alleged to be responsible for the violation in person, by certified mail or it
shall be served by authorized representatives of the Sheriff’s office. In the
case of an offense under Ch. 72 of this code of ordinances, the administrative
citation may be attached to the motor vehicle.
         (c)   The person alleged to be responsible for the violation shall
have ten calendar days to correct the alleged violation after issuance of the
administrative citation. This division (E)(1)(c) shall not apply to violations
under Ch. 72 of this code of ordinances.
         (d)   If the person alleged to be responsible for the violation is
making a good faith attempt to remedy the violation, the Code Compliance
Officer may, in his or her sole discretion, grant an extension to the time
allowed to correct the alleged violation, the length of which must be stated in
writing by the Code Compliance Officer. The Code Compliance Officer shall
promptly inform the person alleged to be responsible for the violation of any
time extension. This division (E)(1)(d) shall not apply to violations under Ch.
72 of this code of ordinances.
         (e)   If the person alleged to be responsible for the violation fails
to correct the violation within the time period provided in the administrative
citation, or in any extension granted thereto, the Code Compliance Officer
shall issue a fine. The Code Compliance Officer must issue the notice of fine
resulting from the administrative citation to the person alleged to be
responsible for the violation in
person, by certified mail or it shall be served by authorized representatives
of the Sheriff’s office. In the case of a violation under Ch. 72 of this code
of ordinances, the notice of fine may be attached directly to the vehicle.
      (2)   Payment. The person alleged to be responsible for the violation
must pay the scheduled fine within 15 calendar days after issuance of the
notice of fine. Penalties for failure to correct the violation or late payment
of the fine may be imposed as set forth in division (D)(5) above. The Code
Compliance Officer may issue additional citations for each day the violation
continues to exist after the date on which the administrative citation is
issued. Payment of the fine associated with an administrative citation does not
relieve the person responsible for the violation from acting to correct the
violation.
      (3)   Abatement. In addition, the City Council may order the violation to
be abated and all fines, costs and other expenses associated with the alleged
violation shall be charged to the person alleged to be responsible for the
violation or to the real property owned by the person alleged to be responsible
for the violation on which the alleged violation has occurred. In cases where
the person alleged to be responsible for the violation does not own property,
the city shall file suit seeking judicial relief to collect the fine,
associated penalties and costs.
(Prior Code, § 13.05)
   (F)   Administrative hearing.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   The administrative hearing provides due process of the law to
any person who is issued an administrative citation. Due process of law
provides that the person alleged to be responsible for the violation shall be
given adequate notice, an opportunity to participate in a hearing and adequate
explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative citation.
         (b)   The person alleged to be responsible for the violation must make
a request for the administrative hearing within 15 days after the date on which
the city issued the fine associated with the administrative citation. All
requests for an administrative hearing must be made in writing to the attention
of the Code Compliance Officer.
      (2)   Administrative Hearing Officer. The City Council shall appoint an
Administrative Hearing Officer, who shall act as the hearing officer for the
administrative hearing. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be an attorney
licensed to practice in the state. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be
appointed for a term of two years beginning on January 1 of each odd-numbered
year.
      (3)   Notice of hearing. At least ten calendar days prior to the
scheduled administrative hearing, written notice delivered by mail shall be
provided to the person alleged to be responsible for the violation regarding
the time, date and location of the administrative hearing.
      (4)   File transmittal.
         (a)   Upon receipt of any request for an administrative hearing, the
Code Compliance Officer shall compile a summary report detailing the facts in
support of any determination that the alleged offense constitutes a violation.
The summary report will include:
            1.   Copy of the citation issued;
            2.   Copy of any notices, which preceded the citation;
            3.   Copy of any case history on the property;
            4.   Photographs and/or videotape of property where available; and
            5.   Proof of mailing and/or posting of notice on the property if
the citation was not personally served on the person alleged to be responsible
for the violation.
         (b)   The file must be delivered to the Administrative Hearing Officer
and the person alleged to be responsible for the violation at least five
business days preceding the scheduled administrative hearing. The delivery of
the file to the person alleged to be responsible for the violation shall be
considered completed upon mailing of the file via first class mail.
      (5)   Presentation of case. The parties shall have the opportunity to
present testimony and question any witnesses at the administrative hearing, but
strict rules of evidence will not apply. The Administrative Hearing Officer
shall tape record the hearing and receive testimony and exhibits. The
Administrative Hearing Officer must receive and give weight to evidence,
including hearsay evidence that possesses probative value commonly accepted by
reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs. The
Administrative Hearing Officer shall have the authority to determine that a
violation occurred, to dismiss a citation, to impose the scheduled fine and to
reduce, stay or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon
compliance with appropriate conditions. When imposing a penalty for a
violation, the Administrative Hearing Officer may consider any or all of the
following factors:
         (a)   The duration of the violation;
         (b)   The frequency of reoccurrence of the violation;
         (c)   The seriousness of the violation;
         (d)   The history of the violation;
         (e)   The conduct of the person alleged to be responsible for the
violation after issuance of the administrative citation;
         (f)   The conduct of the person alleged to be responsible for the
violation after issuance of the notice of hearing;
         (g)   The good faith effort by the person alleged to be responsible
for the violation to correct the alleged violation and to comply with the
ordinances;
         (h)   The impact of the violation upon the community;
         (i)   The prior record of city code violations of the person alleged
to be responsible for the violation; and
         (j)   Any other factors the Administrative Hearing Officer deems
appropriate.
      (6)   Decision.
         (a)   Within 15 calendar days of the date of the administrative
hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall provide the person alleged to
be responsible for the violation with an administrative order constituting its
decision. The decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be final. A
decision in favor of the person alleged to be responsible for the violation
constitutes dismissal of the violation and no fine shall be assessed. If the
Administrative Hearing Officer renders a decision confirming the administrative
citation and finding that a violation has occurred, the person alleged to be
responsible for the violation shall correct the violation and comply with the
citation order. A report of each hearing shall be provided to the City
Administrator.
         (b)   The Administrative Hearing Officer may not impose a fine greater
than the established fine; except that, the Administrative Hearing Officer may
impose a fine for each day that the violation continues if:
            1.   The violation caused or is causing a serious threat of harm to
the public health, safety or welfare; or
            2.   The violator intentionally and unreasonably refused or refuses
to comply with the code requirement.
      (7)   Failure to appear.
         (a)   The failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the
rights of the person alleged to be responsible for the violation to an
administrative hearing. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall consider the
failure to appear as constituting an admission of the violation.
         (b)   The Administrative Hearing Officer may waive this result upon a
showing of good cause for the failure to appear. Examples of GOOD CAUSE are:
death in the immediate family of the person alleged to be responsible for the
violation; documented incapacitating illness of the person alleged to be
responsible for the violation violator; a court order requiring the person
alleged to be responsible
for the violation to appear for another hearing at the same time; and lack of
proper service of the citation or notice of the hearing. GOOD CAUSE does not
include: forgetfulness; lack of transportation or child care; and intentional
delay.
(Prior Code, § 13.06)
   (G)   Judicial review. An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the
decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer as provided in state law.
      (1)   Recovery of civil penalties. If a civil penalty is not paid within
the time specified, the non-payment shall constitute:
         (a)   A lien on the real property upon which the violation occurred if
the property or improvements on the property was the subject of the violation
and the property owner was found responsible for that violation; or
         (b)   A personal obligation of the person alleged to be responsible
for the violation in all other situations.
      (2)   Lien. A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in
the same manner as taxes.
      (3)   Personal obligation. A personal obligation may be collected by
appropriate legal means.
      (4)   Late fees/charges.
         (a)   1.   If, after 15 calendar days of the date on which the fine
was issued to the person found to be responsible for the violation, the fine
has not been paid or a hearing requested, the fine will increase by $50 or 50%
of the fine levied, whichever is greater.
            2.   If, after eight weeks of the date on which the fine was issued
to the person alleged to be responsible for the violation, the fine and
penalties have not been paid, the total fine and penalties shall be assessed to
the property taxes of the person found to be responsible for the violation and
all city licenses issued to the person shall be revoked. For continued
violations, the city may correct the violation and assess the charges for doing
so onto the property taxes of the person found to be responsible for the
violation and criminal charges may be filed.
         (b)   If the same person found to be responsible for the violation is
charged with a subsequent violation within a 12-month period for the same or
substantially similar offense, the fine shall be increased by 25%. After a
third infraction in a 12-month period, the fine shall increase by 50% and after
a fourth infraction in a 12-month period the fine shall increase by 100%.
      (5)   License revocation or suspension. Failure to pay a fine within the
time established for the payment shall constitute grounds for suspending or
revoking any license or permit issued to the person found to be responsible for
the violation.
(Prior Code, § 13.07)
   (H)   Criminal penalties; misdemeanors. The following are misdemeanors,
punishable in accordance with state law:
      (1)   Failure, without good cause, to pay a fine or request a hearing
within 15 days after issuance of an administrative citation;
      (2)   Failure, without good cause, to appear at an administrative hearing
that was scheduled under division (F) above and for which administrative
hearing proper notice was provided;
      (3)   Failure to pay a fine imposed by the Administrative Hearing Officer
within 15 calendar days after it was imposed, or other time as may be
established in the administrative order issued by the Administrative Hearing
Officer; and
      (4)   If the final adjudication in the administrative penalty procedure
is a finding of no violation, then the city may not prosecute a criminal
violation in District Court based on the same set of facts. This does not
preclude the city from pursuing a criminal conviction for a violation of the
same provisions based on a different set of facts. A different date of
violation shall constitute a different set of facts.
(Prior Code, § 13.08)
   (I)   Violation a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. Every person violates a
section, division, paragraph or provision of this section when he or she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when
the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act
prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is prohibited
or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this section and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows.
      (1)   Where the specific section, division, paragraph or provision
specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished as for
a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
      (2)   As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (I)(1) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor.
      (3)   Violation of any section, division, paragraph or provision of this
section shall be deemed continuing in nature, and may be treated as a new and
separate offense on each day (consisting of a 24-hour period commencing at 12:
00 midnight) during which the violation occurs.
(Prior Code, § 13.99)
(Ord. 262, Third Series, effective 5-27-2004; Ord. 263, Third Series, effective
5-27-2004; Ord. 274, Third Series, effective 5-26-2005)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of
this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COUNCIL, OFFICIALS AND OFFICERS
      
31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
33.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
      
34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 30: COUNCIL, OFFICIALS AND OFFICERS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Authority of purpose
   
30.02   Regular Council meetings
   
30.03   Council reorganization
   
30.04   Election ward boundaries
   
30.05   Administrative appeal; procedure for appeals and other hearings
   
30.06   Accounts, claims or demands
   
30.07   Facsimile signatures
   
30.08   Interim emergency succession
   
30.09   Worker’s compensation
   
30.10   Salaries of Mayor and Council Members
Officers and Employees
   
30.25   City Administrator
   
30.26   Oath of office
   
30.27   Administrative policy and procedures
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 AUTHORITY OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted so as to set down for enforcement the
administrative powers of the city by and through its chief legislative body,
the Council, and its chief administrative officer, the City Administrator.
   (B)   This chapter shall constitute the “Administrative Code”, referred to
in the chapter, city code and other official documents of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.01)
§ 30.02 REGULAR COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held at the time or times
established by resolution passed at least 30 days prior to the effective date
thereof, the times may be changed in a similar manner. Special meetings shall
be called as provided in the Charter; provided, however, that, whenever all
members of the Council are present at any special meeting by unanimous consent
any business can be transacted which could be transacted at a regular meeting,
and any defect as to notice or any notice whatsoever may be waived in writing.
All meetings shall also meet all statutory requirements. The City Administrator
shall, at least two days prior to the first regular meeting in each month,
prepare the following items:
      (1)   An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;
      (2)   A statement showing the condition, based on reasonably available
data, of each fund as of the close of business of the preceding month; and
      (3)   A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified accounts
claiming payment for goods or services rendered the city during the preceding
month.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall forthwith cause to be delivered to the
Mayor and each Council Member copies of the agenda, statement of condition of
city funds and financial report, together with a copy of all unapproved
minutes. Robert’s Rules of Order (Newly Revised) shall govern all Council
meetings on matters not set forth in the Charter or ordinance. The Council may
adopt such additional rules of procedure as it seems appropriate and not in
conflict with those provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 2.02) (Ord. 12, Fourth Series, effective 4-22-2020)
§ 30.03 COUNCIL REORGANIZATION.
   (A)   At its first regular meeting in January, the Council shall:
      (1)   Select an Acting Mayor with the duties as prescribed in the
Charter; and
      (2)   Perform such organizational acts or functions as may be permitted
or required.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall function as Secretary of the Council or
with the advice and consent of the Council, he or she may designate another
individual to act in that capacity.
(Prior Code, § 2.03) (Ord. 54, Third Series, effective 5-5-1998)
§ 30.04 ELECTION WARD BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   In compliance with state law and City Charter, the city shall be
divided into two wards by a line running generally in an easterly and westerly
direction.
      (1)   Ward Number 1 (North) shall consist of that portion of the city
lying north of the following described line: commencing at the center line of
Dodge Street and the west boundary of the city's corporate limits; thence east
along the center line of said Dodge Street to the intersection of Kniss Avenue;
thence south along the center line of Kniss Avenue to the intersection of
Crawford Street; thence east along the center line of Crawford Street to the
intersection of Blue Mound Avenue; thence south along the center line of Blue
Mound Avenue to the intersection of Main Street; thence east along the center
line of Main Street to the most easterly portion of the east boundary of the
city's corporate limits.
      (2)   Ward Number 2 (South) shall consist of all that part of the city
which is not located within Ward Number 1 described above.
   (B)   New annexations. Unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance,
any newly annexed property to the city lying north of the dividing line between
Ward Number 1 and Ward Number 2 and the easterly and westerly extensions
thereof shall be upon such annexation a part of Ward Number 1, and any property
lying south of said boundary line and the easterly and westerly extensions
thereof shall upon said annexation be part of Ward Number 2.
   (C)   This section shall be effective and shall govern the 2022 city and
state primary election and all elections held thereafter, and shall further, in
accordance with the City Charter, govern the election of city officials to be
elected at the city's general election in 2022 and thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 2.04) (Ord. 247, Third Series, effective 5-2-2002; Ord. 26,
Fourth Series, effective 3-24-2022)
§ 30.05 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL; PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.
   (A)   If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the
City Administrator or any board or commission not having within its structure
an appellate procedure, the aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing
before the Council upon serving a written request therefor upon the Mayor and
City Administrator at least five days prior to any regular Council meeting;
provided, however, that, no appeal shall be considered if final and
irreversible action has been taken which would affect the rights of another.
The request shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative
decision to be challenged by the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant may
present any evidence he or she deems pertinent to the appeal, but the city
shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The Mayor,
or other officer presiding at the hearing, may, in the interest of justice or
to comply with time requirements and on his or her own motion or the motion of
the appellant, the City Administrator or a member of the Council, adjourn the
hearing to a more convenient time or place, but the time or
place shall be fixed and determined before adjournment so as to avoid the
necessity for formal notice of reconvening.
(Prior Code, § 2.31)
   (B)   The Council may adopt, by resolution, certain written rules of
procedure to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be
held before the Council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and
determine questions therein presented. The rules of procedure shall be
effective 30 days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing
and maintaining order and decorum in the proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 2.32)
(Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988)
§ 30.06 ACCOUNTS, CLAIMS OR DEMANDS.
   (A)   Generally. Except as to an annual salary, fees of jurors or witnesses
fixed by law, or wages or salaries of employees which have been fixed on an
hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis by the Council and which, by law, are
authorized to be paid on the payroll basis, any account, claim or demand
against the city which can be itemized in the ordinary course of business, the
Council shall not audit or allow the claim until the person claiming payment,
or his or her agent, reduces it to writing, in items, and signs a declaration
to the effect that the account, claim or demand is just and correct and that no
part of it has been paid.
   (B)   Discretionary exception. The Council may, in its discretion, allow a
claim prepared by the City Administrator prior to the declaration by the
claimant if the declaration is made on the check by which the claim is paid.
   (C)   Form of declaration. The declaration provided for in division (A)
above is sufficient in the following form:
“I declare under the penalties of law that his or her account, claim or demand
is just and correct and that no part of it has been paid.
                                          Signature of Claimant.”
   (D)   Form and effect of declaration on check.
      (1)   The declaration provided for in division (C) above shall be printed
on the reverse side of the check, above the space for endorsement thereof by
the payee, as follows:
“The undersigned payee, in endorsing this check, declares that the same is
received in payment of a just and correct claim against the city, and that no
part of it has heretofore been paid.”
      (2)   When endorsed by the payee named in the check, the statement shall
operate and shall be deemed sufficient as the required declaration of claim.
   (E)   Signing checks. All checks shall be signed by the Mayor and City
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 2.33)
§ 30.07 FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.
   The Mayor and City Administrator are hereby authorized to request a
depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when the instrument
bears a facsimile of their signatures, and to charge the same to the account
designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though it were
their manually written signatures. The authority is granted only for the
purpose of permitting the officers an economy of time and effort.
(Prior Code, § 2.34)
§ 30.08 INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.
   (A)   Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack or a
natural disaster requiring a declaration of a state of emergency, it is found
urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of duly elected and lawful
leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and the
emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a
method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices.
   (B)   Succession to local offices. In the event of a nuclear attack upon the
United States or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the
Mayor, Council and City Administrator shall be forthwith notified by any one of
the persons and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In the event
that safety or convenience dictate, an alternative place of meeting may be
designated. Those gathered shall proceed as follows.
      (1)   By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number,
they shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary to preside and keep minutes,
respectively.
      (2)   They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the
nuclear attack or natural disaster and injuries to persons or damage to
property already done or the imminence thereof.
      (3)   They may, based on the facts, declare a state of emergency.
      (4)   By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number,
they shall fill all positions on the Council, (including the office of Mayor)
of those persons upon whom notice could not be served or who are unable to be
present.
      (5)   The interim successors shall serve until such time as the duly
elected official is again available and returns to his or her position or the
state of emergency has passed and a successor is designated and qualifies as
required by law, whichever shall occur first.
   (C)   Duties of the Interim Emergency Council. The Interim Emergency Council
shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices and appoint other key
government officials to serve during the emergency.
(Prior Code, § 2.35)
§ 30.09 WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 176.011, subd. 9, clause 6, as it may be amended from
time to time, only the City Council as elected officials of the city or members
of the City Council appointed to fill a Council vacancy as provided in the City
Charter shall be included in the coverage of the Worker’s Compensation Act,
being M.S. §§ 176.001 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 2.36) (Ord. 68, Third Series, effective 3-20-1989)
§ 30.10 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   The salary of the Mayor shall be $11,000 per year and for each Council
Member $9,000 per year. Salaries shall be paid in conjunction with the regular
city payroll for administrative personnel and shall include such deductions and
withholdings as are required or authorized by law.
   (B)   In addition to the salary, each member of the Council shall receive a
per diem for substantially attending any board, commission or committee
meeting; or when attending to official business or travel, but only when the
attendance or activity is a formal appointment or has been specifically
approved by action of the Council. The per diem shall be $50 for three hours or
less and $100 for a full day of more than three hours not to exceed $150 per
day. Each member of the Council shall at least on a quarterly calendar year
basis certify his or her attendance or approved activity prior to receiving
payment. No per diem shall be paid for attendance or activity occurring more
than four months prior to certification. In addition to the per diem, each
member of the Council shall receive reimbursement for authorized travel
expenses on the same basis as regular full-time city administrative personnel.
   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect 60 days after
publication and the salaries and per diems authorized herein shall take effect
upon Council reorganization occurring in January 2017, as provided for in §
30.03 of this chapter. The salaries and per diems provided for in this section
are deemed reasonable and are based upon salaries paid to other county elected
public officials with similar duties and responsibilities.
(Prior Code, § 2.37) (Ord. 131, Third Series, effective 8-10-1992; Ord. 349,
Third Series, effective 12-19-2016; Ord. 2, Fourth Series, effective 12-17-
2018; Ord. 12, Fourth Series, effective 4-22-2020)
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 30.25 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The City Administrator is established by the Charter of the city as
the chief administrative officer of the city.
      (1)   Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the City Administrator
are specified by the City Charter and may hereafter be modified, revoked,
amended or altered by ordinance.
      (2)   Boards and commissions. The City Administrator shall be an ex-
officio voting member of all boards and commissions.
(Prior Code, § 2.05)
   (B)   The City Administrator shall, before entering upon the duties of his
or her office, obtain a corporate surety bond for the city in such form as
security for the faithful performance of his or her official duties and the
safekeeping of the public funds. The bond may be either an individual or
blanket bond at the discretion of the Council. It shall be approved as to form
by the City Attorney and filed with the City Administrator. The provisions of
the laws of the state relating to official bonds consistent with the City
Charter shall be complied with. The premiums on the bonds shall be paid by the
city. The amount of the bond shall be set by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.09)
(Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988; Ord. 181, Third Series, effective
3-21-1996)
§ 30.26 OATH OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor, Council Member, City Administrator, City Attorney, and each
department head of the administrative service shall, before entering upon the
duties of his or her office, take and subscribe to an oath of office and file
same with the City Administrator in substantially the following form:
   “I,                                              , do solemnly swear that I
will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of
Minnesota, and faithfully and to the best of my ability discharge the duties of
                               in and for the City of Luverne, during my
continuance in office.”
(Prior Code, § 2.08) (Ord. 12, Fourth Series, effective 4-22-2020)
§ 30.27 ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his or her
office by state law, the Charter, the city code and other duties not in
conflict therewith as may be required by the City Administrator or Council.
   (B)   Division heads. The head of any division shall be responsible to the
City Administrator and have same duties, responsibilities and authority over
the departments, department heads and employees as does the City Administrator;
provided, the City Administrator consents to the exercise of any such authority
and may reverse the action of any division head at any time. Division heads
shall manage, control and coordinate the activities under his or her
jurisdiction through the respective department heads.
   (C)   Department heads. The heads of departments shall:
      (1)   Responsibility to City Administrator. Be immediately responsible to
the City Administrator or when applicable a division head for effective
administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned
thereto;
      (2)   Inaugurate sound practices. Keep informed as to the latest
practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of
the City Administrator, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the
service and to the public;
      (3)   Report to City Administrator. Submit as requested reports of the
activities of their departments to the Council, City Administrator and, when
applicable, division head;
      (4)   Maintain reports. Establish and maintain a system of filing and
indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information
necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form the basis
of the periodic reports to the Council, City Administrator and, when
applicable, their division head;
      (5)   Maintain equipment. Be responsible for the proper maintenance of
all city property and equipment used in his or her department;
      (6)   Recommendations. Be responsible for recommending to the City
Administrator and, when applicable, their division head, changes in codes, city
code provisions and internal departmental organization which will improve the
operation of their department; and
      (7)   Authority over employees. Have power to recommend to the City
Administrator the appointment, promotion, discipline, demotion, suspension or
removal of employees within their department; have authority to hire, subject
to the approval of the City Administrator, all part-time and temporary
employees for their departments.
   (D)   Departments. Each department shall furnish, upon the direction of the
City Administrator, any other department such service, labor and materials as
may be needed by the department and as its own facilities permit.
(Prior Code, § 2.10) (Ord. 54, Third Series, effective 5-5-1988; Ord. 121,
Third Series, effective 12-12-1991)
CHAPTER 31: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Departments generally
   
31.02   Boards and commissions generally
Specific Organizations
   
31.15   Legal Department
   
31.16   Airport Board
   
31.17   Board of Appeals and Adjustments
   
31.18   Board of Code Appeals
   
31.19   Cable Television Advisory Board
   
31.20   Aquatics and Fitness Board
Planning Commission
   
31.35   Establishment
   
31.36   Composition, appointment and term of office
   
31.37   Meetings
   
31.38   Adoption of program of work
   
31.39   Comprehensive City Plan; preparation and adoption
   
31.40   Zoning Ordinance
   
31.41   Official Map
   
31.42   Plats
   
31.43   Procedure for amendments
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Appointment. All division and department heads, and other employees,
shall be appointed by the City Administrator. All appointments shall be for an
indefinite term.
   (B)   Compensation. All wage and salary scales shall be fixed and determined
by the Council.
   (C)   Departmental organization.
      (1)   The administrative service of the city shall be organized under the
City Administrator into a management team consisting of divisions and
departments and their respective heads. The organizational structure shall be
subject to the approval to the City Council by resolution from time to time as
necessary. Division/department heads shall be responsible for the operation,
employees and interdepartmental coordination of the departments within each
division. Division/department heads shall report directly to the City
Administrator and shall further be responsible for the operation and personnel
in their departments. Each shall perform such duties as assigned to them by
law, the city code, the City Administrator and, when applicable, the division
head.
      (2)   The City Administrator may, if the need arises, temporarily assign
part of all of the duties of one department to another department or make other
reassignments as may be necessary for the effective and efficient operation of
the city. Operations of the city not directly assigned to any of the
aforementioned divisions or departments shall be assigned and administered in a
manner as directed by the City Administrator. Individual members of the Council
shall not attempt to control, nor influence the operations of the city, and
collectively the Council shall issue and execute all matters of policy through
the City Administrator.
   (D)   Duties of division/department heads. The duties, responsibilities,
authorities and qualifications of division/department heads shall be specified
in position descriptions for each position, which position descriptions shall
be subject to City Council review and approval from time to time. A copy of the
position descriptions shall be on file with the City Clerk at all times.
   (E)   Budgetary information. The heads of all divisions or, when applicable,
a department head, shall, upon request, file with the City Administrator or,
when applicable, a department head, the projected financial needs of his or her
department for the ensuing year. The projection shall include information as to
maintenance and operation of equipment, new equipment, personnel and other
information as may be requested by the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 2.07) (Ord. 54, Third Series, effective 5-5-1988; Ord. 121,
Third Series, effective 12-12-1991; Ord. 260, Third Series, effective 2-12-
2004)
§ 31.02 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.
   Appointments to any board or commission, whether now existing or hereafter
created, shall be made by the Mayor from residents of the city and approved by
the City Council. The Mayor shall make his or her appointments for each
expiring term at the first regular meeting in January of each year and,
thereafter, the Council shall proceed forthwith to consider their acceptance or
rejection. Except as otherwise provided by the Council, the term of office of
each person so appointed shall commence with the first meeting of the board or
commission following approval of appointment. Appointees shall hold
their offices until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies in
any board or commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the
original appointment was made and any person so appointed shall serve the
unexpired portion of the term in which the vacancy occurred. Every member
(except ex-officio and Council members who have taken oaths of office by virtue
of their office) shall, before entering office and discharging of duties, take
an oath of office which shall be filed with the City Administrator. Unless
otherwise provided by law, City Charter or city code, members of any board or
commission may be removed without cause at any time by the Council. The Council
may declare a vacancy for any member who fails to attend any three consecutive
regular meetings. Each board or commission shall elect from and by its members
a Chair, Vice Chair and other officers it deems appropriate including selection
of a Secretary. Minutes of all meetings shall be kept and all records and
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Archives of the minutes
shall be kept pursuant to M.S. § 138.17, as it may be amended from time to
time. Officers shall be selected each year at the first regular meeting
following the Mayor’s announcement of his or her appointments to the Council
and they shall serve at the pleasure of the board or commission. A quorum for
each board or commission shall consist of a majority of the voting members
currently holding office; except that, the City Administrator, as an ex-officio
voting member, shall not be counted for purposes of establishing the quorum
requirement or the making thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2.50) (Ord. 332, Third Series, effective 11-7-2013)
SPECIFIC ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.15 LEGAL DEPARTMENT.
   A Legal Department is hereby established. The Council shall appoint a City
Attorney, who shall be head of the Legal Department, together with such
assistants as may be necessary who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
The City Attorney shall perform such duties as are required of him or her by
law or referred to him or her by the Council. It shall be the official duty of
the City Attorney to act as “Reviser of Ordinances”.
(Prior Code, § 2.06)
§ 31.16 AIRPORT BOARD.
   An Airport Board is hereby established for the purpose of managing the
municipal airport, Quentin Aanenson Field.
   (A)   Composition.
      (1)   The Airport Board shall be composed of five members, one of whom
shall be an elected Council member, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Council.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §
31.02 of this chapter, the Mayor may appoint one member to the Airport Board
who resides outside city limits. All appointments shall be for a term of two
years provided that the initial appointments shall be for terms as follows:
         (a)   Two members: one year;
         (b)   Two members: two years; and
         (c)   Council member: two years or for such other period as is deemed
appropriate; provided, the appointment does not exceed the term of the elected
office.
      (2)   Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the Council for the
unexpired portion of the term.
   (B)   Meetings. The Airport Board shall meet regularly at least twice each
year in February and July and may hold such special meetings as may be
necessary or expedient to the proper exercise of its authority. The meetings
may be called upon request by the City Council or the Chairperson of the
Airport Board.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Airport Board shall make recommendations to the
City Council and City Administrator on the operation of the Luverne Municipal
Airport and may exercise such limited administrative powers and authorities as
are granted or allowed from time to time by the City Council. Specifically, the
Airport Board shall:
      (1)   Recommend the establishment of such rules and regulations as are
consistent with state and federal authority and that are necessary and
advisable for the operation and management of the municipal airport;
      (2)   Recommend the establishment and, when necessary, updates to an
airport master plan and, when consistent therewith, recommend the establishment
of building and tie-down sites, construction of improvements, repairs, removal
of structures and other improvements required for the proper and efficient
operation of the municipal airport;
      (3)   Recommend an annual budget and capital improvement plan in a form
as is required by the Council which must contain provisions for an airport
manager, capital outlay, maintenance expenses and all other expenses and income
including the establishment of appropriate rental and sales charges and rates;
      (4)   Submit an annual report and minutes of each regular and special
meeting to the City Council; and
      (5)   Recommend the performance of other activities as may be necessary
for the safe and efficient management, operation and maintenance of the
municipal airport which are consistent with sound and prudent businesslike
principles.
   (D)   Compensation. Members of the Airport Board shall serve without
compensation or remuneration.
(Prior Code, § 2.51) (Ord. 9, Third Series, effective 10-9-1981; Ord. 54, Third
Series, effective 5-5-1988; Ord. 173, Third Series, effective 5-18-1995; Ord.
322, Third Series, effective 3-1-2012)
§ 31.17 BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Establishment and composition.
      (1)   A Board of Appeals and Adjustments is hereby established.
      (2)   The Board shall be composed of three members, at least one of whom
shall be a member of the Council and at least one of whom shall be a member of
the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Members shall serve one-year terms.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Board shall be as
prescribed by state law and the city code.
(Prior Code, § 2.57) (Ord. 71, Third Series, effective 6-22-1989)
§ 31.18 BOARD OF CODE APPEALS.
   (A)   City code issues.
      (1)   Establishment and composition. A Board of Code Appeals is hereby
established. The Board shall be composed of members of the Council.
      (2)   Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Board shall be to
handle all appeals as to matters concerning city code and housing maintenance
as governed by state law, rule or regulation and the city code.
   (B)   Minnesota State Building Code issues.
      (1)   General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions
or determinations made by the Building/Zoning Official relative to the
application and interpretation of the state building codes, the appellant may
appeal to the state’s Appeals Board in the state’s Building Codes and Standards
Division.
      (2)   Scope. Appeals shall be made and handled as set forth in Minn.
Rules part 1300.0230, as contained in the Minnesota State Building Code, as
adopted by the city, pursuant to M.S. §§ 471.465 to 471.469 and 326B.139, as
they may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 2.58) (Ord. 279, Third Series, effective 11-24-2005)
§ 31.19 CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Cable Television Advisory Board is
hereby established. The Board shall be composed of seven members, at least one
of whom shall be a member of the Council who shall serve a one-year term and at
the will and pleasure of the Council. Other members shall serve staggered
three-year terms so that the term of two members expire each year.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Cable Television Advisory Board shall make
recommendation to the City Council and City Administrator on the conduct,
operation and maintenance of the cable television franchise and other functions
as are authorized in the cable television franchise ordinance, assigned by the
Council or authorized by state and federal law.
(Prior Code, § 2.59) (Ord. 98, Third Series, effective 9-6-1990)
§ 31.20 AQUATICS AND FITNESS BOARD.
   An Aquatics and Fitness Board is hereby established.
   (A)   Composition.
      (1)   The Aquatics and Fitness Board shall be composed of seven members,
one of whom shall be an elected Council member, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council. Notwithstanding the provisions of §
31.02 of this chapter, the Mayor may appoint one member to the Aquatics and
Fitness Board who resides outside city limits. All appointments shall be for
terms of two years; provided that, the initial appointments shall be for terms
as follows:
         (a)   Three members: one year;
         (b)   Three members: two years; and
         (c)   Council member: appointed annually.
      (2)   Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the Council for the
unexpired portion of the term.
   (B)   Meetings. The Aquatics and Fitness Board shall, if there is business
to transact, hold at least one regular scheduled meeting each month and other
special meetings as are needed. The meetings may be called upon request by the
City Council or the Chairperson of the Aquatics and Fitness Board.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Aquatics and Fitness Board shall make
recommendations to the City Council and City Administrator on the operation of
the facility and may exercise such limited administrative powers and
authorities as are granted or allowed from time to time by the City Council.
Specifically, the Aquatics and Fitness Board shall:
      (1)   Recommend an annual budget and capital improvement plan in a form
as is required by the Council which must contain provisions for capital outlay,
maintenance expenses and all other expenses and income;
      (2)   Submit an annual report and minutes of each regular and special
meeting to the City Council; and
      (3)   Recommend the performance of other activities as may be necessary
for the safe and efficient management, operation and maintenance of the
facility which are consistent with sound and prudent businesslike principles.
   (D)   Compensation. Members of the Aquatics and Fitness Board shall serve
without compensation or remuneration.
(Prior Code, § 2.61) (Ord. 303, Third Series, effective 2-26-2009; Ord. 42,
Fourth Series, effective 6-13-2024)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 31.35 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Planning Commission is hereby established. The Commission shall be the
city’s Planning Agency. Any and all actions of the Commission shall be subject
to approval of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.55)
§ 31.36 COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Commission shall consist of five members. Four members of the Board
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council and shall
serve for a term of four years; provided that, the initial appointments shall
be for terms of one, two, three and four years. The fifth member shall be an
Council Member or the Mayor who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council. The Council member will serve at the will and pleasure
of the Council for a term of one year, but only while continuing as a member of
the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.55) (Ord. 12, Fourth Series, effective 4-22-2020)
§ 31.37 MEETINGS.
   The Planning Commission shall, if there is business to transact, hold at
least one regularly scheduled meeting each month and other special meetings as
are needed.
(Prior Code, § 2.55) (Ord. 101, Third Series, effective 1-24-1991)
§ 31.38 ADOPTION OF PROGRAM OF WORK.
   (A)   Upon the appointment and organization of the Commission, it shall
proceed with the preparation and adoption of a program of work, outlining
activities proposed to be undertaken in the exercise of its powers and the
performance of its duties.
   (B)   Such a program will include:
      (1)   An outline of data and information to be assembled as a basis of
the City Plan;
      (2)   An outline of subjects to be covered by the City Plan;
      (3)   An outline of types of procedure necessary to make the City Plan
effective; and
      (4)   The Planning Commission may, by resolution, revise its program of
work from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 2.55)
§ 31.39 COMPREHENSIVE CITY PLAN; PREPARATION AND ADOPTION.
   (A)   Preparation of Comprehensive City Plan. It shall be the function and
duty of the Planning Commission to recommend to the Council a Comprehensive
City Plan for the physical, economic and social development of the city,
including, but not limited to, proposed public buildings, street arrangements
and improvements, public utility services, parks, playgrounds and other similar
developments, the use of property, the density of population and other matters
relating to the development of the city. The Comprehensive Plan may also
include a land use plan, a community facilities plan, a transportation plan and
recommendations for plan execution. The Plan may be prepared in sections, each
of which shall relate to a major subject of the Plan or to a major geographical
section of the city as outlined in the Commission’s program of work.
   (B)   Procedure for adoption of Plan.
      (1)   Before adopting the City Plan or any section of it or any
substantial amendment thereof, the Commission shall hold at least one public
hearing thereon, notice of the time, place and purpose of which shall be given
by publication in the official city newspaper at least ten days before the day
of the hearing. The adoption of the City Plan or any section or amendment
thereof shall be by resolution of the
Commission, approved by a majority of all the members of the Commission. The
Commission may from time to time amend or add to the City Plan or section
thereof as herein provided for the adoption of the original Plan whenever
changed conditions or further studies by the Commission indicate that the
amendment or addition is necessary.
      (2)   An attested copy of the Plan or of any section, amendment or
addition to the City Plan adopted by the Planning Commission shall be certified
to the Council.
   (C)   Procedure for Plan effectuation. Upon the adoption of the
Comprehensive City Plan or any section thereof, it shall be the duty of the
Planning Commission to recommend to the Council reasonable and practicable
means for putting into effect the Plan or section thereof in order that the
same will serve as a pattern and guide for the orderly physical, economic and
social development of the city and as a basis for the efficient expenditure of
the funds thereof relating to the subjects of the City Plan. The means shall
consist of zoning regulations, regulations for the control of subdivision
plats, an official map, coordination of the normal public improvements of the
city, a long-term program of capital expenditures and other matters as will
accomplish the purposes of this section.
(Prior Code, § 2.55)
§ 31.40 ZONING ORDINANCE.
   At any time after the adoption of a land use plan for the city, the Planning
Commission, for the purpose of carrying out the policies and goals of the land
use plan, may, and upon instructions by the Council shall, prepare a proposed
ordinance and submit it to the Council with its recommendation for adoption. No
zoning ordinance or amendment thereto shall be adopted by the Council until a
public hearing has been held thereon by the Planning Commission and/or the
Council after a notice similar to that required by §
31.39(B)(1) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.55)
§ 31.41 OFFICIAL MAP.
   (A)   After adoption of a major thoroughfare plan and a community facilities
plan, the Planning Commission may, and upon instructions by the Council shall,
prepare or cause to be prepared an official map of the platted and unplatted
portions of the city and adjoining territory, or portions thereof, indicating
upon the map the land that is needed for future street purposes and as sites
for other necessary public facilities and services within the city.
   (B)   After the map has been prepared, it shall be submitted to the Council,
which shall thereupon consider the map and may adopt it or any part of it with
amendments as it deems advisable. Before the adoption by the Council, a public
hearing shall be held upon the proposal at least ten days after a notice of the
time, place and purpose thereof has been published in the official city
newspaper. After the map has been adopted by the Council and filed with the
County Recorder, whenever any street or highway is widened or improved, or any
new street is opened, or interests in land for other public purposes are
acquired by the city, it is not required in the proceedings to pay for any
building or structure placed without a permit or in violation of conditions of
the permit within the limits of the mapped street or outside of any building
line that may have been established upon the existing street or within any area
thus identified for public purposes.
(Prior Code, § 2.55)
§ 31.42 PLATS.
   (A)   Every proposed plat of land within the city or within two miles of the
limits of the city and not within a town, which itself requires the approval of
plats, shall be submitted to the Council before being filed, and no plat of
land shall be filed unless and until the same shall first have been approved by
the Council.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to violate this provision, or to sell
land or offer land for sale, or contract for the sale of land by reference to
or by other use of any plat before the plat has been approved by the Council in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Before approving a plat, the Council shall submit the same to the
Planning Commission for its recommendations. The Planning Commission, within 60
days after any such plat has been referred to it by the Council, shall act on
the same and shall make its recommendations with respect thereto. The
recommendations may consist of:
      (1)   Recommendation that the Council approve the plat;
      (2)   Recommendation that the Council disapprove plat, in which case the
recommendation shall include a statement of the specific reasons for the
recommendation; or
      (3)   Recommendation that the Council approve the plat after specified
changes or revisions are made therein, which recommendations may include the
condition that a revised plat, containing the changes or revisions, be
submitted to the Planning Commission, in which case the revised plat shall be
so submitted to the Planning Commission for its further consideration and
recommendations before action thereon by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.55) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 31.43 PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS.
   No change shall be made in the Comprehensive City Plan or any portion
thereof or regulations governing the platting of land after the plans or
regulations have been adopted by the Council until the proposed change has been
referred to the Planning Commission for report thereon and an attested copy of
the report has been filed with the Council, and no ordinance or resolution
establishing any such plans or regulations shall be adopted by the Council
until the ordinance or resolution has been referred to the Planning Commission
for a report thereon and an attested copy of the report has been filed with the
Council. Failure of the Planning Commission so to report within 40 days or the
longer period as may be designated by the Council after the reference shall be
deemed to be approval of the proposed change.
(Prior Code, § 2.55)
CHAPTER 32: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
32.01   Personnel rules
   
32.02   Applicants for city employment
§ 32.01 PERSONNEL RULES.
   Upon the recommendation of the City Administrator, the Council may establish
personnel rules setting forth the rights, duties and responsibilities of
employees which shall govern the employer-employee relationship between the
city and each employee unless otherwise provided for by written contract. A
personnel policy containing such rules and amendments thereto shall become
effective upon receipt by the employees.
(Prior Code, § 2.39) (Ord. 54, Third Series, effective 5-5-1988)
§ 32.02 APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   General. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized
criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment
background checks for the positions described in division (B) below.
   (B)   Criminal history employment background investigations. The County
Sheriff’s Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the
city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for
the following positions within the city, unless the city’s hiring authority
concludes that a background investigation is not needed:
      (1)   All regular part-time or full-time positions of the city;
      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the County Sheriff’s Department is
authorized to access data maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions computerized criminal history information system in accordance
with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at
the County Sheriff’s Department under the care and custody of the chief law
enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the
computerized criminal history data may be released by the County Sheriff’s
Department to the hiring authority, including the City Council, the City
Administrator or designee; and
      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in
M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject
an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction
unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and
the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence. If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city
shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
         (d)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 2.40) (Ord. 327, Third Series, effective 5-3-2013)
CHAPTER 33: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
Excess, Unclaimed or Abandoned Property
   
33.01   Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles
   
33.02   Disposal of unclaimed property
   
33.03   Disposal of excess property
   
33.04   Persons who may not purchase; exception
Franchises
   
33.15   Definition
   
33.16   Franchise ordinances
   
33.17   Power of regulation reserved
   
33.18   Conditions in every franchise
   
33.19   Further provisions of franchises
Local Improvement Policy
   
33.30   General policy
   
33.31   Petition deadlines
   
33.32   Classification of projects
   
33.33   Assessment regulations for Class B improvements
   
33.34   Assessment rules for Class C improvements
   
33.35   Special rules
   
33.36   Deferment of special assessments
   
33.37   Prepayment and assessment certification
   
33.38   Warranties
   
33.39   Contributions for existing utilities systems
Special Charges and Costs; Collection
   
33.50   Authority
   
33.51   Definition
   
33.52   Assessment procedure
Fair Housing
   
33.65   Declaration of policy
   
33.66   Definitions
   
33.67   Real property
   
33.68   Public accommodations
   
33.69   Public services
EXCESS, UNCLAIMED OR ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 33.01 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined in M.S. Ch. 169, as
it may be amended from time to time, that has remained for a period of more
than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or
has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property without the
consent of the person in control of the property, or in an inoperable condition
such that it has no substantial potential further use consistent with its usual
function, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall
also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to and accepted
by the city. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. Ch. 168, as it
may be amended from time to time, shall not be considered an ABANDONED MOTOR
VEHICLE within the meaning of this subchapter. Vehicles on the premises of junk
yards or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and maintained in accordance
with the city code, shall not be considered ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES within the
meaning of this subchapter.
      VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential
to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to,
the motor, drive train and wheels.
   (B)   Custody. The city shall take into custody and impound any abandoned
motor vehicle.
   (C)   Immediate sale. When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven
model years of age, is lacking vital component parts and does not display a
license plate currently valid in Minnesota or any other state or foreign
country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction and shall
not be subject to the notification, reclamation or title provision of this
division (C).
   (D)   Notice.
      (1)   When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the provisions
of division (C) above, the city shall give notice of the taking within ten
days. The notice shall set forth the date and place of
the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor
vehicle, if the information can be reasonably obtained, and the place where the
vehicle is being held, shall inform the owner and any lien holders of their
right to reclaim the vehicle under division (F) below and shall state that
failure of the owner or lien holder to exercise their right to reclaim the
vehicle and contents be deemed a waiver by them of all rights, title and
interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public
auction pursuant to division (F) below.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any,
of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of
record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity
and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be
published once in the official newspaper. Published notices may be grouped
together for convenience and economy.
   (E)   Right to reclaim.
      (1)   The owner or any lien holder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall
have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing
and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15
days after the date of the notice required by this section.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any lien of a
garage keeper under the laws of the state or the right of the lien holder to
foreclose. For the purposes of this division (E), GARAGE KEEPER is an operator
of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage
facility or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
   (F)   Public sale.
      (1)   An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not
reclaimed under division (E) above shall be sold to the highest bidder at
public auction or sale, following one published notice published at least seven
days prior to the auction or sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a
form prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient
title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser
to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and claims of ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new
certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.
      (2)   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the
city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the
vehicle and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred pursuant
to this section. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for
the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be
deposited in the General Fund of the city.
   (G)   Disposal of vehicles not sold. Where no bid has been received for an
abandoned motor vehicle, the city may dispose of it in accordance with this
section.
   (H)   Contracts and disposal.
      (1)   The city may contract with any qualified person for collection,
storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other services
necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal for
recycling or other methods of disposal.
      (2)   Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly licensed
by the state’s Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract
to determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s plan for solid waste disposal.
A contract that does so conform may be approved by the Agency. Where a contract
has been approved, the Agency may reimburse the city for the costs incurred
under the contract which have not been reimbursed.
      (3)   If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal
of the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the
cost thereof along with its other costs as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 2.71) (Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988)
§ 33.02 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definition. The term UNCLAIMED PROPERTY means tangible or intangible
property that has lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course
of municipal operations, remains unclaimed by the owner and has been in the
possession of the city for at least 60 days and has been declared such by the
City Administrator.
   (B)   Preliminary notice. The City Administrator shall make a reasonable
effort to ascertain the identity and address of the true owner of unclaimed
property. If the identity and address of the owner are ascertained, the City
Administrator shall serve written notice upon the owner either in person or by
certified mail that, unless the unclaimed property is claimed and proof of
ownership and entitlement to possession are established within 30 days after
the date of notice, the property shall be subject to sale by the city.
   (C)   Notice and sale. If, after reasonable effort, the identity and address
of the true owner cannot be ascertained, or if the 30-day notice period expires
without the owner having made claim and established proof of ownership and
entitlement to possession, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at
public auction or sale. Notice of the sale shall be published once at least
three weeks prior to the sale and contain a brief description of the property
to be sold, the date, time, place and manner in which the sale shall be
conducted.
   (D)   Fund and claims thereon. All proceeds from the sale shall be paid into
the General Fund of the city and expenses thereof paid therefrom. The former
owner, if he or she makes claim within eight
months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided, and upon
application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash
or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefor,
less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice and
sale expenses, but without interest. The payment shall be also made from the
General Fund.
   (E)   Effective law. The City Administrator may elect to proceed under the
provisions of this section or any applicable statutory provisions.
(Prior Code, § 2.71)
§ 33.03 DISPOSAL OF EXCESS PROPERTY.
   (A)   Estimated value, less than $100,000.
      (1)   If the excess property has an estimated value of $100,000 or less,
the City Administrator may sell the same either upon direct negotiation,
quotations, an auction or in the open market.
      (2)   If the agreement to sell is made upon quotations it shall be based,
so far as possible, on at least two quotations which shall be kept on file for
a period of at least one year after receipt thereof.
   (B)   Estimated value, over $100,000. If the excess property has an
estimated value over $100,000, the Council shall order it sold upon sealed bids
solicited by public notice as required by law.
   (C)   Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from sales of
surplus property under this section shall be placed in the fund from which the
asset came.
(Prior Code, § 2.71) (Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988; Ord. 352,
Third Series, effective 4-13-2017)
§ 33.04 PERSONS WHO MAY NOT PURCHASE; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   (1)   No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative
staff, department head, a member of the Council or an advisor serving the city
in a professional capacity may be a purchaser of property under this
subchapter.
      (2)   Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not directly
involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder and if at
least one week’s published or posted notice of sale is given.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this
subchapter if the purchase is prohibited by the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.71) Penalty, see §
10.99
FRANCHISES
§ 33.15 DEFINITION.
   The term FRANCHISE, as used in this subchapter, shall be construed to mean
any special privileges granted to any person in, over, upon or under any of the
streets or public places of the city, whether the privilege has heretofore been
granted by it or by the state or shall hereafter be granted by the city or by
the state.
(Prior Code, § 2.72)
§ 33.16 FRANCHISE ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The Council may grant franchises by ordinance.
   (B)   Franchise rights shall always be subject to the superior right of the
public to the use of streets and public places.
   (C)   All persons desiring to make any burdensome use of the streets or
public places, inconsistent with the public’s right in such places or desiring
the privilege of placing in, over, upon or under any street or public place any
permanent or semi-permanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or
operating railways, telegraphing or transmitting electricity, or transporting
by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the city or its inhabitants or any
portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas or
any other such utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to obtain a
franchise before proceeding to make the use of the streets or public places or
before proceeding to the place the fixtures in those places.
(Prior Code, § 2.72)
§ 33.17 POWER OF REGULATION RESERVED.
   The city shall have the right and power to regulate and control the exercise
by any person of any franchise however acquired and whether the franchise has
been heretofore granted by it or by the state.
(Prior Code, § 2.72)
§ 33.18 CONDITIONS IN EVERY FRANCHISE.
   All conditions specified in this subchapter shall be a part of every
franchise even though they may not be expressly contained in the franchise.
   (A)   The grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part all the
terms of this subchapter and will comply with all pertinent provisions of any
City Charter and city code as the same may from time to time be amended.
   (B)   The grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to exercise any power to
fix fares, rates and charges, but that the fares, rates and charges shall, at
all times, be just, fair and reasonable for the services rendered and shall, in
all cases, be fixed and from time to time changed, unless regulated by an
agency of the state, in the manner following.
      (1)   A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with
efficient management, normally yield above all operating expenses and
depreciation, a fair return upon all money invested.
      (2)   If possible, maximum rates and charges shall be arrived at by
direct negotiations with the Council.
      (3)   If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement, the Council
shall, not less than 30 days before the expiration of any existing rate
schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative, the franchisee
shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative, the two of them shall
appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the three of them shall
constitute a board of arbitration. The board shall report its findings as soon
as possible, and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by majority vote
shall be legal and binding, subject only to review by a court of competent
jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties.
   (C)   The Council shall have the right to require reasonable extensions of
any public service system from time to time and to make such rules and
regulations as may be required to secure adequate and proper service and to
provide sufficient accommodations for the public.
   (D)   The grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the
franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right to
receive upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire the public
utility exercising the franchise, any return on account of the franchise or its
value.
   (E)   No sale or lease of the franchise shall be effective until the
assignee or lessee shall have filed with the city an instrument, duly executed,
reciting the facts of the sale or lease, accepting the terms of the franchise
and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee thereunder.
   (F)   Every grant in the franchise contained of permission for the erection
of poles, masts or other fixtures in the streets and for the attachment of
wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of pipes or conduits under
the streets or public places, or for the placing in the streets or other public
places of any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject
to the conditions that the Council
shall have the power to require the alterations therein, or relocation or
rerouting thereof, as the Council may, at any time, deem necessary for the
safety, health or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall
have the power to require the removal of poles, masts and other fixtures
bearing wires and the placing underground of all facilities for whatsoever
purpose used.
   (G)   Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the city the right
to acquire the same in accordance with statute.
   (H)   The franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay the city fees to
raise revenue or defray increased costs accruing as a result of utility
operations, or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of money based upon
gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.72)
§ 33.19 FURTHER PROVISIONS OF FRANCHISES.
   The enumeration and specification of particular matters which must be
included in every franchise or renewal or extension thereof shall not be
construed as impairing the right of the city to insert in any such franchise or
renewal or extension thereof such other and further conditions and restrictions
as the Council may deem proper to protect the city’s interests, nor shall
anything contained in this subchapter limit any right or power possessed by the
city over existing franchises.
(Prior Code, § 2.72)
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT POLICY
§ 33.30 GENERAL POLICY.
   When an improvement is of special benefit to properties in a definable area,
it is the intent of this subchapter to levy special assessments on the
benefitted properties to finance the improvements. Improvement costs shall,
whenever possible, be assessed in full against the benefitted property.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 179, New Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 33.31 PETITION DEADLINES.
   No petition for construction of water distribution lines, sewage lines,
storm drainage curb and gutter, street improvements, sidewalks, lighting or
other assessment improvements shall be accepted or acted upon by the Council
unless it is filed with the City Administrator on or before September 1 of the
year prior to the year of requested construction unless waived by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 72, Third Series, effective 7-20-1989)
§ 33.32 CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS.
   (A)   In general. Public improvements are divided into three classes
specified in the following divisions (B), (C) and (D) below according to their
respective benefit to the whole city, to property specially served by the
improvement and taking into account past city practice.
   (B)   Class A.
      (1)   Class A improvements are those which are of general benefit to the
city at large, including:
         (a)   Public buildings, except a building which is part of an
improvement described in one of the following divisions (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c) or
(B)(1)(d) below;
         (b)   Any public park, playground or recreational facility;
         (c)   The installation and maintenance of street lighting systems; and
         (d)   Any improvement not described in M.S. § 429.021, subd. 1, as it
may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any such improvement shall be financed from general city funds and
not from special assessments.
   (C)   Class B. Class B improvements are those which are of both general
benefit and special benefit to abutting or nearby property. Class B
improvements include:
      (1)   Trunk water mains larger than six inches;
      (2)   Trunk sanitary sewer mains larger than ten inches;
      (3)   Permanently surfacing arterial streets as defined in division (C)
(4) below;
      (4)   Resurfacing by a bituminous overlay over an existing permanently
surfaced street;
      (5)   Interceptor storm sewers; and
      (6)   The construction of off-street parking facilities.
   (D)   Class C. Class C improvements are those which are primarily if not
exclusively of benefit to property abutting or in the area of the improvement,
including:
      (1)   The construction of water mains no larger than six inches in
diameter;
      (2)   The construction of sanitary sewer mains no larger than ten inches
in diameter;
      (3)   The construction of curbs and gutters;
      (4)   Permanently surfacing residential streets as defined in division
(D)(5) below;
      (5)   Resurfacing by a bituminous overlay over an existing permanently
surfaced street or the replacement of existing curbs and gutter;
      (6)   Storm sewers of a local nature; and
      (7)   Sidewalks in areas not otherwise included in special sidewalk
districts.
   (E)   Financing Class B and C improvements. It is the policy of the city to
finance Class B and C improvements by the methods prescribed in §§
33.33, 33.34 and 33.35 of this chapter. The apportionment of the cost between
benefitted property and the city at large and the method of levying assessments
prescribed in those sections shall be followed in each case unless the Council,
by resolution, finds that because of special circumstances stated in the
resolution, a different policy is necessary or desirable in the particular
case. Any local improvement described in M.S. § 429.02, as it may be amended
from time to time, and not placed in Class A, B or C by this section shall be
financed as the Council determines to be most feasible and equitable in each
case.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 72, Third Series, effective 7-20-1989; Ord. 179, New
Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 33.33 ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS FOR CLASS B IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Trunk water mains and sanitary sewers. When a water or sewer main is
laid across or adjacent to unplatted property, the city shall not defer the
assessment against the unplatted property if the assessment would be made for
such an improvement in the case of platted property, but the city shall make
the assessment at the time the assessment against other property is made,
apportioning the assessment against the unplatted property on the basis of
area. When a trunk sewer or water main is constructed and is to serve also as a
lateral sewer or water main for abutting property, the abutting property shall
be assessed for the cost of a lateral sewer or water main of eight inches, plus
its proportionate share of the cost of the excess capacity. Other property
benefitted by the trunk sewer or water main, but unable to utilize it until a
lateral connected to the trunk sewer or water main has been built to serve the
property shall not be assessed for its share of the cost of the trunk sewer or
water main until the lateral is built. The assessment for the lateral shall
then include the property’s share of the trunk sewer or water main. The cost of
the trunk sewer or water main in excess of the lateral assessment shall be
assessed on the basis of area against all properties benefitted. The cost of a
lift station shall be assessed on the basis of area against that property
actually benefitted by the lift station.
   (B)   Arterial street surfacing.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the term ARTERIAL STREET is
defined as a street used primarily to carry traffic between the thoroughfares
system and minor residential streets or non-residential areas when classified
as such in the city’s Comprehensive Transportation Plan.
      (2)   When an arterial street is paved with concrete, a bituminous mat or
other permanent surface, the cost of the pavement on a 36-foot roadway shall be
assessed against the benefitted property on the basis of frontage on the
abutting street. When the standard for the paving is higher than those the city
would use for a residential street, the cost to be assessed shall be based on
the cost of paving a residential street of the same width. The rest of the cost
shall be paid from general funds.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 72, Third Series, effective 7-20-1989; Ord. 179, New
Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 33.34 ASSESSMENT RULES FOR CLASS C IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Water and sewer. The cost of lateral water mains not exceeding six
inches in diameter and of lateral sanitary sewer mains not exceeding ten inches
in diameter shall be assessed against abutting property on the basis of
frontage. The cost of water mains to be assessed includes the service lines, if
furnished, hydrants and valves. The cost of sewer mains includes lines, if
furnished.
   (B)   Residential streets.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the term RESIDENTIAL STREETS
is a street used primarily for access to abutting property.
      (2)   The cost of construction of curbs and gutters on any street or of
applying permanent surfaces to residential streets shall be assessed on the
basis of frontage.
   (C)   Sidewalks. The cost of sidewalks shall be assessed on the basis of
frontage.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 34, Third Series, effective 7-25-1987; Ord. 179, New
Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 33.35 SPECIAL RULES.
   (A)   Corner lots. In any assessment made on the basis of frontage, except
for water or sanitary sewer, corner lots shall be assessed for footage along
the front of the lot, plus 20% of the side street footage. In the case of an
assessment for a lateral water or sewer main, Class C, corner lots shall be
assessed for the footage along the front side of the lot and shall not be
assessed for the footage along the side street abutting the lot unless the lot
is large enough to accommodate another building which would be benefitted by
construction of the second main. The side yard of a corner lot shall be the
street side not contained in the property address assigned by the city and used
for city utility record purposes. For a bare lot without an address, the side
yard shall be the longest footage until the lot is improved and an address
assigned by the city.
   (B)   Intersections. The cost of water and sewer improvements in street
intersections shall be included as part of the total assessable cost. In the
case of any kind of street improvement or sidewalk improvement, intersection
costs shall be paid by the city.
   (C)   Adjusted frontage. When the amount of an assessment is determined by
frontage, an equivalent front footage shall be determined according to the
following rules when an irregular lot requires such an adjustment to maintain
fairness in the assessment.
      (1)   Front footage shall be measured at setback on cul-de-sacs and
sharply curved streets and irregularly shaped lots.
      (2)   Equivalent front footage shall be determined by dividing the square
footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the subdivision for pie-shaped
lots and irregular shaped lots where other rules do not apply.
   (D)   Federal, state and county aid use. If the city receives financial
assistance from the Federal Government, the state or the county to defray a
portion of the cost of a street improvement project, the aid shall be used
first to reduce the share of the project cost which would be met from general
city funds according to the assessment formula contained in this subchapter. If
the aid is more than the amount of the improvement cost to be borne by the
city, the remainder of the aid so received shall be used to reduce each
individual assessment proportionately.
   (E)   Sidewalks. For all sidewalk improvements in areas other than those
specifically designated as or included in special sidewalk improvement
districts, the assessment shall be made on the basis of 50% of the frontage. In
the case of corner lots, assessment shall be made for 50% of the footage along
the front of the lot, plus 25% of the side street footage.
   (F)   Alleys. In any assessment made on the basis of frontage for alley
right-of-way improvement in the Central Business District as the same is
appropriately zoned under the provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances,
improved lots located at the intersection of connecting street rights-of-way
shall be assessed at the rate of 20% of the abutting alley footage if:
      (1)   No direct or indirect access is available from the building
improvements to the alley right-of-way for purposes of pedestrian or vehicular
ingress or egress or the delivery or pick up of goods or services; or
      (2)   The Council finds that the alley is not currently used in any way
to benefit the adjoining improved property.
   (G)   Street overlays. For all street resurfacing by a bituminous overlay
over an existing permanently surfaced street, the assessment shall be
calculated on the basis of 20% of the total project cost for both footages
along the front of the lot and side street. The city shall pay the remaining
80% of total project costs. This provision does not apply to public property,
which shall be assessed 100% of the costs attributable to the overlay of the
abutting street.
   (H)   Street reconstructs. For all street improvements requiring
reconstruction of an existing permanently surfaced street, the assessment shall
be calculated on the basis of frontage at the rate of 20% of the total project
costs with frontage footage adjusted as required in division (A) above for
corner lots. The city shall pay the remaining 80% of the total project costs.
This provision does not apply to public property, which shall be assessed 100%
of the costs attributable to the reconstruction of the abutting street.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 30, Third Series, effective 2-8-1987; Ord. 34, Third
Series, effective 7-25-1987; Ord. 58, Third Series, effective 7-7-1988; Ord.
72, Third Series, effective 7-20-1989; Ord. 179, New Series, effective 1-19-
1979; Ord. 77, Third Series, effective 10-30-1989; Ord. 3, Fourth Series,
effective 10-25-2018)
§ 33.36 DEFERMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   The Council may defer the payment of any special assessment on
homestead property owned by a person who is 65 years of age or older, or who is
retired by virtue of permanent and total disability, and the City Administrator
is hereby authorized to record the deferment of special assessments where the
following conditions are met.
      (1)   The applicant must apply for the deferment not later than 30 days
after the assessment is adopted by the Council.
      (2)   The applicant must be 65 years of age, or older, or retired by
virtue of permanent and total disability.
      (3)   The applicant must be the owner of the property.
      (4)   The applicant must occupy the property as his or her principal
place of residence.
      (5)   The projected amount of the first year’s installment of principal
and interest will exceed 1% of the applicant’s income from all sources and the
applicant’s income from all sources does not exceed the low income limit as
established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development for uses in
determining the eligibility for Section VIII housing purposes.
   (B)   The deferment shall be granted for as long as period of time as the
hardship exists and the conditions as aforementioned have been met. However, it
shall be the duty of the applicant to notify the City Administrator of any
change in his or her status that would affect eligibility for deferment.
   (C)   The entire amount of deferred special assessments shall be due within
60 days after loss of eligibility by the applicant. If the special assessment
is not paid within 60 days, the City Administrator shall add thereto interest
at the rate originally certified from the due date through December 31 of the
following year and the total amount of principal and interest shall be
certified to the County Auditor for collection with taxes the following year.
Should the applicant plead and prove, to the satisfaction of the Council, that
full repayment of the deferred special assessment would cause the applicant
particular undue financial hardship, the Council may order that the applicant
pay within 60 days a sum equal to the number of installments of deferred
special assessments outstanding and unpaid to date (including principal and
interest) with the balance thereafter paid according to the terms and
conditions of the original special assessment.
   (D)   The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall terminate
and all amounts accumulated, plus applicable interest shall become due upon the
occurrence of any one of the following:
      (1)   The death of the owner when there is no spouse who is eligible for
deferment;
      (2)   The sale, transfer or subdivision of all or any part of the
property;
      (3)   Loss of homestead status on the property; or
      (4)   Determination by the Council for any reason that there would be no
hardship to require immediate or partial payment.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988; Ord. 146,
Third Series, effective 3-18-1993)
§ 33.37 PREPAYMENT AND ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Partial prepayment. After the adoption by the Council of the
assessment roll in any local improvement proceeding, the owner of any property
specially assessed in the proceeding may, prior to the certification of the
assessment of the first installment to the County Auditor, pay to the city any
portion of the assessment. The remaining unpaid balance shall be spread over
the period of time established by the Council for installment payment of the
assessment.
   (B)   Certification of assessments. After the adoption of any special
assessment by the Council, the City Administrator shall transmit a certified
duplicate of the assessment roll with each installment, including interest, set
forth separately to the County Auditor to be extended on the proper tax lists
of the county. In the alternative, the City Administrator shall when directed
by the Council annually certify each installment, including interest, to the
County Auditor for collection with the taxes due the following year as provided
for by law.
(Prior Code, § 2.73)
§ 33.38 WARRANTIES.
   (A)   No abutting property shall be reassessed for the same or a similar
improvement without receiving a pro rata credit against what would normally be
assessed under the provisions of this section. The credit given shall equal a
factor of one, minus the fraction where the numerator is the number of whole
years since the improvement was last assessed and the denominator is the life
span of the improvement in years, and then multiplied by the original assessed
amount, but in any event not less than zero. For purposes of this section,
improvement spans in years are as follows:
      (1)   Water and sewer: 40 years;
      (2)   Storm sewers: 35 years;
      (3)   Concrete streets/alleys/curb and gutter: 30 years;
      (4)   Sidewalks: 20 years;
      (5)   Bituminous streets/alleys/curb and gutter: 20 years; and
      (6)   Bituminous overlays: 15 years.
   (B)   This section shall apply only to improvements made directly by city
forces or by city contract under the direct authority, supervision and control
of the city; it shall not apply to improvements whose proximate cause of damage
is an act of nature, such as earthquake, flood, tornado, wind, tree growth or
similar matters not associated with or caused by defective workmanship or
materials.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 72, Third Series, effective 7-20-1989)
§ 33.39 CONTRIBUTIONS FOR EXISTING UTILITIES SYSTEMS.
   (A)   In addition to any other charges or fees for water and sewer
connections and use, and for connection to or drainage into the storm water
drainage system, an incremental charge shall be made to reimburse the city for
the cost of its existing water, sewer and storm sewer systems and capacity.
   (B)   The Council shall determine from time to time the amount and basis for
computing the charges by resolution.
   (C)   No building permit may be issued, nor a subdivision plat given final
approval, until the charges are paid or provisions made therefor under terms
agreed to by the Council.
   (D)   (1)   The charges shall be in addition to any other charges including,
but not limited to, special assessments, hook-up fees or other charges for
public improvements required to serve the property in question.
      (2)   The charges shall apply to all property or portions thereof that
has been annexed into the city on or after 1-1-1990 and no building permit or
subdivision plat has been approved by the city.
      (3)   The proceeds of the funds shall be placed in the respective
separate accounts and used for the improvement, maintenance or operation of the
systems or as otherwise authorized by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.73) (Ord. 113, Third Series, effective 8-1-1991)
SPECIAL CHARGES AND COSTS; COLLECTION
§ 33.50 AUTHORITY.
   Notwithstanding any other provision contained in city code or state law and
in addition to any other method authorized by law, Charter or ordinance, the
procedures contained in this subchapter may be used for the collection of
current services for all or any part of the cost thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2.731)
§ 33.51 DEFINITION.
   The term CURRENT SERVICE, as used in this subchapter, means any of the
following: snow and/or ice removal from streets and sidewalks; rubbish removal;
the mowing or eradication of noxious weeds or other grasses and growth; the
abatement, removal or elimination of any nuisance as defined by law or other
provisions of city code; the elimination of hazardous buildings; installation
or repair of any utility service lines; street sprinkling, flushing, oiling or
other dust treatment; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of
trees, and removal of unsounds, diseased or insect infected trees from any
property; the operation of a street lighting system; the improvement and
maintenance costs or a sidewalk improvement or storm sewer district; the
charges for any city utility service or costs related thereto; or any other
cost or charge related to the provision of a service to or charges against real
property or the occupants thereof where the assessment thereof to benefitting
private property is allowable by law, Charter or city code.
(Prior Code, § 2.731)
§ 33.52 ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   On approximately October 1 of each year or at such other time as the
City Administrator or Council may deem appropriate, the City Administrator
shall cause to be prepared a list, by tax parcel number, of unpaid charges by
type and listing the benefitting property owner and address as contained in the
records of the County Auditor for real estate tax purpose and the amount of
charges therein assessable against each tax parcel to which charges are
attributable. The list thereof shall be presented to the City Council which
shall order a public hearing, and the City Administrator shall, thereupon,
cause notice to be given, all in accordance with the procedures required in
M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, which shall be the
procedure utilized for the assessment of all unpaid charges authorized by this
subchapter. In addition to mailed notice required by law, the City
Administrator shall cause published notice to be given. At the hearing, the
Council shall pass upon objections to the proposed assessment for current
services whether the same be presented orally or in writing. The Council may
amend the proposed assessment roll as to any charge or parcel and, by
resolution, adopt the same as a special assessment and the interest rate to be
charged from the date of the hearing against the lands named in the assessment
roll attached thereto. Unless the Council orders otherwise, all assessments
shall be paid in one installment collected together with the annual taxes for
the next succeeding year. The Council shall generally follow procedures as
detailed in M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time, in the
conduct of the hearing. No party may appeal an assessment unless, following
notice of the hearing, the party provides written notice of its objection to
the assessment. Written notice shall be provided by the party to the City
Administrator at or prior to the hearing. Any all objections to assessments not
so received shall be deemed waived unless the failure to so object is due to a
reasonable cause.
   (B)   Thereafter and upon adoption of the resolution, the City Administrator
shall certify to the County Auditor on or before November 30 or at a later time
when allowed by the Auditor or law, thereafter the assessment roll of all those
assessments not paid prior to the certification and the same shall be collected
as a special assessment as provided for herein and by law.
(Prior Code, § 2.731) (Ord. 333, Third Series, effective 1-30-2014)
FAIR HOUSING
§ 33.65 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   Racial, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or
disability, and sex and religious discrimination in housing, public
accommodations and public services adversely affect the health, welfare, peace
and safety of the community. Persons subject to the discrimination suffer
depressed living conditions, poverty and lack of hope, injuring the public
welfare, placing a burden upon the public treasury to ameliorate the conditions
thus produced, and creating conditions which endanger the public peace and
order. The public policy of the city is declared to be to foster equal
opportunity for all to obtain housing, public accommodations, and public
services without regard to their race, creed, color, national origin, marital
status, status with regard to public assistance, disability, sex or ancestry
and strictly in accord with their individual merits as human beings.
(Prior Code, § 2.74) (Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988)
§ 33.66 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISABILITY. A mental or physical condition which constitutes a handicap.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit any program, service,
facility or privilege afforded to a person with a disability which is intended
to habilitate, rehabilitate or accommodate that person.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATING. Segregate or separate.
   MARITAL STATUS. The standing, state or condition of one as a single or
married person.
   PERSON. Individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations,
corporations, legal representatives, trustees, receivers, political
subdivisions, boards, commissions and their officers and agents.
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS. Every business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation or transportation facility, whether licensed or not,
whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are
extended, offered, sold or otherwise made available to the public.
   STATUS WITH REGARD TO PUBLIC ASSISTANCE. The condition of being a recipient
of federal, state or local assistance, including medical assistance, or of
being a tenant receiving federal, state or local subsidies, including rental
assistance or rent supplements.
(Prior Code, § 2.74) (Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988)
§ 33.67 REAL PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful discriminatory practice:
   (A)   For an owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee or managing agent of, or
other person having the right to sell, rent or lease any real property, or any
agent of any of these:
      (1)   To refuse to sell, rent or lease or offer for sale, rental or lease
any real property to any person or group of persons or to negotiate for the
sale, rental or lease of any real property to any person or group of persons
because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status,
status with regard to public assistance or disability, or represent that real
property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it
is so available or otherwise deny or withhold any real property or any
facilities of real property to or from any person or group of persons because
of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, religion, marital status, status
with regard to public assistance or disability;
      (2)   To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of
race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status with
regard to public assistance or disability in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any real property or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or
      (3)   In any transaction involving real property, to print, circulate or
post or cause to be printed, circulated or posted any advertisement or sign, or
use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property,
or make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase,
rental or lease of real property which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance
or disability or any intent to make any limitation, specification or
discrimination.
   (B)   For a person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company, insurance
company or other financial institution or lender to whom application is made
for financial assistance for the purchase, lease, acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any real property, or any agent or
employee thereof:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of
race, color, creed, national origin, sex, marital status, religion, status with
regard to public assistance or disability of the person or group of persons or
of the prospective occupants or tenants of the real property in the granting,
withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the rates, terms,
conditions or privileges of any such financial assistance or in the extension
of services in connection therewith;
      (2)   To use any form of application for the financial assistance or make
any record of inquiry in connection with application for the financial
assistance which expresses directly or indirectly any limitation,
specification, or discrimination as to race, color, religion, creed, national
origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or
disability or any intent to make any limitation, specification or
discrimination; or
      (3)   To discriminate against any person or group of persons who desire
to purchase, lease, acquire, construct, rehabilitate, repair or maintain real
property in a specific urban or rural area or any part thereof solely because
of the social, economic or environmental conditions of the area in the
granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the rates,
terms, conditions or privileges of any such financial assistance, or in the
extension of services in connection therewith.
   (C)   For any real estate broker or real estate salesperson, for the purpose
of inducing a real property transaction from which the person, his or her firm
or any of its members may benefit financially to represent that a change has
occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to race,
religion, creed, color, sex, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance or disability of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood
or area in which the real property is located, and to represent, directly or
indirectly, that this change will or may result in undesirable consequences in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located,
including, but not limited to, the lowering of property values, an increase in
criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or
other public facilities.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The rental of a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for
two families, one of which is occupied by the owner; or
      (2)   The rental, by an owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation
in which he or she resides, of a room or rooms in the accommodation to another
person or person if the discrimination is by sex, marital status, status with
regard to public assistance or disability. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to require any person or group of persons selling, renting or leasing
property to modify the property in any way, or exercise a higher degree of care
for a person having a disability than for a person who does not have a
disability; nor shall this section be construed to relieve any person or
persons of any obligations generally imposed on all persons regardless of any
disability in a written lease, rental agreement or contract of purchase or
sale, or to forbid distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and
conditions, including financial obligations, of the lease.
(Prior Code, § 2.74) (Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988)
§ 33.68 PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.
   It is an unlawful discriminatory practice to deny any person the full and
equal enjoyment of goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages and
accommodations because of race, religion, color, creed, national origin, sex or
status with regard to public assistance or disability. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to require any person owning or operating public
accommodations to modify property in any way, or exercise a higher degree of
care for a person having a disability than for a person who does not have a
disability; nor shall this section be construed to relieve any person or person
of any obligation generally imposed on all persons regardless of any disability
in a written lease, rental agreement or contract of purchase or sale, or to
forbid distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions,
including financial obligations, of the lease, agreement or contract.
(Prior Code, § 2.74) (Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 33.69 PUBLIC SERVICES.
   It is an unlawful discriminatory practice to discriminate against any person
in the access to, admission to, full utilization of or benefit from any public
service because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex or status
with regard to public assistance or disability.
(Prior Code, § 2.74) (Ord. 44, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988) Penalty, see
§
10.99
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
34.01   Purpose
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Emergency management organization
   
34.04   Powers and duties
   
34.05   Local emergencies
   
34.06   Emergency regulations
   
34.07   Emergency management a government function
   
34.08   Participation in labor dispute or politics
§ 34.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that there exists the possibility of the
occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destruction resulting from
fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes or
from sabotage, hostile action or from hazardous material mishaps of
catastrophic measure.
   (B)   The City Council further finds that in order to ensure that
preparations of the city will be adequate to deal with such disasters and,
generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace,
health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of the
city, it is hereby declared to be necessary:
      (1)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible
for city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time
of disasters;
      (2)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies
and disasters;
      (3)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the city, county
and other local and state agencies with respect to the carrying out of
emergency preparedness functions; and
      (4)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 12, § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, that requires each political subdivision of the
state shall establish a local organization for emergency management and with
Presidential Directive HSPD-5 (Implementation and use of NIMS).
(Prior Code, § 14.01) (Ord. 283, Third Series, effective 2-2-2006)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person, or situation which has resulted in or
likely to result in, catastrophic loss of property and for which traditional
sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair
or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, (other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible), to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature or from sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services,
police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out of the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as CIVIL DEFENSE
functions.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city
emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or order there under. This includes personnel from the
city, county, authorized volunteers and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff element responsible for
coordinating city planning and preparation for disaster response. This
organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and
county authorities relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.
(Prior Code, § 14.02) (Ord. 283, Third Series, effective 2-2-2006)
§ 34.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created by the city an emergency management organization
which shall be under the supervision and control of the City Emergency
Management Director (herein after called the “Director”) and working in accord
with the County Emergency Management Team. The Director shall be appointed by
the Mayor under terms of the city employment policy. The Director shall have
direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the
emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14.03) (Ord. 283, Third Series, effective 2-2-2006)
§ 34.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director, with consent of the City Council, shall represent the
city at any regional or state conferences for emergency management. The
Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the county and state for reciprocal emergency management aid
and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall
present the agreements to the City Council for its action. The arrangements
shall be consistent with the state’s Emergency Plan.
   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the manpower,
industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to
determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish
the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards and
sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions
subject to approval of the Council.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare a Comprehensive Emergency Plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the City
Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan by resolution,
it shall be the duty of all city agencies, departments and emergency
preparedness forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by
the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to
time. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the
city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the
emergency plan of the Federal Government and the state and coordinated with the
emergency plan of the county.
   (D)   In accordance with the state’s and county’s Emergency Plan, the
Director shall institute training programs, public information programs and
conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to
assure prompt and effective operation of the city’s Emergency Management Plan
when the disaster occurs.
   (E)   (1)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the
maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such departments
and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and
extend the services and facilities to the city and county emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request.
      (2)   The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the
Director shall be responsible for the planning and programming of the emergency
activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the department
or agency.
   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with existing city departments and
agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of the
emergency management personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that the
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency, they shall be under the administration and control of the department or
agency.
   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall
coordinate the activity of city emergency management organizations within the
city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs as required to
assure emergency operational capability in the several services (M.S. Ch. 12, §
12.25, as it may be amended from time to time).
   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued
by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit such reports on emergency
preparedness activities as may be requested by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 14.04) (Ord. 283, Third Series, effective 2-2-2006)
§ 34.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor of the city, or
the City Council or its legal designee. It shall not be continued for a period
in excess of three days, except by or with the consent of the Council. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local emergency
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly by the
City Clerk.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable sections of the city plan, and
may authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
   (C)   No agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly
authorized by the agreement under which it functions.
(Prior Code, § 14.05) (Ord. 283, Third Series, effective 2-2-2006)
§ 34.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for the
emergency for which adequate regulations have been adopted by the Governor or
the City Council, the Council may, by resolution, promulgate regulations,
consistent with applicable federal and state law or regulation, respecting
conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair,
maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire, safety regulation, drills or practice periods required for preliminary
training, and all other matters which are required to protect public safety,
health and welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   Every resolution relating to emergency regulations shall be in
writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it
pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator, which copy shall be kept posted and available for public
inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of the regulation and
its availability for inspection in the Administrator’s office shall be
conspicuously posted at the front of City Hall or at such places affected as
the Council shall designate in the resolution. By like resolution, the Council
may modify or rescind any such regulation.
   (C)   (1)   The Council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any
time. If not sooner rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the end of
30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent
with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended
during the period of time and to the extent the conflict exists.
      (2)   During a declared emergency, notwithstanding any statutory or
Charter provision to the contrary, the city is empowered, through its governing
body acting within the corporate city limits, to enter into contracts and incur
obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and
safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the
victims of the disaster. The city may exercise the powers in the light of the
exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time consuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and
materials, limitations upon tax levies and the appropriate and expenditure of
public funds including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions,
publication of call for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules,
provisions relating to low bids and requirements for budgets.
(Prior Code, § 14.06) (Ord. 283, Third Series, effective 2-2-2006)
§ 34.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
   All functions thereunder and all other activities relating to emergency
management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of
this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to
which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the
Worker’s Compensation Law, being M.S. §§ 176.001 et seq., as it may be amended
from time to time, or under any pension law, or the right of any such person to
receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
(Prior Code, § 14.07) (Ord. 283, Third Series, effective 2-2-2006)
§ 34.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTE OR POLITICS.
   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
(Prior Code, § 14.08) (Ord. 283, Third Series, effective 2-2-2006)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITIES
      
51.   PUBLIC GROUNDS
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWERS
      
54.   SOLID WASTE; RECYCLABLES
      
55.   ELECTRIC SERVICE
      
56.   STORM WATER DRAINAGE
      
57.   EMERGENCY PROTECTION FIRE SERVICES
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities
   
50.03   Fixing rates and charges for public utilities
   
50.04   Contractual contents
   
50.05   Connection or tapping prohibited; delinquent assessments or charges
   
50.06   Additional rules and regulations
Rules and Regulations for Municipal Utilities
   
50.20   Billing, payment, prepayment and delinquency
   
50.21   Application, deposit, connection and sale of service
   
50.22   Discontinuance of service; procedure
   
50.23   Municipal utility services and charges a lien
   
50.24   Ownership of municipal utilities
   
50.25   Right of entry
   
50.26   Meter accuracy and billing errors
   
50.27   Unlawful acts
   
50.28   Damage to equipment, facilities and appurtenance/obstruction
   
50.29   Municipal service disruptions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this public works title, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any city-owned utility system, including, but not by way
of limitation, water, sewerage, electric and refuse service.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any utility, other than a municipal utility, serving
customers in the city under a franchise.
   SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
   UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public city-owned
facilities or furnished by public utility companies.
(Prior Code, § 3.01)
§ 50.02 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by way of
limitation, rates for service, permit fees, connection and meter reading fees,
disconnection fees, reconnection fees, including penalties for non-payment, if
any, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the Council and adopted by
resolution. The resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be
kept on file and open to inspection in the office of the City Administrator and
shall be uniformly enforced.
(Prior Code, § 3.02)
§ 50.03 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   (A)   All rates and charges for public utility franchisees not regulated by
an agency of the state shall be fixed and determined by the Council and adopted
by ordinance. Upon adoption, the rates and charges shall become provisions of
this public works title.
   (B)   Public utility company rates and charges may be fixed and determined
by the respective franchisees in compliance with this section as follows.
      (1)   No rate or charge involving an increase thereof shall become
effective until approved by the Council. To request the increase, the
franchisee shall prepare its written petition setting forth the then current
and proposed rates and charges, the effective date of the proposed increase
(which may not be within 90 days of filing the petition) and the reason or
reasons necessitating the proposed increase or increases. The petition shall be
filed with the Council by serving the same on the City Administrator in person
or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
      (2)   Within 30 days of the filing, the Council shall adopt a resolution
and serve the same upon the resident superintendent of the franchisee in like
manner as the petition may be served either approving the proposed increases or
ordering a hearing thereon to be held within 60 days thereof. If no such action
is taken by the Council, the increase or increases shall take effect on the
date stated in the franchisee’s petition as though approved by the Council.
      (3)   Prior to the hearing date the franchisee shall, without delay,
comply with the city’s reasonable requests for examination and copying of all
books, records, documents and other information relating to the subject matter
of the petition. Should the franchisee unreasonably delay, fail or refuse the
requests, the same shall be grounds for a continuance of the hearing date.
      (4)   Notice of hearing shall be in the form and manner stated in the
resolution. At the hearing, all persons wishing to be heard thereon shall be
afforded a reasonable opportunity. Findings and a decision shall be made by the
Council within 15 days after the hearing and served upon the franchisee.
(Prior Code, § 3.03)
§ 50.04 CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.
   (A)   Provisions of this public works title relating to municipal utilities
shall constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of
municipal utility services and every such consumer shall be deemed to assent to
the same.
   (B)   All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility services
other than municipal shall be in strict accord with the provisions of this
public works title.
(Prior Code, § 3.04)
§ 50.05 CONNECTION OR TAPPING PROHIBITED; DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS OR CHARGES.
   No permit shall be granted to tap or connect with sewer or water mains when
any assessment or connection charge for the sewer or water main against the
property to be connected is in default or delinquent. If the assessment or
connection charges are payable in installments, no permit shall be granted
unless all installments then due and payable have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 3.06)
§ 50.06 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution, adopt and from time to time amend,
such additional rules, regulations and conditions for furnishing municipal
utility service as it, in its sole discretion, deems necessary and proper under
the circumstances.
   (B)   All municipal utility customers shall, upon adoption or amendment
thereof, be deemed to assent and be subject to any such rules and regulations,
and municipal utilities shall be connected and the services continued, only
upon customer compliance with such conditions for furnishing service.
(Prior Code, § 3.07) (Ord. 75, Third Series, effective 10-19-1989)
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
§ 50.20 BILLING, PAYMENT, PREPAYMENT AND DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   All municipal utilities shall be billed monthly, and a utilities
statement shall be sent to the owner or occupant of the premises following
reading of any meter. All utility charges shall be delinquent if they are
unpaid at the close of business on the eighth of the month following the
billing; provided that, if the eighth day shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday or
legal holiday, the time shall be extended to the close of business on the next
succeeding day on which business is normally transacted. A bill not paid when
due shall be delinquent and a penalty of 10% thereof shall be added to, and
become a part of, all delinquent utility bills. The penalty may be waived by
the City Administrator in cases of dire emergency of the customer, or if the
account has been promptly paid, during the previous 12-month period provided
the payment is received within three business days after the due date.
Municipal utilities may, at the option of the city, be suspended, as provided,
when a bill is so delinquent.
   (B)   If service is suspended due to delinquency, it shall not be restored
to that location until a reconnection charge as prescribed by the Council has
been paid for each utility reconnect in addition to amounts owed for service,
penalties and deposit; or a repayment plan acceptable to the City Administrator
is made and an agreement signed with the city providing that utilities will be
immediately shut off if the terms of the payment plan are not strictly adhered
to.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 331, Third Series, effective 8-30-2013)
§ 50.21 APPLICATION, DEPOSIT, CONNECTION AND SALE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon forms
supplied by the city and strictly in accordance therewith.
   (B)   At the time of filing an application for utility service, the
applicant shall deposit a sum as approved by Council resolution.
   (C)   No connection shall be made until consent has been received from the
city to make the same.
   (D)   All municipal utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under
the then applicable rate applied to the amount of the utilities taken as
metered or ascertained in connection with the rates.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 166, Third Series, effective 2-2-1995)
§ 50.22 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; PROCEDURE.
   All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued according to M.S.
Ch. 216B, Public Utilities, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 132, Third Series, effective 6-18-1992; Ord. 241,
Third Series, effective 9-13-2001; Ord. 23, Fourth Series, effective 11-11-
2021)
§ 50.23 MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICES AND CHARGES A LIEN.
   (A)   Payment for all municipal utility (as that term is defined in § 50.01
of this chapter) service and charges shall be the primary responsibility of the
owner of the premises served and shall be billed to him or her unless otherwise
contracted for and authorized by the owner and the tenant, as agent for the
owner, and consented to by the city. The city may collect the same in a civil
action or, in the alternative and at the option of the city, as otherwise
provided in this section.
   (B)   Each such charge is hereby made a lien upon the premises served. All
such charges, when directed by the Council, shall be certified by the City
Administrator to the County Auditor by November 30 of each year, and the City
Administrator, in so certifying the charges to the County Auditor, shall
specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises served and the name
of the owner thereof. The amount so certified shall be extended by the Auditor
on the tax rolls against the premises in the same manner as other taxes, and
collected by the County Treasurer, and paid to the city along with other taxes.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 333, Third Series, effective 1-30-2014)
§ 50.24 OWNERSHIP OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   Ownership of all municipal utilities plants, lines, mains, extensions and
appurtenances thereto shall be and remain in the city, and no person shall own
any part or portion thereof; provided, however, that, private facilities and
appurtenances constructed on private property are not intended to be included
in municipal ownership.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
§ 50.25 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The city has the right to enter in and upon private property, including
buildings and dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed a municipal
utility or connection therewith, at all times reasonable under the
circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the purpose of
inspection and repairs to meters or a utility system or any part thereof, and
for the purpose of connecting and disconnecting service.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
§ 50.26 METER ACCURACY AND BILLING ERRORS.
   All water and electric utilities service shall be supplied through a meter
which shall accurately measure the amount thereof supplied to any consumer. The
consumer shall supply a safe and proper place for the installation of the
meters. Meters shall be tested for accuracy by the city upon the request of any
consumer who believes his or her meter to be inaccurate. If, upon test, it
appears that the meter overruns to the extent of 3% or more, the city shall pay
the cost of the tests and shall make a refund for overcharges collected since
the last known date of accuracy, but for not longer than six months, on the
basis of the extent of the inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the tests.
If, upon test, it appears that the meter is slow to the extent of 3% or more,
the consumer shall pay for undercharges since the last known date of accuracy,
but for not longer than six months, on the basis of the extent of the
inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the test. If, when any meter is tested
upon the demand of a consumer, it is found to be accurate or less than 3% fast
or slow, the consumer shall pay the reasonable cost of the testing. If a meter
is registering accurately, but for other reasons a billing error occurred, the
amount
used shall be appropriately billed or refunded by the city, but without penalty
or interest for the period of time that the error occurred, but not in excess
of seven years from the date of discovery of the error.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
§ 50.27 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break,
injure, mar, deface, disturb or in any way interfere with any buildings,
attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture or appurtenance of any
municipal utility or municipal utility system, or to commit any act tending to
obstruct or cause waste or impairment of use of any municipal utility.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with, opening
into, use or alter in any way any municipal utility system without first having
applied for and received written permission to do so from the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the
same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for non-payment of a bill,
or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so from
the city.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to “jumper”, or by any means or device
to fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or to knowingly use
or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any utility system, the
use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 75, Third Series, effective 10-19-1989) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 50.28 DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES AND APPURTENANCE/ OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section only, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      MUNICIPAL UTILITY EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES AND APPURTENANCE. Any tangible
asset which is owned, controlled or leased by the city and which is required to
provide utility services.
      OBSTRUCTION. Any tangible asset, whether organic or inorganic, above
ground or below ground and real, personal or mixed; which is located in a
public right-of-way owned, controlled or leased by the city; which has not been
approved by the city; and which includes, but is not limited to, trees, shrubs,
gardens, lawn ornaments and landscaping; underground cables, pipes, waterlines,
electrical lines and sprinkler systems; and above-ground structures such as
buildings, sidewalks, driveways and fences.
   (B)   Damage to municipal utility equipment. It is unlawful for any person
to intentionally cause damage to any municipal utility equipment, facilities or
appurtenance, including, but not limited to, meters, street lights, water
hydrants and curb cocks. Anyone intentionally causing damage shall pay the
reasonable value thereof to the city, including labor for replacement and
installation of any such equipment, facilities or appurtenances, and shall also
be subject the penalties set forth in §
10.99.
   (C)   Damage to obstruction. When the city does work in a public right-of-
way and finds it necessary to damage, dismantle or remove an obstruction, the
costs associated therewith will be billed to that obstruction’s owner and must
be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Any obstruction, including,
but not limited to, water sprinkling systems, located in the public right-of-
way shall be the sole responsibility of the obstruction’s owner, and the city
shall not be responsible in any way for maintenance of or damage to the
obstruction.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 306, Third Series, effective 6-25-2009) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 50.29 MUNICIPAL SERVICE DISRUPTIONS.
   In no event will the city be responsible for direct or indirect damages
caused by disruptions in the service of any municipal utility whether the same
be a complete or partial interruption, including, but not limited to, low or
high voltages or pressure, line blockages or other fluctuations in the delivery
of services.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 75, Third Series, effective 10-19-1989)
CHAPTER 51: PUBLIC GROUNDS
Section
Vacations
   
51.01   Petition
   
51.02   Action on petition
   
51.03   Notice of hearing
   
51.04   Council action
VACATIONS
§ 51.01 PETITION.
   (A)   No public grounds or streets shall be vacated, except upon the
petition directed to the Council of a majority of the owners of property on the
line of the public grounds or streets residing within the city, payment of the
initial non-refundable filing fee as determined by the Council and completion
of the procedure hereinafter specified.
   (B)   The petition shall set forth the reasons for the desired vacation,
accompanied by a plat of the public grounds or streets proposed to be vacated,
and the petition shall be verified by the oath of a majority of the petitioners
residing within the city.
   (C)   A petition for a vacation of a street, alley or other public ground
shall not be granted unless all of the abutting owners and encumbrancers agree
to execute utility easement documents if required by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.08) (Ord. 326, Third Series, effective 9-27-2012) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 51.02 ACTION ON PETITION.
   If, in the discretion of the Council, it is expedient that the matter be
proceeded with, it may order the petition filed for record with the City
Administrator, order a hearing on the petition and fix the time and place of
the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 3.08) (Ord. 326, Third Series, effective 9-27-2012)
§ 51.03 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The City Administrator shall give notice of the hearing by publication once
at least 15 days in advance of the hearing, and by mail to the last known
address of all of the owners of property on the line of the public grounds or
streets proposed to be vacated at least ten days in advance of the hearing, the
last known addresses to be obtained from the office of the County Auditor/
Treasurer. The notice shall state in brief the object of the hearing, the time,
place and purpose thereof and the fact that the Council, or a board or
commission designated by it shall hear the testimony and examine the evidence
of the parties interested.
(Prior Code, § 3.08) (Ord. 326, Third Series, effective 9-27-2012)
§ 51.04 COUNCIL ACTION.
   The Council, after hearing the same, or upon the report of the board or
commission designated to hold the hearing, may, by resolution, adopted by
unanimous vote of all members, declare the public grounds or streets vacated or
deny the petition. In granting a petition, the Council may reserve to the city
or to any utility an easement to continue maintaining facilities upon the
premises vacated. The resolution, if granting the petition shall, upon payment
to the city of all expenses incurred, less the initial non-refundable filing
fee, be certified by the City Administrator and shall be filed for record and
duly recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 3.08) (Ord. 321, Third Series, effective 12-8-2011; Ord. 326,
Third Series, effective 9-27-2012)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
   
52.01   Deficiency of water and shutting off water
   
52.02   Repair of leaks
   
52.03   Abandoned services; penalties
   
52.04   Service pipes
   
52.05   Private water supplies
   
52.06   Restricted hours of sprinkling
   
52.07   Private fire hose connections
   
52.08   Opening hydrants
   
52.09   Unmetered service
   
52.10   Code requirement
   
52.11   Connection fees
§ 52.01 DEFICIENCY OF WATER AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.
   The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water
to customers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of
making repairs or connections or by any other cause whatever. In case of fire,
or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to ensure a supply for firefighting. In
making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time
and kept off so long as may be necessary.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 52.02 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service
pipe from the curb stop into the house or other building. In case of failure
upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in his or
her service pipe within 24 hours after oral or written notice has been given
the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off and will not
be turned on until a reconnection charge has been paid and the water service
has been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to
result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the repair is not
proceeded with immediately.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 52.03 ABANDONED SERVICES; PENALTIES.
   All service installations connected to the water system that have been
abandoned or, for any reason, have become useless for further service shall be
disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises served by this service
shall pay the cost of the excavation. The city shall perform the actual
disconnection and all pipe and appurtenances removed from the street right-of-
way shall become the property of the city. When new buildings are erected on
the site of old ones and it is desired to increase the old water service, a new
permit shall be taken out and the regular tapping charge shall be made as if
this were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any
service pipe to be hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow
of water or to save expense in improperly removing the pipe from the main.
Also, the improper disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city and the
cost incurred shall be borne by the person causing or allowing the work to be
performed.
(Prior Code, § 3.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.04 SERVICE PIPES.
   Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to prevent rupture by
settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than seven feet below the
surface, in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by
freezing. Frozen service pipes between the curb stop and the building shall be
the responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the curb stops
to the inside of the building or, if not taken into a building, then to the
hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to supply. A valve, the same
size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the
building, ahead of the meter and well protected from freezing. Joints on copper
tubing shall be kept to a minimum. Not more than one joint shall be used for a
service up to 70 feet in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until
inspected. Minimum size connection with the water mains shall be three-fourths
inch in diameter.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 52.05 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.
   (A)   No water pipes of the city water system shall be connected with any
pump, well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other source of
water supply, and when such are found, the city shall notify the owner or
occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water
shall be turned off.
   (B)   Before any new connections to the city system are permitted, the city
shall ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when the new connection is
made.
   (C)   When a building is connected to “city water”, the private water supply
may be used only for such purposes as the city may allow.
(Prior Code, § 3.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.06 RESTRICTED HOURS OF SPRINKLING.
   Times and hours during which water may not be used from the city water
system is between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. for lawn sprinkling,
except new lawns, new seedlings, new sod and hand garden sprinkling. Watering
is allowed for even numbered addresses on even numbered days between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (evening and early morning). Watering is allowed for
odd-numbered addresses on odd-numbered days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. (evening and morning). Property in a homeowner association may water
on even numbered days regardless of an even or odd house number. In addition,
whenever the city determines a shortage of water threatens the city of any part
of the city, it may further limit the times and hours during which water may be
used from the city water system for any and all uses specified during such
period of water shortage or emergency. It is unlawful for any water consumer to
cause or permit water to be used in violation of the determination after public
announcement hereof has been made through the news media specifically
indicating the restrictions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3.20) (Ord. 347, Third Series, effective 6-30-2016) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 52.07 PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS.
   Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may apply
for and obtain permission to connect the street mains with hydrants, large
pipes and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only, at their own
installation expense and at such rates as the Council may adopt, by resolution,
as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 52.08 OPENING HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire Department or
other persons duly authorized by the city in pursuance of lawful purpose, to
open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner
interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so authorized to
deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or
wrench, except for the purpose strictly pertaining to their lawful use.
(Prior Code, § 3.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.09 UNMETERED SERVICE.
   Unmetered service may be provided for construction, flooding skating rinks
and any other purpose. The service shall be at a duly adopted rate. Where it is
difficult or impossible to accurately measure the amount of water taken,
unmetered service may be provided and the unmetered rate applied; provided,
however, that, by acceptance thereof the consumer agrees to have the city
estimate the water used. In
so estimating, the city shall consider the use to which the water is put and
the length of time of unmetered service.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 52.10 CODE REQUIREMENT.
   All piping, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and performed
strictly in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Failure to install or
maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to have or permit
required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city, be an additional ground
for termination of water service to any consumer.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 52.11 CONNECTION FEES.
   Service shall be furnished only after proper application has been made and
connection fees paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Use of public sewers required
   
53.03   Private wastewater disposal
   
53.04   Building sewers and connections
   
53.05   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
53.06   Enforcement
Discharges; Rules and Regulations
   
53.20   Discharge of surface waters and the like
   
53.21   Non-acceptable wastes
   
53.22   Accidental discharges
   
53.23   Monitoring facilities
   
53.24   Measurement procedures
   
53.25   Inspection and sampling
   
53.26   Special cases
Sump Pump Discharges
   
53.40   Purpose
   
53.41   Definition and method
   
53.42   Disconnection
   
53.43   Inspections
   
53.44   Waivers
Cross-reference:
Streets and Sidewalks, see Ch. 151
Subdivisions, see Ch. 152
Water, see Ch. 52
Zoning, see Ch. 153
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also known as the Clean Waters
Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning two feet outside the outside face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A sewage disposal system, other than a
public or community system, which receives sewage from an individual
establishment. Unless otherwise indicated, the word SYSTEM, as it appears in
this chapter, means INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who discharges to the city’s sewage works liquid
wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business establishments, or from the development of any natural
resource.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the (city’s) wastewater
disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the (city’s) NPDES or the
state’s disposal system permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal by the city in accordance with published regulations providing
guidelines under § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any regulations
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C.
§§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.), the Toxic
Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.) or more stringent state
criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the city.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT.
      (1)   The process of reducing the amount of pollutants, eliminating
pollutants or altering the nature of pollutant properties in sewage to a less
harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing the
pollutants into the sewage works.
      (2)   The reduction, elimination or alteration may be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means,
except dilution.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to
enter the city’s wastewater disposal system.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. A user that discharges to the city’s treatment
facility non-domestic wastewater that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater;
      (2)   Contains a loading of 156 pounds per day of BOD or more; or
      (3)   Has the potential, in the opinion of the city, to adversely impact
the city’s treatment works or the quality of its effluent.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which is a
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than three times the average
24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms, conditions
and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. § 115.07, as it
may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system as defined by M.S. §
115.01, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
   STORM DRAIN. (Sometimes termed as STORM SEWER.) A sewer which carried storm
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes,
other than unpolluted cooling water.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   USER. Any person who discharges, causes or permits discharge of wastewater
into the city’s wastewater disposal system.
   WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM or SYSTEM. Any devices, facilities, structures,
equipment or works owned or used by the city for the purpose of the
transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of industrial and
domestic wastewater or necessary to recycle or reuse water, including
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection system, pumping, power
and other equipment, and their appurtenances; extension, improvements,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a
recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well
facilities; and any works, including land that will be an integral part of the
treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
the treatment.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) (Ord. 22, Third Series, effective 10-17-1984; Ord. 207,
Third Series, effective 8-20-1998)
§ 53.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, private vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage. It is further unlawful for any
person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the city or in any area under its
jurisdiction any human or animal excrement, sewage, garbage or other
objectionable material or waste.
   (B)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes from which sewage is
discharged shall be required at the owner’s expense to install a suitable
service connection to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter within 90 construction working days of the date of notice to the
owner; provided that, the Council may waive the requirements herein if the
public sewer is located more than 200 feet from the property line and a private
wastewater disposal system is connected and meets all requirements of §
53.03 of this chapter. All future buildings constructed shall be required to
immediately connect to the
public sewer. If sewer connections are not made pursuant to this section, an
official 30-day notice shall be served instructing the affected property owner
to make the connection and no occupancy of the building shall be permitted
until the connection is made.
   (C)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in
compliance with a notice given under division (B) above, the city may undertake
to have the connection made and shall assess the cost thereof against the
benefitted property. The assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the
rate determined by the City Council and shall be certified to the County
Auditor and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements. The rights of the city shall be in addition
to any remedial or enforcement provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.03 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sewer is not required under the provisions of §
53.02 of this chapter, the building sewer must be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city.
The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as are deemed necessary by the city. Existing systems may also be
given a permit upon similar application.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the system or the installation is inspected or completed to the
satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative. The city or its
representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
city when work is ready for final inspection before any underground portions
are covered. The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of
notice. The city may also request discovery work at the expense of the owner to
verify the system was constructed and operating according to plans.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location, design and layout of a private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Minn. Rules
Ch. 7080, entitled, “Individual Sewage Treatment System” and amendments or
successor provisions thereto. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer within 90 days of availability in compliance with this
section and within 180 days, any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottoms shall be
broken to permit drainage and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
   (F)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may imposed by the state’s Pollution
Control Agency, Department of Natural Resources, the Department of Health or
any other state or federal authority having jurisdiction thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) (Ord. 120, Third Series, effective 12-12-1991) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 53.04 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Building Inspector.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgement of the Building Inspector. A permit and
inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed,
the fee to be an amount as currently on file in the city’s sewage rate
schedule.
   (C)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building sewer stands at the rear of another or an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (E)   Old buildings’ sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination by the Building Inspector, to meet all
requirements of this section.
   (F)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (G)   No person shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other source of surface run-off or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (H)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice
No. 9. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Building Inspector before installation. A copy of the controlling code rules
and regulations will be made available on request for an appropriate fee.
   (I)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Building
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Building Inspector.
   (J)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.05 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   Duly authorized city employees bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of §§
53.01 through
53.06 and 53.20 through 53.26 of this chapter. City employees shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct
bearing of the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
(Prior Code, § 3.21)
§ 53.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The City Administrator may suspend the sewage treatment services
to any user (after informal notice to the discharger) when the suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the City Administrator, in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the
environment or to the sewage system, or would cause the city to violate any
condition of its NPDES or the state’s disposal system permit.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the sewage treatment service
shall immediately stop the discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City Administrator shall take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewage system or
endangerment to any individuals. The City Administrator shall reinstate the
sewage treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying
discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the
causes of any slug or accidental discharge and the measures taken to prevent
any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City Administrator within 15
days of the date of occurrence.
   (B)   In accordance with the procedures set forth in §§
53.01 through
53.06 and 53.20 through 53.26 of this chapter, the City Administrator may
revoke the permit of any user which fails to factually report the sewage
constituents or characteristics; or which refuses reasonable access to the
user’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring or for violation of
conditions of its permit, §§
53.01 through
53.06 and 53.20 through 53.26 of this chapter or applicable state and federal
regulations.
   (C)   If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes
into the city’s sewage system contrary to the provisions of §§
53.01 through
53.06 and 53.20 through 53.26 of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment
requirements, or any order of the city, the City Attorney may, following the
authorization of the action by the City Council, commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief.
   (D)   (1)   A list of the users which were significantly violating
applicable pretreatment requirements or national categorical pretreatment
standards during the 12 previous months shall be annually published by the city
in a local newspaper. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement
actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months.
      (2)   For the purpose of this provision, significant violations would be
those violations which remain uncorrected 45 days after notification of non-
compliance, which are part of a pattern of non-compliance over a 12-month
period, or which involve a failure to accurately report non-compliance.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) (Ord. 22, Third Series, effective 10-17-1984)
DISCHARGES; RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 53.20 DISCHARGE OF SURFACE WATERS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process
waters into any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   No rain spout or other form of surface drainage and no foundation
drainage shall be connected with any sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.21 NON-ACCEPTABLE WASTES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged into any public
sewer any of the following wastes:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C), or
causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste having a biological oxygen demand exceeding
1,000 parts per million by weight for any 24-hour period;
      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, kerosene, toluene,
xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides or sulfides, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid
or gas;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded to particles of
one-half inch or less in any dimension;
      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure, grit, brick, cement, onyx, carbide,
animal guts or tissues, paunch, manure, bones, hair, hides of fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, spent lime, stone or marble dust, straw shavings, grass
clippings, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, asphalt residues, residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding
or polishing wastes, or other matter that may interfere with the proper
operation of the sewers or sewage treatment plant;
      (6)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works;
      (7)   Any water or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantities to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, injure or
interfere with sewage treatment or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant;
      (8)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm or ground water;
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
      (10)   Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not;
      (11)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to a degree that the material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the Council for the materials; and
      (12)   Materials which exert or cause unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand
or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the sewage treatment works, and unusual volume of low or concentration of
wastes constituting “slugs”, as defined herein.
   (B)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (C)   National categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) shall be met by all uses which are
subject to such standards unless otherwise modified in accordance with
applicable state statutes or EPA regulations.
   (D)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained herein,
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards or contained in
any state requirement.
   (E)   Sludges, floats, skimmings and the like generated by an industrial or
commercial pretreatment system shall not be placed into the city’s sewage
works. The sludges shall be contained, transported and disposed of in
accordance with all federal, state and local regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.22 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by §§
53.01 through
53.06 and 53.20 through 53.26 of this chapter. Where necessary, facilities to
prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or user’s own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the city for review and approval.
   (B)   Users shall notify the city immediately upon having a slug or
accidental discharge of substances or wastewater in violation of §§
53.01 through
53.06 and 53.20 through 53.26 of this chapter in order to enable counter-
measures to be taken to minimize damage to the sewage works and the receiving
waters. The notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense,
loss or damage to the sewage works or treatment process, or for any fines
imposed on the city on account thereof under any state or federal law. A notice
shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent
place advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental
discharge. Employers shall ensure
that all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of
the emergency notification.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.23 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems shall be
provided and operated by all industrial users. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the City Administrator may,
when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user,
allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and composting of samples for analysis. The facility
and sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City
Administrator’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards
and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the City Administrator, unless time extension is
otherwise granted by the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 3.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.24 MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
water to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole.
(Prior Code, § 3.21)
§ 53.25 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The City Administrator shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of §§
53.01 through
53.06 and 53.20 through 53.26 of this chapter is being met and all requirements
are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the City Administrator ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The
City Administrator, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) and EPA shall
have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into his, her, their or its
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with any security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, duly authorized city
employees, the state’s Pollution Control Agency employees and U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency employees bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, record, examination, observation and performance of their specific
responsibilities.
(Prior Code, § 3.21)
§ 53.26 SPECIAL CASES.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby any industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern. In no event shall the terms and provisions of such special
agreement cause the city to violate its NPDES permit or state disposal system
permit or result in plant interference, pass through, or restrictions on sludge
disposal. Additionally, any special agreement shall not agree to variances for
industries from national categorical pretreatment standards. Whenever it is
determined that any lot, parcel of land, building or premises is discharging
industrial wastes of unusual volume, concentration or character, or of a
greatly variable volume, a special rate for the class of users, taking into
consideration the volume, biochemical oxygen demand value and suspended solids
content of the industrial wastes and the nature of the use made of the sewer
system may be adopted by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 3.21)
SUMP PUMP DISCHARGES
§ 53.40 PURPOSE.
   In adopting this subchapter, the City Council finds that the discharge of
water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool
or other natural precipitation into the city sewerage system will and has on
occasion in the past, flooded and overloaded the sewerage system to such an
extent as to cause significant and grave damage to the property of large
numbers of city residents. The damage is caused by the backup of sewage into
the living quarters of residents and in addition to other damage creates a
hazard to health. The City Council, therefore, finds it essential to the
maintenance of health and to minimize damage to property that the provisions of
this subchapter be strictly enforced to avoid emergencies in the future.
(Prior Code, § 3.215)
§ 53.41 DEFINITION AND METHOD.
   No water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile, swimming
pool or other natural precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary
sewerage system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures which require,
because of the infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and the like,
a sump pump system to discharge excess water shall have a permanently installed
discharge line which shall not, at any time, discharge water into the sanitary
sewerage system, except as provided herein. A permanent installation shall be
one which provides for year-round discharge capability to either the outside of
the dwelling, building or structure, or is connected to the city storm sewer or
discharges through the curb and gutter to the street. It shall consist of a
rigid discharge line, without valving or quick connections for altering the
path of discharge and, if connected to the city storm sewer line, include a
check valve.
(Prior Code, § 3.215) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.42 DISCONNECTION.
   Any person, firm or corporation having a roof, surface, ground, sump pump,
footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the
sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove the same. Any disconnects
or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in an effective,
workmanlike manner, approved by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.215) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.43 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   At any time, if the city has reason to believe an illegal connection
may exist in a premises, the owner, by written notice, shall comply with the
provisions of §
53.41 of this chapter.
   (B)   As the city deems necessary, persons owning improved real estate that
discharges into the city’s sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee of the
city or a designated representative to inspect the building to confirm there is
no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Any
property owner found in violation of this subchapter shall make the necessary
changes to comply with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.215) (Ord. 167, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 53.44 WAIVERS.
   (A)   The city shall have the power and duty of hearing and deciding
requests for waivers from the applicability of the provisions of this
subchapter where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of
circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration or cause a
safety problem.
   (B)   Application for waivers pursuant to this section shall be addressed in
writing to the city. The application shall, at a minimum, identify the property
for which the waiver is being applied for, the name of the property owner/
applicant and describe in detail what characteristics of the subject property
create an undue hardship.
   (C)   Within a reasonable time, the city shall make its order deciding on
the matter and serve a copy of the order upon the applicant by mail. Upon
approval of an application for a waiver, a property owner shall be allowed to
temporarily pump directly into the sanitary sewer system between the dates of
October 15 and May 1, and provided the applicant agrees to pay an additional
fee of $35 per year for the additional sewer service, payable October 15 of the
year.
(Prior Code, § 3.215) (Ord. 170, Third Series, effective 5-4-1995)
CHAPTER 54: SOLID WASTE; RECYCLABLES
Section
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Storage and transporting garbage
   
54.03   Garbage containers
   
54.04   Recyclable containers
   
54.05   Collection and disposal of garbage
   
54.06   Property of the city
   
54.07   Burying garbage; composting
   
54.08   Schedules; additional collections
   
54.09   Prohibited practices
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Solid waste resulting from the demolition of buildings,
roads and other structures including concrete, brick, bituminous concrete,
wood, masonry, glass, trees, rock and plastic building parts.
   GARBAGE. All drained organic material resulting from the preparation of food
and spoiled or decayed food from any source, non-recyclable cans, non-
recyclable bottles, non-recyclable glassware, non-recyclable paper or paper
products, crockery, ashes, rags, discarded clothing, putrescible and non-
putrescible solid wastes, rubbish and other discarded waste materials and
sludge in solid, semi-solid, liquid or contained gaseous form. GARBAGE does not
include medical waste, yard waste or demolition debris.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Any waste generated in the diagnosis, treatment or
immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in
the production or testing of biologicals by a medical facility, hospital,
clinic, dental facility, mortuary or other facility wherein the wastes are
produced, used or stored.
   RECYCLABLE. Newsprint, corrugated cardboard, office and computer paper,
plastic containers, glass containers, aluminum foil and cans, tin cans, steel
cans and bimetal cans, free of food, dirt and
other contaminants. Also included as a RECYCLABLE is any other material that
the city may hereafter be required to collect as a recyclable by the County
Environmental Office.
   YARD WASTE. The garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds and prunings
generated at residential or commercial properties.
(Prior Code, § 3.22) (Ord. 246, Third Series, effective 4-11-2002; Ord. 261,
Third Series, effective 4-8-2004)
§ 54.02 STORAGE AND TRANSPORTING GARBAGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to store or accumulate garbage except as
herein provided. Any unauthorized accumulations of garbage on any premises is a
nuisance and prohibited.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to transport garbage over any street,
for hire, except by special permit from the Council, acting within the course
and scope of a written contract with the city, or his or her employment with
the city.
   (C)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to transport garbage on any street
unless it is carried in a vehicle equipped with a leak-proof body or container
and completely covered with a heavy canvas or top to prevent loss of contents.
      (2)   Any vehicle transporting garbage shall meet all city and county
weight requirements per axle when loaded.
   (D)   Garbage and recyclables, in appropriate containers, are to be placed
at the curb or other location as approved by the city, for property where the
individual resides.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to haul and dispose of garbage or
recyclables in a dumpster provided to a private business for that business’s
use.
(Prior Code, § 3.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.03 GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
   All garbage shall be stored in containers provided by the city with a
maximum capacity of 60 gallons and not exceeding total weight of 65 pounds with
the lid closed. The container must be moved to the curb and face the street in
order to be picked up on the scheduled day. The container must not be blocked
by a vehicle/mailbox or other obstacle. The container must not have garbage
items packed in so tight that the material will not come out. The garbage
container must not include any grass, leaves, recyclable items, hazardous waste
or other non-garbage items.
(Prior Code, § 3.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.04 RECYCLABLE CONTAINERS.
   All recyclable materials shall be stored in containers provided by the city
with the lids closed. Recyclable items are to be placed in the appropriately
labeled container and taken to the curb in time for pickup on the scheduled
day.
(Prior Code, § 3.22) (Ord. 227, Third Series, effective 4-20-2000) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 54.05 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   (A)   All garbage accumulated in residential properties, city-owned
facilities, county-owned/operated facilities and city/county-owned facilities
within the city shall only be collected by the city in a sanitary manner to
ensure the health, safety and general welfare of its residents, under such
terms and conditions as the city may, from time to time, deem appropriate.
Containers shall be placed at the designated collection point on days specified
by the city. For purposes of this chapter, residential properties shall
include, but are not limited to, all single-family dwellings, multi-family
dwellings including single-family residences, duplexes, tri-plexes, four-plexes
and apartment complexes, churches, day-care facilities, retirement homes, homes
for the elderly, home care or assisted living facilities and hospice
facilities. Residential properties shall not include nursing homes licensed by
the state or commercial, industrial or institutional properties not
specifically included in the meaning or definition of residential properties.
   (B)   (1)   In the event a large volume of garbage is generated at a
residential property, as a result of extraordinary circumstances or events, a
special or additional pickup(s) may be requested.
      (2)   The person requesting the special or additional pickup(s) shall be
responsible for the costs of the special or additional pickup(s).
(Prior Code, § 3.22) (Ord. 261, Third Series, effective 4-8-2004) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 54.06 PROPERTY OF THE CITY.
   Once garbage is placed at the curb for collection, no private individual
shall collect, carry off, take or assume possession of any such materials,
except by express written direction and consent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.07 BURYING GARBAGE; COMPOSTING.
   No person shall bury any garbage within the city, except in an approved
sanitary landfill; but leaves, grass clippings and easily biodegradable, non-
poisonous garbage may be composted on the premises where the garbage has been
accumulated.
(Prior Code, § 3.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.08 SCHEDULES; ADDITIONAL COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule for the
collection of garbage on a regular periodic basis. The City Council shall also
establish, by resolution, the schedule for any additional pickups including,
but not necessarily limited to spring clean up or leaf pickup.
   (B)   The City Council, may from time to time establish guidelines to make
provisions for special collections, including, but not necessarily limited to,
a spring clean up for the purposes of receiving materials not included in the
periodic garbage collection service, a leaf pickup and a branch or other debris
pickup. The special collections shall apply only to residential properties
served by the city under §
54.05 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.22) (Ord. 227, Third Series, effective 4-20-2000; Ord. 261,
Third Series, effective 4-8-2004)
§ 54.09 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   No person shall engage in “junking” or shall otherwise take, pickup or
collect garbage which has been placed on a public street for collection by the
city. During a scheduled spring clean up, however, junking will be permitted
during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Any violation of this section
shall be considered a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 3.22) (Ord. 277, Third Series, effective 4-20-2000) Penalty, see
§
10.99
CHAPTER 55: ELECTRIC SERVICE
Section
General Provisions
   
55.01   Definitions
   
55.02   Code requirements
   
55.03   Services
   
55.04   Replacing or converting to underground
Transmission, Furnishment and the Like
   
55.15   Franchise required
   
55.16   Term
   
55.17   Franchise fee
   
55.18   Public hearing
   
55.19   Power and regulation reserved
   
55.20   Renewals or extensions
Aggregation of Demand Response
   
55.35   Legislative findings
   
55.36   Aggregation of retail customer demand response
   
55.37   Ancillary services provided by demand response resources
Electric Service Rules and Regulations
   
55.45   Liability
   
55.46   Acceptance of service rules
   
55.47   Access to electric utility facilities
   
55.48   Auxiliary power supply
   
55.49   Balancing loads
   
55.50   Character of service
   
55.51   Cogeneration equipment
   
55.52   Electric service over 200 amps
   
55.53   General design guidelines (commercial and industrial)
   
55.54   Construction procedures
   
55.55   Customer equipment
   
55.56   Damage to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-owned facilities
   
55.57   Easements
   
55.58   Electric utility facility installation
   
55.59   Fault currents
   
55.60   Gopher State One Call
   
55.61   Interruption and termination of service
   
55.62   Location of pad-mounted transformers
   
55.63   Metering
   
55.64   Electric motor installations
   
55.65   Plans and drawings
   
55.66   Power factor
   
55.67   Protection of customer-owned equipment
   
55.68   Rates and facilities
   
55.69   Electric service 200 amps and less
   
55.70   Special equipment
   
55.71   Street and security lighting
   
55.72   Temporary service
   
55.73   Tree trimming
   
55.74   Wiring certification
   
55.75   Summary of responsibilities
   
55.76   Non-distributed generation interconnection guidelines
   
55.77   Standard for transformer pads for transformers 75 to 500 KVA
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 55.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICATION FOR SERVICE. The agreement or contract between Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility and the customer under which electric service is provided.
   ACCESSIBLE. Admitting close approach, not guarded by locked doors, elevation
or other effective means.
   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.
   CUSTOMER'S SERVICE EQUIPMENT. The necessary equipment and accessories
located near the point of delivery at a customer location which constitute the
main control and means of disconnecting the supply to that location. This
equipment usually consists of a circuit breaker or a switch and fuses.
   DRU-DEMAND RESPONSE UNIT. The necessary equipment allowing Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility to control load during peak usage times. Equipment consists of
a seven inch by eight inch gray plastic box located on the outside of the home
close to the air conditioning unit.
   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of installing, maintaining or altering, by contract or otherwise,
electrical equipment for the use of electric energy supplied for light, heat or
power in any building or structure which is, or will be, connected to Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility's electric distribution system.
   ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The system, in whole or in part, over which
electrical energy is supplied by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility to its
customers.
   FACILITIES. The conductors, transformers, pedestals, switching cabinets,
meters and other associated equipment that comprise the electric distribution
system.
   METER SOCKET AND TROUGH. The mounting device consisting of jaws, connectors,
and enclosure for socket-type meters. The mounting device may be either a
single socket or a trough. The socket may have a cast or drawn enclosure. The
trough and assembled enclosure may be extended to accommodate more than one
mounting unit. This equipment is owned and maintained by Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any city-owned utility system, including, but not by way
of limitation, water, sewerage, electric and refuse service.
   NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE (N.E.C.). The latest revision of the National
Electric Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters as approved by the
American National Standards Institute.
   NATIONAL ELECTRICAL SAFETY CODE (N.E.S.C.). The latest revision of the
National Electrical Safety Code as approved by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics, Inc. and approved by the American National Standards Institute.
   NOMINAL VOLTAGE. A specific voltage value assigned to a circuit or system
for the purpose of convenient designation.
   POINT OF DELIVERY. The point where electric energy leaves that part of the
electric distribution system owned by Luverne Municipal Electric Utilities and
enters that portion of the electric distribution system owned by the customer.
This is not necessarily the location of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's
meter.
   POWER FACTOR. The relationship (ratio) between the active power and the volt
amperes in any particular alternating current circuit.
   PRIMARY VOLTAGE. The voltage on the supply side of a transformer.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any utility, other than a municipal utility, serving
customers in the city under a franchise.
   SECONDARY VOLTAGE. The voltage on the load side of a transformer.
   SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
   SERVICE ENTRANCE. That point at which the customer's service equipment
connects to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's facilities.
   SERVICE LOCATION. The point of attachment of the underground service cables
to the customer's building.
   STRUCTURE. An object which is constructed or erected requiring permanent
location on land.
   TEMPORARY SERVICE. The installation of a service of a temporary nature,
usually for construction purposes, for a period of time not to exceed one year
from the date on which the temporary service is installed.
   UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public, city-owned
facilities or furnished by public utility companies.
   UTILIZATION EQUIPMENT. Any customer owned equipment, apparatus, appliance or
device located on a customer's premises or used by a customer.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)ical service to any consumer.
(Prior Code, § 3.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.02 CODE REQUIREMENTS.
   All wiring, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and performed
strictly in accordance with the National Electric Code. Failure to install or
maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to have or permit
required inspections, shall, upon discovery by the city, be an additional
ground for termination of electrical service to any consumer.
(Prior Code, § 3.23) (Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 55.03 SERVICES.
   (A)   New or changed service installations shall be made at the expense of
the consumer, placed underground where designated by the city, and the meter
location shall also be designated by the city.
   (B)   Overhead service installations may be permitted by the city:
      (1)   Temporarily during new construction;
      (2)   Temporarily during an emergency to prevent danger to person or
property;
      (3)   For a period of not more than seven months when soil conditions
make excavation for underground service impractical; or
      (4)   Where to require underground service, the consumer has shown that
the requirement is unduly burdensome.
(Prior Code, § 3.23) (Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.04 REPLACING OR CONVERTING TO UNDERGROUND.
   (A)   Converting to underground. The city may, at its option and at its
expense, convert any present service, where no change is otherwise required by
the consumer, from overhead to underground. Where this is done, the city shall
only cover and refill the trench and other ditching maintenance or repair, and
all subsequent changing and repairing of the service shall be the obligation of
the consumer.
   (B)   Replacing. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from replacing an
overhead service with the same type.
   (C)   Meters and placement service. Placement of services and meters shall
be determined by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.23) (Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
TRANSMISSION, FURNISHMENT AND THE LIKE
§ 55.15 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, firm or corporation shall
transmit, furnish, deliver or receive, or cause to be transmitted, furnished,
delivered or received electric energy for light, power, heat and other purposes
for public and/or private use within and through the limits of the city, or
place or maintain any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures, over, upon or under
any street or public place
for the purpose of operating a public utility or transmitting, furnishing,
delivering or receiving, or causing to be transmitted, furnished, delivered or
received electric energy or for any other purpose, except pursuant to a
franchise from the city. A franchise shall be granted only by ordinance. Every
ordinance granting a franchise shall contain all the terms and conditions of
the franchise. The grantee shall bear the costs of publication of the franchise
ordinance and shall make a sufficient deposit with the City Administrator or
his or her designee to guarantee publication before the ordinance is adopted.
(Prior Code, § 3.25) (Ord. 203, Third Series, effective 8-21-1997; Ord. 18,
Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.16 TERM.
   No perpetual franchise or privilege shall ever be created, nor shall any
exclusive franchise or privilege be granted for a period of more than 20 years.
(Prior Code, § 3.25) (Ord. 203, Third Series, effective 8-21-1997; Ord. 18,
Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.17 FRANCHISE FEE.
   As a part of any franchise ordinance adopted, the city may impose upon the
grantee a franchise fee. The franchise fee, set by resolution, shall be
expressed as a specified charge per kilowatt hour of electric energy
transmitted, furnished, delivered or received, which fee shall be calculated by
the City Council and imposed upon each kilowatt hour of electric energy
transmitted, furnished, delivered or received within the city. The franchise
fee may be changed by resolution from time to time; however, no change shall be
adopted until at least 30 days after written notice enclosing the proposed
resolution has been served upon the grantee by certified mail. The franchise
fee may not be changed more often than once in each calendar year. The current
franchise fee, as set by resolution, shall be paid by the City of Luverne-owned
electric utility in the same manner as any other provider of electricity having
a franchise agreement with the city. At a minimum, the franchise fee shall be
paid to the City of Luverne general fund at lease annually.
(Prior Code, § 3.25) (Ord. 203, Third Series, effective 8-21-1997; Ord. 18,
Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.18 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Before any franchise ordinance is adopted or any rates, fares or prices to
be charged by a public utility are fixed by the Council, the Council shall hold
a public hearing on the matter. Notice of the hearing shall be published at
least once in the official newspaper not less than ten days prior to the date
of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 3.25) (Ord. 203, Third Series, effective 8-21-1997; Ord. 18,
Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.19 POWER AND REGULATION RESERVED.
   Subject to any applicable law, the Council may, by ordinance, reasonably
regulate and control the exercise of any franchise, including the maximum
rates, fares or prices to be charged by the grantee. No franchise value shall
be included in the valuation of the grantee’s property in regulating utility
rates,
fares or prices under any applicable law, ordinance or regulation or in
proceedings for municipal acquisition of the grantee’s property by purchase or
eminent domain.
(Prior Code, § 3.25) (Ord. 203, Third Series, effective 8-21-1997; Ord. 18,
Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.20 RENEWALS OR EXTENSIONS.
   Every extension, renewal or modification of any existing franchise or of any
franchise granted hereafter shall be subject to the same limitations and shall
be granted in the same manner as a new franchise.
(Prior Code, § 3.25) (Ord. 203, Third Series, effective 8-21-1997; Ord. 18,
Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
AGGREGATION OF DEMAND RESPONSE
§ 55.35 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   The City Council hereby finds the following.
   (A)   The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has issued Order No. 719, 125
FERC H 61,071, 73 Fed. Reg. 64,099 (10-28-2008).
   (B)   Pursuant to Order No. 719, 18 C.F.R. § 35.28(g)(1) provides: “Each
Commission-approved independent system operator and regional transmission
organization must permit a qualified aggregator of retail customers to bid
demand response on behalf of retail customers directly into the Commission-
approved independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s
organized markets, unless the laws and regulations of the relevant electric
retail regulatory authority expressly do not permit a retail customer to
participate.”
   (C)   Pursuant to Order No. 719, 18 C.F.R. § 35.28(g)(1)(i)(A) provides:
“Every Commission-approved independent system operator or regional transmission
organization that operates organized markets based on competitive bidding for
energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and
voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary service (or its
functional equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator’s
or regional transmission organization’s tariff) must accept bids from demand
response resources in these markets for that product on a basis comparable to
any other resources, if the demand response resource meets the necessary
technical requirements under the tariff, and submits a bid under the
Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional transmission
organization’s bidding rules at or below the market-clearing price, unless not
permitted by the laws or regulations of the relevant electric retail regulatory
authority.”
   (D)   Pursuant to state law and the City Charter, the city is authorized to
enact regulations governing the provision of electric power to retail customers
within the service territory of the municipal electric utility.
   (E)   It would be harmful to the demand response in the municipal electric
utility, and the collective interests of the municipal electrical system, as a
load-serving entity with an obligation to serve at retail, the electrical
system’s retail customers to permit any entity other than the municipal
electrical system itself or its authorized designee to aggregate demand
response on behalf of its retail customers.
   (F)   It to be desirable that the aggregation of demand response on behalf
of retail customers served by the municipal electric system to be bid directly
into the organized electric and ancillary services markets administered by the
Regional Transmission Organization/Independent System Operators, or its
successors or authorized designee, the following amendments (§§ 55.36 and 55.37
of this chapter) are hereby adopted.
(Prior Code, § 3.26) (Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.36 AGGREGATION OF RETAIL CUSTOMER DEMAND RESPONSE.
   (A)   The municipal electric utility or its authorized designee is the sole
entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by
the municipal electrical system directly into any Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized
electric markets.
   (B)   Retail customers served by the municipal electrical system wishing to
bid their demand response into a Commission-approved independent system
operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized electric markets
may do so by participating in the program established by the municipal
electrical system or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not
permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other entity
without the express prior authorization of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3.26) (Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.37 ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDED BY DEMAND RESPONSE RESOURCES.
   (A)   The municipal electric utility or its authorized designee is the sole
entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by
the municipal electrical system directly into any Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized
markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves,
reactive power and voltage control or regulation and frequency response
ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s tariff).
   (B)   Retail customers served by the municipal electric utility wishing to
bid their demand response into a Commission-approved independent system
operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized markets for energy
imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and
voltage control or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its
functional equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator’s
or regional transmission organization’s tariff) may do so by participating in
the program established by the municipal electric utility or its authorized
designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the demand
response program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3.26) (Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
ELECTRIC SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 55.45 LIABILITY.
   (A)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility is not responsible for and will not
install, maintain or otherwise service the electrical distribution system
beyond the point of delivery except for Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-
owned equipment. Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall not be liable to any
customer or to any third party for damage resulting from the customer's use of
the service or from the presence of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-owned
equipment on the customer's premises.
   (B)   The customer is solely responsible for any accidents, fires or
failures resulting from the condition and use of the electric distribution
system beyond the point of delivery.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.46 ACCEPTANCE OF SERVICE RULES.
   Any person making application for service, accepting, or using Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility electrical service by connecting to Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility's electrical distribution system thereby agrees to
conform to and abide by all applicable federal, state and local rules and
regulations for the operation of the electrical distribution system.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.47 ACCESS TO ELECTRIC UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Any properly authorized agent of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility
shall have free access to the customer's premises at all reasonable hours for
the purpose of reading, examining, inspecting, repairing, replacing or removing
any element of the electric distribution system owned by Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility.
   (B)   No customer shall build or install any structure such as a deck,
porch, patio or addition over or around Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-
owned facilities or otherwise block access to existing Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility-owned distribution system equipment.
      (1)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility may relocate Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility-owned distribution system facilities to accommodate a
customer's needs where:
         (a)   The customer makes a written request for the relocation of
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility facilities.
         (b)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines that the requested
relocation is technically feasible.
      (2)   Any customer blocking access to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-
owned facilities shall be given written notice of such violations and shall be
given a specified period of time within which to provide for appropriate
corrective action acceptable to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
      (3)   Any violation of this section not corrected within the specified
time shall be corrected by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility and the customer
shall be billed for all costs associated with such corrective action.
   (C)   To effect the safe operation of the electric distribution system,
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to remove any
trees, bushes, fences or other obstructions located on a customer's property
which block access to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-owned facilities.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.48 AUXILIARY POWER SUPPLY.
   Where the customer provides for an auxiliary power supply, an adequately-
sized “double-throw disconnecting device" must be provided to open all
ungrounded conductors from the normal supply before connection is made to the
emergency supply in accordance with the requirements of the latest edition of
the National Electric Code.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.49 BALANCING LOADS.
   (A)   All separate electric loads within a service shall be balanced.
   (B)   Where three-phase services are provided, single-phase loads shall be
evenly divided between each of the three phases as the voltage permits.
   (C)   Where single-phase services are provided, the load shall be evenly
divided between the energized conductors.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.50 CHARACTER OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Normal service.
      (1)   Service supplied by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall be
alternating current at a nominal voltage and at a frequency of 60 HZ.
      (2)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby disclaims any liability
and does not guarantee to maintain the accuracy of the nominal values under all
conditions.
   (B)   Standard classes of service.
      (1)   All customers shall call Luverne Municipal Electric Utility before
designing electrical service. Not all voltage characteristics are available in
all service areas.
      (2)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility will provide the following
secondary service where the specified voltages are available either from
existing facilities or from facilities planned for the requested location.
      (3)   Classes of service.
 
Phases Wires Voltage Use
1      3     120/240 Lighting and Appliances
3      4     208/120 Light and Power
3      4     480/277 Light and Power
 
      (4)   There are areas within Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's service
area where nonstandard secondary voltages exist. These existing areas are
"grandfathered" in.
      (5)   Three-phase service shall not be provided for loads with an
expected peak demand of less than 50 KW.
      (6)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall not provide 120/208-volt
service to any customer with a service entrance exceeding 2,500 amps.
      (7)   Customers are advised that since the class of service available
depends on existing and planned facilities, they should obtain specific
characteristics of available service before proceeding with the purchase and
installation of any equipment.
      (8)   Information concerning the specific classes of service available
may be obtained from Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.51 COGENERATION EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The use of any cogeneration equipment requires a separate written
agreement between the customer and Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
   (B)   Information concerning the operation of cogeneration facilities is
available from Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's business office.
   (C)   See Non-Distributed Generation Interconnection Guidelines pursuant to
§
55.75.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.52 ELECTRIC SERVICE OVER 200 AMPS.
   (A)   The customer shall consult with Luverne Municipal Electric Utility
before selecting any service location.
   (B)   Where Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-owned facilities need to be
relocated or upgraded due to any development, re-development, rehabilitation,
addition, site modification, increase in load or customer request, transformer
shall be relocated as determined by the Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
   (C)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-owned equipment.
      (1)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall furnish and own the
transformer or the secondary pedestal, all primary cable and all associated
equipment. All primary cable and associated equipment furnished or installed by
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility is the property of Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility.
      (2)   The meter and associated metering equipment furnished by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility is the property of Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility. Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall furnish and own the meter and
current transformers.
   (D)   Customer-owned equipment.
      (1)   The customer or property owner shall install, maintain and replace
as necessary the entrance conduit, entrance wire and the Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility-furnished metering equipment in accordance with the N.E.C.
standards for all services over 200 amps.
      (2)   On services over 320 amps, the customer or property owner shall
install a secondary connection pedestal in which the customer will be
responsible for the final connections. The secondary connection pedestal will
also be used as a metering point with the meter mounted on the outside of a
cabinet. Customer will be responsible for secondary connections located inside
the transformer.
      (3)   All secondary connections must be landed using Luverne Municipal
Utility required connections at customer expense.
      (4)   The customer or property owner shall be solely responsible for the
ownership, installation, maintenance and replacement of all components of the
electric distribution system located beyond the point of delivery.
      (5)   The customer or property owner shall install concrete-filled, eight
inch steel posts to protect the service transformer and the metering
installation where Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines that it is
required for safety. Upon the customer's or property owner's written request,
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility may approve other forms of protection.
      (6)   Where applicable, the customer shall provide the necessary
equipment for mounting current transformers (see §
55.62).
   (E)   All meters shall be located outside of the structure unless prior
written authorization approving inside installation is obtained from Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility.
   (F)   Meters shall be installed so that the center of the meter is between
40 inches and 66 inches above the final grade.
   (G)   Meters shall be located so that there will be no obstructions for
meter reading, meter testing or other maintenance.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.53 GENERAL DESIGN GUIDELINES (COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL).
   (A)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall provide only one electric
service connection to any structure.
   (B)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall provide only one standard
class of service to any structure.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided, all new electrical metering and
switchgear installations shall be located in one location as close to the
transformer as Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines to be reasonable.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.54 CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The owner, subdivider, builder or developer shall provide Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility with a construction schedule so the electric
distribution system can be installed in an orderly and timely manner.
   (B)   The ground in which electric service will be located shall be brought
to within four inches of final grade and all other underground utilities to be
located beneath the electric service shall be installed prior to the
installation of the electric distribution system.
   (C)   The owner, subdivider, builder or developer shall provide Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility with a clear, unobstructed path across the property
as required for the installation of the on-site electric distribution system.
   (D)   Prior to the actual construction, the developer or customer shall
provide:
      (1)   Final grades (where electric service will be installed);
      (2)   Staking for all lots located in the subdivision or development;
      (3)   Requested easements; and
      (4)   Payment of the facility installation charge (when required).
      (5)   Attention: Failure to complete any of the above items may result in
construction delays.
   (E)   The owner, subdivider, builder or developer shall be responsible for
the cost of moving or rebuilding any facilities as a result of their errors,
omissions or changes.
   (F)   The owner, subdivider, builder or developer shall coordinate the
installation of streets so that Luverne Municipal Electric Utility can install
street crossing conduits before the road base is constructed.
      (1)   The owner, subdivider, builder or developer shall provide Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility with no less than 30 days notice to make the
necessary street crossing installation(s).
      (2)   Where the owner, subdivider, builder or developer fail to
coordinate such street installations with Luverne Municipal Electric Utility,
they shall be jointly and severally responsible for additional costs incurred
by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility as a result of boring, tunneling, street
repairs, and the like.
   (G)   When, in the sole judgment of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility,
difficult installation conditions exist, such as frost, rock, ledge, and the
like, Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall not be bound by any construction
schedule which may have been stated, written or otherwise implied. Such
installations may also be subject to additional charges as determined by
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
   (H)   Prior to the start of construction, the owner, subdivider, builder, or
developer shall arrange for a site inspection with Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility and any communications access provider (i.e. telephone and C.A.T.V.) to
determine the suitability of the site. Suitability will be at the sole
discretion of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
   (I)   The owner, subdivider, builder or developer shall be solely
responsible for any additional costs incurred by Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility to remobilize Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's construction crew if
such work is stopped because Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines that
a portion of the site is not suitable for construction of the electric
distribution system.
   (J)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall schedule its work after all
necessary easements are granted and the project site is ready as determined by
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.55 CUSTOMER EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The customer is responsible for selecting and installing motors,
apparatus and devices which are suitable for operation with the character of
the service available and supplied by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
   (B)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right and
authority to gain access to inspect and test any customer-owned equipment that
is connected to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's system.
   (C)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall be the sole authority in
determining whether any customer-owned equipment connected to Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility's system is causing a deleterious effect on the quality of
service provided by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility to its customers.
   (D)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right and
authority to require the customer to install, at customer's sole expense, any
equipment which Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines is required to
prevent any deleterious effects on the quality of service provided by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility to its customers.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.56 DAMAGE TO LUVERNE MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY-OWNED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Any person working in the vicinity of Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility-owned electric facilities shall be solely responsible to take whatever
precautions are necessary to avoid damaging such facilities.
   (B)   Any person causing damage to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's
equipment or facilities shall be responsible to reimburse Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility for any costs incurred to repair such damage.
   (C)   Any person causing damage to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's
primary system shall be responsible for all costs associated with temporary
repairs made to restore service and for all costs related to replacement of the
primary circuit from the nearest termination point to termination point. Due to
the demand for the highest possible power quality, Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility will not allow permanent splices on the primary system.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.57 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   As required, property owners shall dedicate by plat or grant by
written agreement, public utility easements to the City of Luverne for Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility's use in the construction, maintenance and
replacement of the electric distribution system.
   (B)   All required easements shall be dedicated or granted without cost to
the City of Luverne or Luverne Municipal Electric Utility. This shall include
any additional or relocated easements, which may be required by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility due to circumstances or conditions unforeseen prior
to the beginning of construction.
   (C)   Standard easements shall customarily follow property lines. If such
customary easement location is not possible due to field conditions (hills,
slopes, obstructions, and the like), required easements shall be located in the
nearest suitable area that will insure the safety of the individuals and
equipment involved in the constructing, installing or relocating of Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility facilities.
   (D)   Easements shall be shown and recorded on the subdivision plat.
   (E)   The only time a request to vacate an easement will be considered is:
      (1)   When the easement in question has no utilities located upon it and
no foreseeable need to maintain the easement can be established.
      (2)   The requesting party agrees to pay all associated costs in
relocating all established utilities and provide a feasible alternate easement.
      (3)   The final decision on whether or not to vacate an existing easement
rests with the City Council.
   (F)   The only time a subterranean easement will be granted is when it is
deemed feasible to replace utilities by means of directional boring. This would
require sufficient space to operate a directional boring machine on the
easement. Subterranean status will only be granted to that portion of the
easement that is occupied by a permanent structure. N.E.S.C. has some
restrictions on subterranean easements.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.58 ELECTRIC UTILITY FACILITY INSTALLATION.
   (A)   All permanent electrical facilities shall be installed underground.
   (B)   All new distribution facilities shall be installed so that they are
capable of being looped.
   (C)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to
install temporary or emergency facilities in the most economical manner using
accepted engineering principles and practices.
      (1)   All primary cable shall be installed at a minimum depth of 40
inches and a maximum depth of 72 inches.
      (2)   All secondary services shall be installed at a minimum depth of 16
inches and a maximum depth of 24 inches.
   (D)   To preserve easements and right of ways, Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility encourages joint trench with communication facilities in as much as
feasible. Luverne Municipal Electric Utility will work with all communication
providers in planning and installation of facilities. Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility shall invoice the communication provider for trenching,
handling and other labor involved in joint trenching.
   (E)   To comply with N.E.S.C. rule 350.F, all above ground metallic power
and communications apparatus (pedestals, terminals, apparatus cases,
transformer and switch cabinets cases, and the like) shall be separated by a
distance of six feet or more.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.59 FAULT CURRENTS.
   The customer's service equipment and other devices shall be adequate to
withstand and interrupt the maximum available fault current. There are
locations within Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's service area that may
have a fault current exceeding 10,000 amps, including some single-family
residences. Customer should contact Luverne Municipal Electric Utility to
determine maximum existing and future anticipated fault currents.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.60 GOPHER STATE ONE CALL.
   (A)   In accordance with Minnesota State Statute, Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility is connected to the Minnesota Gopher State One Call System.
   (B)   All requests for locating underground facilities should be made at
least 48 hours in advance of the excavation. The excavation notice may be made
by calling the Gopher State One Call at 1-800-252-1166 or 811. Locates may also
be submitted online at www.gopherstateonecall.org. You will be asked to provide
the following information:
      (1)   Name of the individual calling.
      (2)   Precise location of the proposed excavation.
      (3)   Name, address and telephone number of the excavator.
      (4)   Excavator's field telephone number.
      (5)   Type and extent of proposed excavation.
      (6)   Any anticipated use of explosives.
      (7)   Date and time when excavation is to commence.
   (C)   An excavation is defined as any activity that disturbs the soil by use
of machine-powered equipment or explosives. Excavation does not include:
      (1)   Installation of agricultural drainage tile.
      (2)   Extraction of minerals.
      (3)   Opening of a grave in a cemetery.
      (4)   Street maintenance that does not change the original grade or
involve the ditch.
      (5)   Farm activities that disturb the soil to a depth less than 18
inches.
      (6)   Landscaping or gardening to a depth less than 12 inches.
   (D)   Any damage to the electric distribution system occurring during
excavation must be reported immediately by calling Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility at (507) 449-2388.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.61 INTERRUPTION AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Planned interruptions of service in the normal course of business will
be prearranged with the customer whenever practical.
   (B)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to
curtail or temporarily interrupt a customer's service when Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility determines that repairs, replacement or modification of
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's facilities are required either on or off
the customer's premises.
   (C)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to
interrupt the supply of service to customers in the case of emergencies or
whenever such interruption is required to comply with an order from any
jurisdictional authority.
   (D)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to
terminate electrical service or disconnect the customer from the electric
system when Luverne Municipal Electric Utility or any jurisdictional authority
determines that the customer-owned equipment is unsafe or is causing an unsafe
condition.
   (E)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility may terminate any customer's
service for non-payment of funds owed to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
   (F)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility may terminate any customer's
service if Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines the customer has
illegally diverted any source of energy or has permitted, approved of, or
benefitted from such a diversion.
   (G)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility may terminate any customer's
service if Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines that customer-owned
equipment is causing or may cause damage to Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility's equipment or facilities, or that the customer's continued connection
to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's system may cause power quality problems
for any other Luverne Municipal Electric Utility customer.
   (H)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall not be liable for any loss or
damage to property resulting directly or indirectly from any interruption or
termination of electric service for any reason. Customers requiring service
reliability and/or stability exceeding Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's
normal service should consider uninterruptible power supplies, isolation
transformers, power conditioners, redundant services or other options to
provide the level of service required.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.62 LOCATION OF PAD-MOUNTED TRANSFORMERS.
   (A)   Non-combustible walls. Included in this class would be wood-framed
brick-veneered buildings, metal-clad, steel-framed buildings, asbestos-cement
board-walled metal-framed buildings and masonry buildings.)
      (1)    Doors. Pad-mounted oil insulated transformers shall not be located
within a zone extending 20 feet outward and 10 feet to either side of a
building door.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b81c600120171f21b8029f85c575efd70cc9d9a9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1555.png]
 
      (2)    Air intake openings. Pad-mounted oil insulated transformers shall
not be located within a zone extending 10 feet outward and 10 feet to either
side of an air intake opening located at the level of the transformer. If the
air intake opening is located above the transformer level, the distance from
the transformer to the opening shall be a minimum of 25 feet. The term "level
of the transformer" is to be interpreted as within 10 inches of the ground.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b81c600120171f21b8029f85c575efd70cc9d9a9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1557.png]
 
      (3)   Windows or openings other than air intake.
         (a)   First story. Pad-mounted oil insulated transformers shall not be
located within a zone extending 10 feet outward and three feet to either side
of a building window or opening other than an air intake.
         (b)    Second story. Pad -mounted oil insulated tra nsformers shall
not be located less than five feet from any part of a second story window or
opening other than an air intake.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b81c600120171f21b8029f85c575efd70cc9d9a9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1559.png]
 
   (B)    Combustible walls.
      (1)   Included in this class would be wood buildings and metal-clad
buildings with wood frame construction.
      (2)    Pad-mounted oil insulated transformers shall be located at a
minimum of 10 feet from the building's wall in addition to the clearance from
building doors, windows and other openings set forth for non-combustible walls.
The immediate terrain adjacent to the transformer shall be sloped away from the
building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b81c600120171f21b8029f85c575efd70cc9d9a9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1561.png]
 
   (C)   Barriers. 
      (1)   Included in this class are reinforced concrete, brick or concrete
block barrier walls.
      (2)   If the clearance specified above cannot be obtained, a fire-
resistant barrier shall be constructed in lieu of the separation. The following
methods of construction are acceptable:
         (a)   Non-combustible walls. The barrier shall extend to a projection
line from the corner of the pad-mount to the furthest corner of the window,
door or opening in question. The height of the barrier shall be one foot above
the top of the pad-mounted transformer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b81c600120171f21b8029f85c575efd70cc9d9a9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1563.png]
 
         (b)     Combustible walls. The barrier shall extend three feet beyond
each side of the pad-mounted transformer. The height of the barrier shall be
three feet above the top of the pad-mounted transformer. If a combustible first
floor overhang exists, the 24 inches specified shall be measured from the edge
of the overhang rather than from the building wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b81c600120171f21b8029f85c575efd70cc9d9a9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1565.png]
 
   (D)   Fire escapes. Pad-mounted oil insulated transformers shall be located
such that a minimum clearance of 20 feet is maintained from fire escapes at all
times.
   (E)   Decorative combustible enclosures (fence) installed by the customer
around pad-mounted transformers adjacent to a combustible building wall shall
not extend more than 24 inches beyond the transformer towards the combustible
wall. A 10 inch clearance is required in front of the pad-mount transformer
doors. Adequate transformer accessibility and ventilation must be provided.
   (F)   Minimum clearances around pad-mounted transformers and equipment shall
be 10 feet in front and 36 inches along the sides and back. Fences, shrubbery
and trees may be installed by the customer provided the specified clearances
are maintained, the grade is not altered and the underground cables are not
endangered.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b81c600120171f21b8029f85c575efd70cc9d9a9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1567.png]
 
   (G)   On new installations minimum clearances around metallic power
equipment and communications apparatus (pedestals, terminals, apparatus cases,
transformer cases, and the like) shall be a minimum of six feet as per the
N.E.S.C. (Sec. 35-350-F).
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.63 METERING.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   All electricity furnished by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility
shall be metered, with a meter provided by the Luverne Municipal Utility,
unless the customer has entered into a written agreement with Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility to otherwise account for the customer's use of energy.
      (2)   Responsibilities for the purchase and installation of metering and
related equipment are summarized in §
55.75.
      (3)   Sub-metering of electricity by customers for the purpose of resale
is prohibited.
   (B)   Meter locations.
      (1)   Meter location for new, modified or rehabilitated installations
will be agreed upon by representatives of the customer and Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility, subject to final approval by Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility.
      (2)   All meters shall be located outdoors unless special permission has
been obtained from Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
      (3)   Meters shall be located to facilitate the setting, changing,
testing and reading of the meters.
      (4)   All metering equipment shall be located in an area openly
accessible to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility and shall be grouped to
minimize the number of metering points.
      (5)   The customer shall be solely responsible at all times to maintain a
clear 48-inch work area in front of each meter location as well as a suitable
approach to the meter location, as determined by Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility. If meter location is within a fenced in backyard, a gate shall be
provided for access.
      (6)   The customer or property owner shall install concrete-filled,
eight-inch steel posts to protect the metering installation where meters are
located outdoors in paved areas or in any other areas where Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility determines the metering installation is susceptible to damage.
   (C)   Meter and equipment seals.
      (1)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall seal all meters and points
of access to unmetered wiring on the customer's premises.
      (2)   The customer shall call Luverne Municipal Electric Utility if it
becomes necessary to gain access to any sealed equipment.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall break any seal, close any by-pass
switch, connect, disconnect or tamper with any of Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility's metering equipment.
      (4)   Any person(s) determined to have violated this rule shall be
prosecuted to the full extent of the law and shall also be liable for the cost
of all energy supplied which has not been billed due to unauthorized use,
alteration or tampering with metering equipment.
      (5)   The customer and the owner of the customer's premises (if not the
same as customer) shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs of any
such unauthorized use of energy.
   (D)   Meter installations.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Single-phase meters up to 240 volts, 200 amperes shall be
installed with through-type meter sockets that are provided by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility.
         (b)   All devices designed to interrupt service or protect against
vandalism shall be installed on the load side of the meter(s).
         (c)   Where meter damage occurs or is anticipated, outdoor meters
shall be protected by a suitable box with hasp and staple for the installation
of a padlock.
         (d)   Where Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines that a
protective box is required to protect against possible vandalism or meter
tampering, such a protective box shall be installed and maintained by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility.
      (2)   Meter sockets shall be furnished by Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility. All meter sockets will be "ringless" and have a manual bypass.
      (3)   The customer shall install a Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-
furnished manual bypass meter socket for each of the following single-phase
installations:
         (a)   All commercial installations; and
         (b)   All residential installations rated at 200 amperes.
      (4)   After meter sockets are installed, the interior of the socket must
be protected if exposed to the weather or if the terminals are energized.
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility will furnish and install cover plates for
unused meter sockets at the time meters are installed on other loops.
      (5)   Multiple meter installations.
         (a)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall review and approve all
multiple meter service requests prior to the installation of any equipment.
         (b)   Multiple meter bank assemblies shall be designed so that the
center of the top meter is no more than 66 inches above the floor or the ground
and the center of the bottom meter is no less than 40 inches above the floor or
the ground.
         (c)   Where two or more meters are installed at a location, provisions
shall be made so that the specific address or area served by each meter is
easily determined.
      (6)   No part of the metering set may be used as a junction box for the
customer's wiring.
   (E)   Instrument transformer meter installations
      (1)   The installation of all meters rated over 200 amperes shall include
the necessary equipment for mounting current transformers.
      (2)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall furnish, own and maintain
all instrument transformers required to provide electric service.
         (a)   The customer shall provide the necessary equipment for mounting
bus bar type current transformers and install a one-inch conduit from the meter
socket to its respective exterior instrument transformer enclosure.
         (b)   The meter socket will be located on an outside building wall,
between 44 inches and 66 inches above final grade, and in such a position that
there will be no obstructions to meter reading, testing or other maintenance.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.64 ELECTRIC MOTOR INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   In an effort to ensure that adequate power quality is maintained on
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's distribution system, the following rules
apply to all new connections of motor loads. All installations of electrical
power loads on the utilities' system shall conform to the safety rules as set
forth in the National Electrical Code and other such codes or specifications as
may be applicable.
   (B)   Protective devices. Customers must provide suitable protective devices
for motors and equipment to prevent damage caused by improper or dangerous
operation in case of overload, loss of voltage, low voltage, and single-phasing
of polyphase motors, reversal of phase-rotation of polyphase motors or the re-
establishment of normal service after any of the above. Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility is not responsible for motor or equipment damage caused by any
of the above conditions.
   (C)   Large motor application. All motors in excess of five horsepower
single-phase and 25 horsepower three-phase shall be installed with soft start.
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility reserves the right to limit the number and
size of motors installed on single-phase and three-phase services.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.65 PLANS AND DRAWINGS.
   (A)   The owner, subdivider, builder or developer shall provide to Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility complete and accurate drawings and layouts for
subdivisions, planned unit developments and any other projects requiring the
installation or replacement of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility electrical
facilities.
   (B)   (1)   The owner, subdivider, builder or developer shall provide
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility with complete architectural drawings for any
commercial project for which the city is reviewing a permit application.
      (2)   Such drawings shall include:
         (a)   The requested service voltage;
         (b)   The service entrance amp rating;
         (c)   The connected load (in kW) broken down by load type;
         (d)   The electrical switchgear and metering lineup;
         (e)   The one-line diagram; and
         (f)   The specifications for the HVAC equipment, and the like.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.66 POWER FACTOR.
   (A)   In order to improve the efficiency of Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility's electric distribution system, the customer's utilization equipment
shall maintain an average power factor as close to unity as possible.
   (B)   Some Luverne Municipal Electric Utility rate schedules include a
demand charge and a penalty for an average power factor that is less than the
prescribed limits. For new services, it is suggested the customer's utilization
equipment be designed for operation at a high-power factor or with capacitors
that are switched on and off with the equipment.
   (C)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility will calculate the power factor as
necessary by installing electronic metering capable of determining power
factor.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.67 PROTECTION OF CUSTOMER-OWNED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility does not guarantee the supply of
electric service as to quantity or quality. Irregularities and interruptions
may occur and Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby disclaims any liability
for any damages or lost business incurred by any such irregularities or
interruptions.
   (B)   The customer may install circuit protection devices to protect against
possible equipment damage at the customer's sole expense and liability for the
purchase, installation, use or misuse of any such devices.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.68 RATES AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   Electrical rates have been established by resolution for various
customer classes.
   (B)   A full description of each of the electrical service rates and can be
obtained at the Luverne Municipal Electric Utility business office.
   (C)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility installs or coordinates all new
primary and secondary installations that are dedicated services (serves only
one customer). If the installation is part of the network (serves more than one
customer or "feeds" thought to feed additional customers), a fee is not
assessed. The facility has to be located on the public right of way or on a
granted utility easement. Luverne Municipal Electric Utility typically only
charges for material on new installations. In most cases the labor charges can
be revenue justified and are not billed to the customer.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.69 ELECTRIC SERVICE 200 AMPS AND LESS.
   (A)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall construct and install all on-
site electric distribution systems in new or existing subdivisions or
developments.
      (1)   All such distribution systems shall be constructed in conformity
with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code in effect or as
amended.
      (2)   All services shall be installed underground in accordance with this
chapter.
      (3)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall provide only one electric
service connection to each customer location.
      (4)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility will provide each customer
location with electric service rated at 120/240 volts, single-phase, 200
amperes, in accordance with standard service rules for new construction.
   (B)   The owner, subdivider, builder, developer and/or customer shall
install, maintain and replace as necessary the entrance conduit and the
metering equipment in accordance with the N.E.C. standards.
      (1)   The entrance conduit is required to have a slip sleeve also known
as an expansion joint or expansion coupling.
      (2)   Meters shall be located to maintain completely open access at all
times for meter reading, meter testing or other maintenance.
      (3)   The center of any meter shall be located between 40 inches and 66
inches above final grade.
      (4)   (a)   The electric meter shall be located at the side or rear of
the structure, which is nearest to the point of connection with Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility's system.
         (b)   The owner, subdivider, builder, developer, or contractor shall
provide a straight, clear, unobstructed path across the property as required
for the installation of the on-site electric distribution system.
   (C)   Where Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-owned facilities need to be
relocated or upgraded due to any development, re-development, rehabilitation,
addition, site modification, increase in load or customer request, all required
work shall be performed by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
   (D)   At the sole discretion of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility, the
owner, subdivider, builder, developer or customer may be required to pay for
required on-site distribution system equipment before Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility orders such equipment.
   (E)   The ground in which electric service will be located shall be brought
to within four inches of final grade and all other underground utilities to be
located beneath the electric service shall be installed prior to the
installation of the electric distribution system.
   (F)   Where Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines it is necessary to
relocate an existing electric meter due to meter failure or alterations or
additions to an existing dwelling unit, the meter shall be located in
conformity to provision in this chapter of the City Code.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.70 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT.
   Where the customer's service demands include the use of electrical service
to operate equipment or devices which create a high demand on the operation of
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility facilities for a relatively short period of
time, Luverne Municipal Electric Utility may determine that the installation of
special equipment may be required to maintain satisfactory service. In all such
cases, the customer shall reimburse Luverne Municipal Electric Utility for
costs incurred to purchase special equipment or facilities.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.71 STREET AND SECURITY LIGHTING.
   (A)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility designs, maintains and upgrades the
street lighting systems on all city streets.
   (B)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility recognizes the problems of light
pollution and light trespass. All new lighting installations will be designed
and built with this in mind. Installations will attempt to comply in as much as
reasonably possible to International Dark Sky's recommendations.
   (C)   All new and replacement street light fixtures will be light-emitting
diode (LED) type.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.72 TEMPORARY SERVICE.
   (A)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility will provide temporary service to
any customer where such service may be provided from Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility's existing electric distribution system. Where a customer applies for
routine temporary service, the customer shall provide an approved meter socket
and maintain suitable equipment for a service entrance. All required service
conductors shall be sized in accordance with all applicable codes.
   (B)   The customer shall pay a temporary service connection fee for single-
phase, temporary service in addition to regular monthly charges at the
applicable service rate.
   (C)   The customer shall pay a temporary service connection fee for three-
phase, temporary service in addition to regular monthly charges at the
applicable service rate.
   (D)   Temporary service requests that do not conform to the conditions
specified above may be granted at the sole discretion of Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility. The customer shall reimburse Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility for all costs associated with installing and removing such "non-
routine" temporary services.
   (E)   Temporary service is intended for limited use only and should not
exceed a period of one year.
   (F)   Permanent service entrance equipment shall be installed as soon as
practicable.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.73 TREE TRIMMING.
   (A)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to trim
or remove any trees which create a hazard as defined by the National Electrical
Safety Code.
   (B)   Properly authorized agents of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall
have access to a customer's property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of
trimming or removing trees.
   (C)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to trim
or remove any trees that obstruct the street lighting system.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.74 WIRING CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Only licensed electrical contractors and resident homeowners are
permitted to alter, modify or install wiring devices or appliances in the homes
where they reside.
   (B)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to
require a Certification for Connection by Utility for installations that have
been disconnected, with the cost of such certification being the property
owner’s expense. Connection to power will not be provided until such required
certification is received and approved.
   (C)   As required by M.S. § 326.242, all wiring in mobile home parks must be
performed by properly licensed employees of licensed electrical contractors.
Owners of manufactured homes, park owners, park employees or other unlicensed
persons are not permitted to install wiring for any purpose.
   (D)   As required by M.S. § 326.244, all new or replacement wiring is
required to be inspected. This includes connection of new or relocated
manufactured homes.
   (E)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility hereby reserves the right to make a
further inspection of service entrance and grounding equipment before making
any connection to its electrical system.
   (F)   Any inspection by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility shall not be
deemed to be an approval of the adequacy of any wiring or certification that
such wiring conforms to the rules, regulations and ordinances of the
authorities having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.75 SUMMARY OF RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Residential and commercial service 200 amps and under.
      (1)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility responsibilities:
         (a)   Provide and install all primary cable, transformer pads and pad-
mounted transformers.
         (b)   Make all primary terminations and connections.
         (c)   Provide and install secondary cable to residential property.
         (d)   Secondary cable to non-residential property must be installed by
an electrician at customer expense.
         (e)   Provide meter socket and meter and maintains.
         (f)   Make connection to the secondary terminals of the transformer
and energize service only after State of Minnesota Electrical Inspector has
inspected and approved customer wiring.
         (g)   Perform all required maintenance on the electric distribution
system up to the meter socket.
      (2)   Customer responsibilities:
         (a)   Contact Luverne Municipal Electric Utility to consult on
location of service entrance and complete an application for service and other
documents as required by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
         (b)   Provide necessary easements and clear installation path of all
obstructions.
         (c)   Bring area to final grade prior to installation of the electric
distribution system (adjustments required after installation due to grade
changes will result in additional charges).
         (d)   Provide trench compaction after the installation of the on-site
electric distribution system.
         (e)   Provide and maintain all required clearances.
         (f)   Provide required access to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility at
all reasonable hours.
         (g)   Provide and install protection posts as required by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility.
         (h)   Protect Luverne Municipal Electric Utility facilities from
damage during construction period.
         (i)   Obtain completed Contractor or Registered Employer Request for
Electrical Inspection form.
         (j)   Install meter socket meeting Luverne Municipal Electric Utility
specifications in an approved location.
         (k)   Provide and install riser conduit with a slip sleeve/expansion
joint from service drop to meter socket.
   (B)   Multiple meter installations (apartments).
      (1)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility responsibilities:
         (a)   Provide and install all primary cable.
         (b)   Make all primary terminations and connections.
         (c)   Make connection to the secondary terminals of the transformer
and energize service only after State of Minnesota Electrical Inspector has
inspected and approved customer wiring.
      (2)   Customer responsibilities:
         (a)   Contact Luverne Municipal Electric Utility to consult on
location of multiple meter bank assemblies and complete an Application for
Service and other documents as required by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
         (b)   Provide necessary easements and clear installation path of all
obstructions.
         (c)   Bring area to final grade prior to installation of the electric
distribution system (adjustments required after installation due to grade
changes will result in additional charges).
         (d)   Provide trench compaction after the installation of the on-site
electric distribution system.
         (e)   Provide and maintain all required clearances.
         (f)   Provide required access to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility at
all reasonable hours.
         (g)   Provide and install protection posts as required by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility.
         (h)   Protect Luverne Municipal Electric Utility facilities from
damage during construction period.
         (i)   Provide and install multiple meter bank assemblies.
         (j)   Provide transformer pad.
         (k)   Provide, install and maintain all secondary cable to interior
multiple meter bank assemblies.
         (l)   Label, tag or otherwise mark each meter socket to identify the
specific location served by each meter.
         (m)   Obtain completed Contractor or Registered Employer Request for
Electrical Inspection Form.
   (C)   Mobile home parks.
      (1)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility responsibilities:
         (a)   Provide and install all primary cable, transformer pads and pad-
mounted transformers.
         (b)   Make all primary terminations and connections.
         (c)   Provide, install and maintain all secondary cable to exterior
multiple meter bank assemblies or to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility service
disconnects, as applicable.
         (d)   Make connection to the secondary terminals of the transformer
and energize service only after State of Minnesota Electrical Inspector has
inspected and approved customer wiring.
      (2)   Customer responsibilities:
         (a)   Contact Luverne Municipal Electric Utility to consult on
location of multiple meter bank assemblies and complete an Application for
Service and other documents as required by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
         (b)   Provide necessary easements and clear installation path of all
obstructions.
         (c)   Bring area to final grade prior to installation of the electric
distribution system (adjustments required after installation due to grade
changes will result in additional charges).
         (d)   Provide trench compaction after the installation of the on-site
electric distribution system.
         (e)   Provide and maintain all required clearances.
         (f)   Provide required access to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility at
all reasonable hours.
         (g)   Provide and install protection posts as required by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility.
         (h)   Provide completed Contractor or Registered Employer Request for
Electrical Inspection Form.
         (i)   For new or relocated mobile homes, obtain wiring approval from
State of Minnesota Electrical Inspector prior to requesting service connection
from Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
         (j)   Provide, install and maintain meter sockets that conform to
N.E.C. requirements for mobile home use.
   (D)   Commercial and industrial service over 200 amps.
      (1)   Luverne Municipal Electric Utility responsibilities:
         (a)   Provide and install all primary cable and pad-mounted
transformers.
         (b)   Make all primary terminations and connections.
         (c)   Provide meter socket, current transformers and meter.
         (d)   Energize service only after State of Minnesota Electrical
Inspector has inspected and approved customer wiring.
      (2)   Customer responsibilities:
         (a)   Contact Luverne Municipal Electric Utility to consult on
location of service entrance and complete an Application for Service and other
documents as required by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
         (b)   Provide necessary easements and clear installation path of all
obstructions.
         (c)   Bring area to final grade prior to installation of the electric
distribution system (adjustments required after installation due to grade
changes will result in additional charges).
         (d)   Provide trench compaction after the installation of the on-site
electric distribution system.
         (e)   Provide and maintain all required clearances.
         (f)   Provide required access to Luverne Municipal Electric Utility at
all reasonable hours.
         (g)   Provide and install protection posts as required by Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility.
         (h)   Protect Luverne Municipal Electric Utility facilities from
damage during construction period.
         (i)   Provide and install all secondary cables and conduit from the
point of delivery (usually transformer) to the building service entrance.
         (j)   Provide and install transformer pad (see appendix C).
         (k)   Provide and install an exterior current transformer enclosure
and a one-inch conduit from the current transformer enclosure to the meter
socket.
         (l)   Install Luverne Municipal Electric Utility-provided meter socket
in an approved location.
         (m)   Obtain completed Contractor or Registered Employer Request for
Electrical Inspection Form.
         (n)   On services over 320 amp, furnish a secondary connection
pedestal which will also be used as a metering point with the meter mounted on
the outside of cabinet.
         (o)   On services over 320 amp, the customer will be responsible for
all secondary connections.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.76 NON-DISTRIBUTED GENERATION INTERCONNECTION GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Scope and purpose.
      (1)   This section is intended to describe the requirements of Luverne
Electric Utilities regarding connection to its system of customer-owned
distributed generation equipment. The guidelines are intended to develop the
minimum requirements for connection of such equipment to the Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility system, and are not intended to be exhaustive. Each
installation will be reviewed by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility staff, and
additional requirements may be placed on the installation under special
circumstances.
      (2)   This document is intended to describe certain equipment that will
be necessary in order to ensure that the level of service provided to Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility's customers is not degraded by the installation of
the proposed distributed generation equipment. It is also intended to ensure
that safe operation of both the generation equipment and Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility's existing distribution system are maintained.
      (3)   Since this is a rapidly developing and changing field, it is
expected that these guidelines will be updated periodically to reflect new
technologies or industry standards. Luverne Municipal Electric Utility reserves
the right to require compliance with new guidelines should they be issued in
the future.
   (B)   Standards. The requirements developed in this chapter are intended to
comply with the following standards and regulatory bodies.
      (1)   Emerging IEEE Standard 1547.
      (2)   State and federal regulatory agency requirements.
      (3)   Requirements of Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's power
suppliers and transmission agents.
      (4)   National Electric Safety Code (latest version).
      (5)   National Electrical Code (latest version), if applicable, IEEE
Standard 519.
   (C)   Classifications of installation.
      (1)   Three types of distributed generation connections covered in this
document are as follows:
         (a)   Open transition. An open transition involves the disconnection
of the utility from the customer's load prior to transferring the load to the
customer's generator. The customer experiences a momentary interruption of
power while the transfer is being made. At no time is the customer generator
attached to the Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's distribution system.
         (b)   Closed transition/short-term parallel. This arrangement allows a
momentary connection of the customer's generator with the Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility's system during the time the customer load is being
transferred from the utility to the customer's generation equipment. Once the
transfer is made, the Luverne Municipal Electric Utility system is disconnected
from the customer load during the time the generator is operating. The length
of time in which the generator and the Luverne Municipal Electric Utility
system are connected is very short. In this arrangement, the customer does not
experience an interruption of service while the transition to and from the
generator is being made.
         (c)   Closed transition/long-term parallel. At this time, Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility does not allow long-term parallel operation of a
distributed generation installation.
      (2)   Protective equipment and interrupting devices vary depending on
which of the above operating modes are present.
      (3)   Disconnecting device. Each generating installation shall have a
three-phase disconnecting device of suitable voltage and current rating to
allow disconnection of the generating facility from Luverne Municipal Electric
Utility's system. The characteristics of this device are dependent on the
proposed operating mode of the generation equipment.
         (a)   Open transition. For an open transition installation, a transfer
switch or equivalent arrangement utilizing the “break before make" operating
characteristics shall be provided. This device shall ensure that the local
customer load bus is disconnected from Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's
system prior to closing the connection to the generator.
         (b)    Closed transition/short-time parallel. A three-phase device
suitable for protective relay operation shall be provided for any installation
that involves paralleling of the generation equipment with the Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility System. The required equipment for the utility side
device shall be a three-pole circuit breaker suitable for interruption of load
and fault current. The device shall be electrically operated such that
protective relaying (described below) can initiate disconnection of the
generator installation from Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's system when a
fault is sensed on Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's system.
   (D)   Protective relaying.
      (1)   It is essential that the delivery of power from the generating
equipment into Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's system, for however brief a
time, be done in a manner to minimize hazards to adjacent property. It is
essential that the generating facility be taken off line from Luverne Municipal
Electric Utility's system immediately whenever a fault is detected on Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility's system. Further, it is critical that the tie to
Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's system be separated whenever Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility's system experiences an outage (no "islanding" can
be allowed).
      (2)   The protective devices listed below are intended to protect Luverne
Municipal Electric Utility's system only. Protection of the generation
equipment is the responsibility of the generation equipment owner.
      (3)   Various protective relaying functions are required for any
arrangement that involves a closed transition or parallel operation of the
generating unit with Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's system. The following
are the minimum protective functions that must be present on the utility
tiebreaker looking out onto Luverne Municipal Electric Utility's system.
         (a)   Phase over-current protection.
         (b)   Over-voltage protection.
         (c)   Under-voltage protection.
         (d)   Over-frequency protection.
         (e)   Under-frequency protection.
         (f)   Ground-fault protection.
         (g)   Reverse-power protection.
      (4)   Many of the above functions can be incorporated into a multi-
function electronic relay. For all installations over 40 kW of nameplate-
generated capacity, the relays must be utility grade (not industrial grade).
Proposed equipment must be approved by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility.
   (E)   Auxiliary equipment. Luverne Municipal Electric Utility will review
the proposed installation, and determine if modifications to its equipment are
necessary. If Luverne Municipal Electric Utility determines that changes to its
equipment are required to accommodate the distributed generation equipment, the
changes will be made by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility, with all or part of
the cost assessed to the customer. Luverne Municipal Electric Utility will
provide an estimate of the cost prior to proceeding.
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
§ 55.77 STANDARD FOR TRANSFORMER PADS FOR TRANSFORMERS 75 TO 500 KVA.
   This is the generic standard Luverne Municipal Electric Utility uses for
transformer pads for transformers 75 to 500 KVA. You must verify the actual
transformer footprint that will be used by Luverne Municipal Electric Utility
prior to pouring.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b81c600120171f21b8029f85c575efd70cc9d9a9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1599.png]
 
(Ord. 18, Fourth Series, effective 6-24-2021)
CHAPTER 56: STORM WATER DRAINAGE
Section
   
56.01   State law
   
56.02   Findings and determinations
   
56.03   Rates and charges
   
56.04   Other land uses
   
56.05   Adjustment of charges
   
56.06   Exemptions
   
56.07   Payment of charge and tax lien
   
56.08   Recalculation of charges
   
56.09   Storm water drainage districts
§ 56.01 STATE LAW.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
establishes a storm water drainage utility and authorizes the imposition of
just and reasonable charges for the use and availability of storm sewer
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 3.24)
§ 56.02 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to promote
the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, the city has
constructed, operated and maintained a storm sewer system (“the system”). This
chapter is adopted in the further exercise of the authority and for the same
purposes.
   (B)   The system, as constructed, heretofore has been financed and paid for
through the imposition of special assessments and ad valorem taxes. It is now
necessary and desirable to provide an alternative method of recovering some or
all of the future costs and improving, maintaining and operating the system
through the imposition of charges as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   In imposing charges, it is necessary to establish a methodology that
undertakes to make them just and equitable. Taking into account the status of
completion of the system, past methods of recovering system costs, the
topography of the city and other relevant factors, it is determined that it
would be just and equitable to assign responsibility for some or all of the
future costs of operating, maintaining and improving the system on the basis of
the expected storm water run-off from the various parcels of land within the
city during a standard rainfall event. For the purposes of this chapter, a
STANDARD RAINFALL EVENT is defined as the 100-year storm of one-day duration.
It is assumed that there is five times as much run-off from impervious land as
land covered with vegetation for the standard rainfall event.
   (D)   (1)   Assigning costs and making charges based upon expected typical
storm water run-off cannot be done with mathematical precision, but can only be
accomplished within reasonable and practical limits.
      (2)   The provisions of this chapter undertake to establish a reasonable
and practical methodology for making the charges.
(Prior Code, § 3.24)
§ 56.03 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Residential equivalent factor.
      (1)   Rates and charges for the use and availability of the system shall
be determined through the use of a “residential equivalent factor” (“REF”).
      (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, one REF is defined as the ratio
of the average volume of surface water run-off coming from one acre of land and
subjected to a particular use, to the average volume of run-off coming from one
acre of land subjected to typical single-family residential use within the city
during a standard rainfall event.
   (B)   Storm water drainage charges.
      (1)   In determining charges, the City Council shall by resolution
establish a basic system rate to be charged against one acre of land having an
REF of one. The charge to be made against each parcel of land shall then be
determined by multiplying the REF for the parcel’s land use classification
times the parcel’s acreage times the basic system rate. The REFs for the
following land uses within the city and the billing classifications for the
land uses are as follows:
Classification Land Uses REF
Classification Land Uses                                                 REF
1              Cemeteries, parks, golf courses                           0.50
2              Single-family and and each unit in a twin home            1.00
3              Public and private schools and institutional uses         1.30
4              Multiple-family residential and churches                  1.70
5              Commercial                                                2.30
6              Farm land (tillable and pasture)                          0.10
               Undeveloped land in the 100-year flood fringe or floodway
7              zones, or sloughs, ponds and the like without drainage    0.00
               outlet
8              Industrial - sites with more than 500,000 square feet of  3.20
               impervious surface area
 
      (2)   For the purpose of calculating storm water drainage charges, all
developed single-family and duplex parcels shall be considered to have an
acreage of one-third acre per unit. Double bungalows or duplexes shall be
considered to be two units. Farmsteads with accessory structures and out
buildings shall be classed in the single-family/duplex residential class and
considered to have an acreage of two-thirds acre per dwelling unit, plus any
other land at its REF classification.
(Prior Code, §3.24) (Ord. 135, Third Series, effective 7-23-1992; Ord. 139,
Third Series, effective 11-19-1992)
§ 56.04 OTHER LAND USES.
   (A)   Other land uses not listed in the foregoing table shall be classified
by the City Administrator in consultation with the City Engineer by assigning
them to classes most nearly like the listed uses, from the standpoint of run-
off volume for the standard rainfall event.
   (B)   An appeal from the City Engineer’s determination of the property
classification may be made to the City Council.
(Prior Code, §3.24)
§ 56.05 ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES.
   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt policies providing for the
adjustment of charges for parcels or groups of parcels, based upon land use
data supplied by affected property owners, which data demonstrates a run-off
volume for the standard rainfall event substantially different from the REF
being used for the parcel or parcels.
   (B)   The adjustment shall be made only upon recommendation of the City
Engineer and shall not be made effective retroactively.
(Prior Code, §3.24)
§ 56.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   Public street rights-of-way are exempt from storm water drainage charges.
(Prior Code, §3.24)
§ 56.07 PAYMENT OF CHARGE AND TAX LIEN.
   Storm water utility bills shall be paid in conjunction with other municipal
utility charges and in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter and
this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of city code, storm water
drainage fees are specifically found to benefit the property so billed and
served and shall constitute a lien thereon until paid. Past due fees may be
certified to the County Auditor for collection with the real estate taxes in
the following year pursuant to the City Charter and M.S. §444.075, subd. 3, as
it may be amended from time to time. In addition, the city shall have the right
to bring a civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid
charges.
(Prior Code, §3.24)
§ 56.08 RECALCULATION OF CHARGES.
   If the property owner or person responsible for paying the storm water
drainage charge questions the correctness of such a charge, the person may have
the determination of the charge recomputed by written request to the City
Administrator. The request shall be made within 30 days of the mailing of the
billing in question.
(Prior Code, §3.24)
§ 56.09 STORM WATER DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish storm water drainage districts
within the city and provide for a unique basic system rate for each district
based upon the costs of improving, maintaining and operating the system within
the district. Unless the Council, by resolution, specifically orders otherwise,
funds collected from one district shall not be used in another district;
however, this provision shall not preclude the co-mingling or use of funds for
costs deemed to be common and substantially equivalent to all districts, nor
temporary loans among districts, nor the pledging of revenues from all district
to secure bonds or other indebtedness. All other provisions of this chapter not
in conflict with this section shall apply to each district.
(Prior Code, §3.24)
CHAPTER 57: EMERGENCY PROTECTION FIRE SERVICES
Section
   
57.01   Purposes and intent
   
57.02   Definitions
   
57.03   Parties affected
   
57.04   Rates
   
57.05   Billing and collection
   
57.06   Mutual aid agreement
   
57.07   Billing procedure for contracts with other towns or cities
   
57.08   Application of collections to budget
§ 57.01 PURPOSES AND INTENT.
   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the city to charge
for fire service as authorized by M.S. §§ 366.011, 366.012 and 415.01, as they
may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, §3.30) (Ord. 314, Third Series, effective 5-27-2010)
§ 57.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACT. A contract between the city and a town or other
city for the city to provide fire service.
   FIRE SERVICE.
      (1)   Any deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to
extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to protect
equipment, life or property in an area threatened by fire.
      (2)   It also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel and/or
equipment to provide fire suppression, rescue, extrication and any other
services related to fire and rescue as may occasionally occur.
   FIRE SERVICE CHARGE. The charge imposed by the city for receiving fire
service.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally
manufactured to operate primarily on public roads and highways, and not
operated exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes semi-trailers. It does
not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all-terrain vehicles or park
trailers.
   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and a town or other city
for the city’s Fire Department to provide assistance to the fire department of
a town or other city.
(Prior Code, §3.30) (Ord. 314, Third Series, effective 5-27-2010)
§ 57.03 PARTIES AFFECTED.
   Owners of property in towns or cities to which the city provides fire
service pursuant to a fire protection contract.
(Prior Code, §3.30) (Ord. 314, Third Series, effective 5-27-2010)
§ 57.04 RATES.
   The established rate for each fire service provided by the city’s Fire
Department is set at $1,000.
(Prior Code, § 3.30) (Ord. 314, Third Series, effective 5-27-2010; Ord. 40,
Fourth Series, effective 2-8-2024)
§ 57.05 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Parties requesting and receiving fire services will be billed directly
by the city’s Fire Department within one month of the fire service.
Additionally, if the party receiving fire services did not request fire
services, but a fire or other situation exists which, at the discretion of the
Fire Department personnel in charge requires fire service, the party will be
charged and billed. All parties will be billed whether or not the fire service
is covered by insurance. Any billable amount of the fire charge not covered by
a party’s insurance remains a debt of the party receiving the fire service.
   (B)   Parties billed for fire service will have 30 days to pay. If the fire
service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered delinquent and
the city’s Fire Department will send a notice of delinquency.
   (C)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after this
notice of delinquency is sent, the city’s Fire Department will use all
practical and reasonable legal means to collect the fire service charge. The
party receiving fire service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred
by the city’s Fire Department including, but not limited to, reasonable
attorney fees and court costs.
   (D)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice
of delinquency is sent, the city’s Fire Department may turn the remaining
balance over to collection. The city’s Fire Department must give the property
owner notice in writing of its intent to turn the unpaid fire service charge
over to collection.
   (E)   False alarms will not be billed as a fire call.
(Prior Code, §3.30) (Ord. 314, Third Series, effective 5-27-2010)
§ 57.06 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.
   When the city’s Fire Department provides fire service to another fire
department pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, the billing will be determined
by the mutual aid agreement.
(Prior Code, §3.30) (Ord. 314, Third Series, effective 5-27-2010)
§ 57.07 BILLING PROCEDURE FOR CONTRACTS WITH OTHER TOWNS OR CITIES.
   When the city’s Fire Department provides fire service to another fire
department pursuant to a fire protection contract, the billing will be
determined by the contract.
(Prior Code, §3.30) (Ord. 314, Third Series, effective 5-27-2010)
§ 57.08 APPLICATION OF COLLECTIONS TO BUDGET.
   All collected fire charges will be city funds and used to offset the
expenses of the city’s Fire Department in acquiring new fire suppression
equipment.
(Prior Code, §3.30) (Ord. 314, Third Series, effective 5-27-2010)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING RULES
      
73.   RECREATIONAL AND TOY VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Certain statutes adopted by reference
Special Vehicles Used by Disabled Persons
   
70.15   Operation authorized
   
70.16   Permits
   
70.17   Unlawful acts
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 CERTAIN STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this traffic code, the regulatory and
procedural provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, commonly referred to as the Highway
Traffic Regulation Act, and as amended from time to time, is hereby
incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions
thereof.
   (B)   The term BUSINESS DISTRICT, as used in M.S. § 169.222, as it may be
amended from time to time, means the area bounded on the east by the centerline
of Blue Mound Avenue; on the north by the centerline of Lincoln Street; on the
west by the centerline of Estey Street; and on the south by the centerline of
Maple Street between the centerline of Estey Street and a point 75 feet east of
the McKenzie Street right-of-way, thence north along the extension of the
property line between Lots 3 and 4, Block 7, of the original plat to the south
line of the east-west alley in Block 7, thence east along the south line of the
alley and extensions thereof including the south line and extensions thereof of
the east-west alleys in Blocks 5 and 6 of the original plat to the centerline
of Blue Mound Avenue. Upon the public sidewalks just prior to entering and at
intersection crosswalks throughout the aforedescribed business district will be
painted a logo or sign depicting a bicycle in black with an over painted red
circle and slash mark through the circle signifying a prohibition of bicycle
traffic. This depiction shall be similar to a bicycle prohibition sign as
described in the most current Minnesota Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices issued by the state's Department Transportation.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this traffic code, M.S. §§ 171.01,
171.02, 171.08, 171.22, 171.23 and 171.24, as they may be amended from time to
time, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the
penalty provisions thereof.
   (D)   The state statutes referred to herein are those as amended through
Laws of 1992.
(Prior Code, § 8.01) (Ord. 87, Third Series, effective 7-5-1990; Ord. 95, Third
Series, effective 7-19-1990; Ord. 140, Third Series, effective 12-24-1992)
SPECIAL VEHICLES USED BY DISABLED PERSONS
§ 70.15 OPERATION AUTHORIZED.
   Operation of motorized golf carts or four-wheel all-terrain vehicles are
hereby authorized on the roadways of all streets, except such as are prohibited
by resolution of the Council, and only in strict compliance with this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.60) (Ord. 40, Third Series, effective 12-31-1987)
§ 70.16 PERMITS.
   Permits shall be issued only to disabled persons, as defined by statute.
Application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart or a four-wheel all-
terrain vehicle on the roadways or streets shall include the name and address
of the applicant and such other information as may from time to time be
required by the Council. Applications for initial or renewal permits shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed medial doctor stating that
the applicant is capable of safely operating a motorized golf cart or a four-
wheel all-terrain vehicle on the roadway or streets. All permits shall expire
on December 31, unless renewed. The fee for a permit shall be fixed by
resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.60) (Ord. 40, Third Series, effective 12-31-1987)
§ 70.17 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart or a four-
wheel all-terrain vehicle on the roadway of a street unless:
   (A)   The operator has in possession a valid, current and unrevoked permit
from the city;
   (B)   The operation is on a roadway which has not been designated as
prohibited for the operation, except crossing at an intersection;
   (C)   The operation is during daylight hours between sunrise and sunset;
   (D)   The operation is not during inclement weather, or when visibility is
impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or when there is
insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles thereon at a distance of
500 feet;
   (E)   The motorized golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle displays a
slow moving vehicle emblem, as described by statute, on the rear thereof;
   (F)   The motorized golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle is equipped
with rear view mirrors as required by statue for other vehicles;
   (G)   The operator has insurance coverage as provided by statute (presently
M.S. § 65B.48, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time) for
motorcycles; and
   (H)   The operator observes all traffic laws, except such as cannot
reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts or four-wheel all-terrain
vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 8.60) (Ord. 40, Third Series, effective 12-31-1987) Penalty, see
§
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
traffic code when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared
unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows.
   (A)   Where the specific section, division, paragraph or provision of this
traffic code specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be
punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or
under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this traffic code, exclusive
of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle,
within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent
time, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
   (B)   As to any violations not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor.
   (C)   As to any violation of a provision adopted by reference, he or she
shall be punished as specified in the provision, so adopted.
(Prior Code, § 8.99)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Truck routes
   
71.02   Exhibition driving
   
71.03   U-turns
   
71.04   Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal
   
71.05   Dynamic braking devices
§ 71.01 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural
implement, truck (other than a pickup truck of one-ton capacity or less),
truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck-tractor, automobile trailer or
automobile to which a trailer is attached, in through traffic, upon any street,
except those which have been designated and sign-posted as truck routes.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, THROUGH TRAFFIC means originating
without the city and with a destination without the city, as distinguished from
“local traffic” which means traffic either originating or having a destination
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   (A)   Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition driving
when a motor vehicle stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates or turns at an
unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal, gears to grind, soil
to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing or skidding or, as to two-wheeled or
three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground
or roadway surface.
   (B)   Unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any exhibition
driving on any street, parking lot or other public private property, except
when an emergency creates necessity for the operation to prevent injury to
persons or damage to property; provided that, this section shall not apply to
driving on a racetrack with the permission and under the auspices and direction
of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 8.20) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 U-TURNS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle by turning so as to
proceed in the opposite direction upon any street, except at a street
intersection, and then only if the street intersection is not sign-posted
prohibiting a U-turn or otherwise controlled by a traffic signal; provided
that, any person making a permitted U-turn shall yield the right-of-way to all
other vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 8.21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic-control
device by driving upon or through any private property.
(Prior Code, § 8.22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definition. A DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE (commonly referred to as a Jacobs
brake, engine brake or compression brake) means a device primarily on trucks
for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air
compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
   (B)   Use prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged, except for the aversion of
imminent danger within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 8.23) (Ord. 189, Third Series, effective 7-4-1996) Penalty, see
§
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING RULES
Section
   
72.01   Presumption
   
72.02   General parking prohibitions
   
72.03   Unauthorized removal
   
72.04   House trailer, mobile home, camping trailer and bus parking
   
72.05   Direction to proceed
   
72.06   Parallel parking
   
72.07   Angle parking
   
72.08   Streets without curb
   
72.09   Parking hours
   
72.10   Reserved and restricted parking
   
72.11   Parking during emergencies
   
72.12   Truck parking
   
72.13   Parking rules in city parking lots and ramps
   
72.14   Impounding and removing vehicles
   
72.15   Loading zones
   
72.16   Unattended vehicles
   
72.17   Vehicle repair on street
   
72.18   Parking for purpose of advertising or selling merchandise
   
72.19   Courtesy parking
   
72.20   Physically disabled parking
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Streets and Sidewalks, see
Ch. 151
   Zoning, see
Ch. 153
§ 72.01 PRESUMPTION.
   As to any vehicle parking in violation of this traffic code, when the driver
thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same or
that the driver was acting as the agent of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 9.01)
§ 72.02 GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
specific directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic-control device in
any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;
   (G)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (H)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (I)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (J)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of
curb of a street;
   (K)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;
   (L)   At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping,
parking or both;
   (M)   In any alley, except for loading and unloading and then only so long
as reasonably necessary for the loading and unloading to or from adjacent
premises;
   (N)   On any boulevard which has been curbed; or
   (O)   In a sign-posted fire zone.
(Prior Code, § 9.02) (Ord. 249, Third Series, effective 4-10-2003) Penalty, see
§
72.99
§ 72.03 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.
   It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by the person into
any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 9.03) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 HOUSE TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, CAMPING TRAILER AND BUS PARKING.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a house trailer, mobile home,
camping trailer, bus or other similar recreational vehicle on or within the
limits of any street or right-of-way, except where signs are erected
designating the place as a campsite, for more than six consecutive hours;
provided, however, that, during the six-hour period, the vehicle shall not be
occupied as living quarters.
(Prior Code, § 9.04) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 DIRECTION TO PROCEED.
   It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when
directed or ordered to proceed by any law enforcement officer invested by law
with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(Prior Code, § 9.05) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 PARALLEL PARKING.
   Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb
marking or sign-posting, or where curb setback parking is permitted, each
vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way road where there is an adjacent curb
shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel
with, and within 12 inches of, the right-hand curb and, where painted markings
appear on the curb or the street, each vehicle shall be within the markings,
front and rear; provided that, upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so
parked; except that, the left-hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with
and within 12 inches from the left-hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in
any event and with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the
direction of the flow of traffic upon the one-way street; and it is unlawful to
park in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.06) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 ANGLE PARKING.
   Where angle parking has been established by Council resolution, and is
allowed, as shown by curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle
stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with
the front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the
curb or street; provided that, the front wheel not touching the curb shall be
the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of one-way traffic; and it
is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.07) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 STREETS WITHOUT CURB.
   Upon streets not having a curb each vehicle shall be stopped or parked
parallel and to the right of the paving, improved or main travel part of the
street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.08) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 PARKING HOURS.
   Parking on street shall be limited as follows.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any
vehicle upon any street for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours.
   (B)   The chief law enforcement officer may, when authorized by resolution
of the Council, designate certain streets, blocks or portions of streets or
blocks as five-minute, ten-minute, 15-minute, 30-minute, one-hour, two-hour,
four-hour, six-hour, eight-hour limited parking zones and shall mark by
appropriate signs any zones so established. The zones shall be established
whenever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic
hazards and preserve a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to
stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in any space so limited in excess of
the time limitation when sign-posted.
(Prior Code, § 9.09) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 RESERVED AND RESTRICTED PARKING.
   (A)   Council action. The Council may, by resolution, reserve certain
streets, portions thereof, or zones thereon, or portions of public parking
lots, for parking by a specified class of persons or restrict parking to those
persons accomplishing a specified public or private purpose. The reserved or
restricted parking shall be appropriately sign-posted. The Council may, in its
sole discretion and after consideration of all circumstances, make a rental
charge for reserved or restricted parking in addition to the sign-posting
expense incurred by the city.
   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person not a member of the
specified class, or for a purpose other than that specified, to stop, park or
leave standing any vehicle in any space on any such street, portion thereof, or
zone thereon, or portion of a public parking lot, in any violation of any such
reservation or restriction.
(Prior Code, § 9.10) (Ord. 51, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988) Penalty, see
§
72.99
§ 72.11 PARKING DURING EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term EMERGENCY means a
condition created on city streets because of the presence of snow, freezing
rain, sleet, ice or snow drifts thereon, or other natural phenomenon which
create or are likely to create hazardous road conditions or impede or likely to
impede the free movement of fire, health, law enforcement, emergency or other
vehicular traffic.
   (B)   Declaration of emergency. Whenever, in the discretion of the City
Administrator or his or her designated agent, an emergency exists, he or she
may declare the same and the City Administrator shall cause an announcement
thereof to be made over the local news media.
   (C)   Unlawful acts. During an emergency, it is unlawful to park or leave
standing any vehicle upon a street on which parking has been restricted by the
declaration of an emergency.
   (D)   Effectiveness. A snow emergency declared under this section shall
remain in effect until termination by announcement of the City Administrator,
or his or her designated agent; or on any street area which has been
substantially cleared of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of an
entire block.
(Prior Code, § 9.20) (Ord. 81, Third Series, effective 3-1-1990) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 TRUCK PARKING.
   (A)   It is unlawful to park a detached semi-trailer upon any street, city-
owned parking lot or other public property, except on streets as specifically
designated by the Council by resolution.
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful to park a semi-trailer, truck-trailer or box
whether or not attached to a truck-tractor or to its original chassis, within a
residential district zone, except for the purpose of promptly loading or
unloading the same, or when the same is used in direct conjunction with a
building permit for bona fide construction purposes and in accordance with the
terms contained in the permit. In a business district zone, the use of semi-
trailers, truck-trailers or boxes for the permanent or temporary storage of
materials and products is prohibited and the parking or placing of the items
for more than seven calendar days on private property is prohibited, except
under the following conditions:
         (a)   When the same are completely screened behind an opaque fence or
wall, or contained within the confines of an enclosed building;
         (b)   When the same are used in direct conjunction with a building
permit for the bona fide construction purposes and in accordance with the terms
contained in the permit;
         (c)   When the same are used for a Council approved not-for-profit
community recycling/used material drop off point provided the same are
routinely removed and/or exchanged;
         (d)   When the same are located in the B-2 District if the nearest
point of the trailer or box is not less than 100 feet from any property line
and the same are maintained in good condition and without visible deterioration
(e.g., rusting, peeling paint and the like) or any form of written advertising
on any surface visible from public or private property; and
         (e)   When the same are located in the B-2 District as a part of a
bona fide trailer sales and service business and are maintained in good, usable
road condition or awaiting prompt repair and, if not awaiting repair, held for
bona fide sale at a reasonable market price.
      (2)   This division (B) does not apply to completely enclosed truck boxes
(not to exceed 160 square feet) in good condition without visible deterioration
or any form of written advertising on any surface visible from public or
private property, the axle and wheels have been removed, and the same has been
converted to a permanent accessory structure in conformance with the State
Building Code, State Fire Code and city zoning regulations.
   (C)   It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of more than one ton
capacity upon any street in the Business District unless it has been duly sign-
posted permitting the same, but parking of the vehicle for a period of not more
than 20 minutes shall be permitted in the space for the purpose of necessary
access to abutting property for loading or unloading when the access cannot
reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck
parking is not so restricted.
   (D)   It is unlawful to park a truck or other vehicle using or equipped with
a trailer, or extended body or other extension or projection beyond the
original length of the vehicle, or any passenger bus, diagonally along any
street, except for a time sufficient to load or unload; provided, however,
that, a truck may stand backed up to the curb if the weight or bulk of the load
makes parallel parking impractical, but then only for a period of time
sufficient to load or unload.
   (E)   Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and
sign-posted loading zones and in alleys for a period of up to 20 minutes;
provided that, the alley parking does not prevent the flow of traffic therein,
all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or adjacent
property for loading or unloading.
   (F)   The Council may, by resolution, taken at any regular or special
meeting designate certain streets or parts thereof on which trucks may be
parked, and establish the times and conditions under which the trucks may be
parked.
   (G)   The cost of repairing damage to any street surface caused by any
vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the vehicle causing the damage.
(Prior Code, § 9.30) (Ord. 81, Third Series, effective 3-1-1990; Ord. 130,
Third Series, effective 6-18-1992) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.13 PARKING RULES IN CITY PARKING LOTS AND RAMPS.
   (A)   In city-owned parking lots and ramps, the Council may limit the sizes
and types of motor vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of parking and
prescribed method of parking; provided that, the limitations and restrictions
are sign-posted thereon.
   (B)   It is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle backed into a
parking place, to drive in a direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by
“one way” signs or arrows, or to park any vehicle in any city-owned parking lot
or ramp contrary to the restrictions or limitations sign-posted therein.
(Prior Code, § 9.31) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.14 IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   When any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle standing upon a
street or city-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, the
officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of
the vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   When any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
street or city-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, the
officer is hereby authorized to impound the unlawfully parked vehicle and to
provide for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage
or other facility or place of safety; provided that, if any charge shall be
placed against the vehicle for cost of removal or storage, or both, by anyone
called upon to assist therewith the same shall be paid prior to removal from
the place of storage or safekeeping.
(Prior Code, § 9.32)
§ 72.15 LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution, establish loading zones to be used for
the specific purpose of loading or unloading merchandise from a commercial
vehicle or vehicle temporarily being utilized in the transport of merchandise.
   (B)   The loading zones shall be installed by order of the City
Administrator where in the judgment of the Council a commercial loading zone is
justified and duly sign-posted.
(Prior Code, § 9.33)
§ 72.16 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended
while the engine is running.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended with
the key in the ignition.
(Prior Code, § 9.34) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.17 VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.
   It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any
vehicle parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to service the
vehicle by adding gasoline or oil or to provide emergency repairs thereon.
(Prior Code, § 9.35) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.18 PARKING FOR PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING OR SELLING MERCHANDISE.
   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street for the
purpose of selling merchandise thereon or therein, or advertising any
merchandise for sale or a forthcoming event, for a period longer than 15
minutes.
(Prior Code, § 9.36) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.19 COURTESY PARKING.
   The Council is hereby authorized, by resolution, to waive hours of parking
limitations herein stated upon an application duly filed on any day and to any
particular group; provided that, members of the group shall have displayed in
their motor vehicles a “courtesy parking” sticker, card or other similar
designation.
(Prior Code, § 9.37)
§ 72.20 PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING.
   (A)   Statutory parking privileges for physically disabled shall be strictly
observed and enforced. Law enforcement officers are authorized to tag vehicles
on either private or public property in violation of the statutory privileges.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically disabled, to
stop, park or leave standing, a motor vehicle:
      (1)   In a sign-posted fire lane at any time; or
      (2)   In lanes where, and during such hours as, parking is prohibited to
accommodate heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours.
(Prior Code, § 9.50) (Ord. 51, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988) Penalty, see
§
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows.
   (A)   Where the specific section, division, paragraph or provision of this
chapter specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished
as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under
circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within
the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he or
she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
   (B)   As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 9.99)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL AND TOY VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Operation on streets and highways
   
73.03   Traffic laws and rules control operation
   
73.04   Operation generally
   
73.05   Equipment required
   
73.06   Unattended snowmobile
   
73.07   Permission to enter private property
   
73.08   Public lands
   
73.09   Prohibited in area dangerous to persons or property
   
73.10   Number of persons riding
   
73.11   Youthful snowmobile operators
   
73.12   Registration
Skateboards, Roller Skates, Roller Blades and Bicycles
   
73.25   Definitions
   
73.26   Unlawful operation
   
73.27   Violations
Special Vehicles
   
73.40   [Reserved]
   
73.41   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
73.42   Motorized foot scooters
   
73.43   Medium-speed electric vehicles and neighborhood electric vehicles
 
   
73.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Special Vehicles Used by Disabled Persons, see §§
70.15 through
70.17
SNOWMOBILES
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of National Resources of the state acting
directly or through his or her authorized agent.
   DAYLIGHT HOURS. Any time, except from one-half hour after sunset to one-half
hour before sunrise and at any other time there is not sufficient light to
render clearly discernible persons and vehicles at a distance of 500 feet.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to
a snowmobile and entitled to the use or possession thereof.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice and
steered by skis or runners.
(Prior Code, § 8.50)
§ 73.02 OPERATION ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon the
roadway, shoulder or inside bank or slope of any trunk, county state-aid or
county highway in the city, except that snowmobiles may be operated on Cedar,
Edgehill, Donaldson and Warren Streets which are county state-aid streets and
as further excepted as provided in this section.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this section to the
contrary, it is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the
limits of the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m., on weekdays
nor between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:30 a.m. on Sundays.
   (C)   A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway at any
hour of the day; provided:
      (1)   A crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing;
      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main-traveled way of the highway;
      (3)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
      (4)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of the highway with another public street or highway; and
      (5)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility
only if both front and rear lights are on.
   (D)   A snowmobile may be operated upon a public street or highway other
than as provided by division (B) above in an emergency during the period of
time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by
automobile impractical.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 TRAFFIC LAWS AND RULES CONTROL OPERATION.
   All provisions of the city code relating to the operation of motor vehicles
upon streets or highways shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles, except
for those relating to required equipment and except those which, by their
nature, are inapplicable.
(Prior Code, § 8.50)
§ 73.04 OPERATION GENERALLY.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile in the
following unsafe or harassing ways:
   (A)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the
surrounding circumstances and, in no event, at a rate of speed greater than 20
mph during daylight hours and a rate of speed greater than 15 mph at all other
times;
   (B)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto;
   (C)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics or
habit-forming drugs;
   (D)   Without a lighted head and tail light when required for safety; and/or
   (E)   In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys
growing stock.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the right-of-
way limits of a street or highway unless it is equipped with:
   (A)   Brakes each of which shall conform to standards prescribed by rule of
the Commissioner;
   (B)   At least one head lamp, one tail lamp, each of a minimum candle power
as prescribed by regulation of the Commissioner, and reflective material of a
minimum area of 16 square inches mounted on each side forward of the
handlebars;
   (C)   A muffler in good working order which blends the exhaust noise into
the overall snowmobile noise and is in constant operation to prevent excessive
or unusual noise. The exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping
or crackling sound. No person shall have for sale, sell or offer for sale on
any snowmobile any muffler that fails to comply with the specifications
required by the rules and regulations of the Commissioner; and
   (D)   Safety or “dead men” throttle which, when pressure is removed from the
accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving
track.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILE.
   It is unlawful for the owner or operator to cause or permit a snowmobile to
be or remain unattended on any public property, street or highway while the
motor is running or while the keys to start the same are in the ignition
switch.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 PERMISSION TO ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person operating a snowmobile to enter upon the lands
of another without first having obtained permission from the owner or occupant
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 PUBLIC LANDS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any publicly owned
lands including, but not limited to, schools, park property, playgrounds,
recreation areas, public boulevards and sidewalks, except areas designated for
the use by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 PROHIBITED IN AREA DANGEROUS TO PERSONS OR PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within 100 feet of any
skating rink or sliding area, or in any other areas where the operation would
conflict with the use thereof by others or endanger the person or property of
others.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.10 NUMBER OF PERSONS RIDING.
   No snowmobile shall be operated with more than three persons thereon,
including the operator; and any sled, trailer or other device being towed by a
snowmobile must be equipped with reflective materials as required by rule and
regulation of the Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.11 YOUTHFUL SNOWMOBILE OPERATORS.
   Notwithstanding anything in §
73.02 of this chapter to the contrary, it is unlawful for any person under 14
years of age to operate a snowmobile upon any public street or highway within
the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.12 REGISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided by state statutes, it is unlawful for any
person to operate a snowmobile which has not been registered with the
Commissioner and which does not bear the permanent registration number assigned
thereto as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 8.50) Penalty, see §
73.99
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES AND BICYCLES
§ 73.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride,
having two tandem wheels either of which is over 14 inches in diameter, or any
device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or rear
wheels; or a unicycle equipped with only one wheel.
   OPERATE. To ride on or upon or control the operation of a skateboard, roller
skates, roller blades or bicycle in any manner other than carrying or walking
beside and holding onto the devices.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
skateboard, roller skates or roller blades.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, partnership, corporation and the state and
its agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or
not.
   ROLLER SKATES or ROLLER BLADES. A form of skate with small wheels or rollers
instead of a runner.
   SKATEBOARD. A device for riding upon, usually while standing, consisting of
an oblong piece of wood or other composition mounted on two or more wheels.
(Prior Code, § 8.61) (Ord. 87, Third Series, effective 7-5-1990; Ord. 216,
Third Series, effective 7-8-1999)
§ 73.26 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person and the parent or guardian of any person
under the age of 16 years of age to operate or allow the person to operate a
skateboard, roller skates, roller blades or bicycle under the circumstances set
forth in this section as follows:
   (A)   On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of the property;
   (B)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be
likely to endanger, the safety of any person or property of any other person;
   (C)   Upon any public sidewalk within the area prohibited and defined in §
70.01(B) of this code of ordinances;
   (D)   When emerging from an alley, driveway or building; or upon approaching
a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway to
not yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching the sidewalk or
sidewalk area;
   (E)   In any manner by attaching the skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades or bicycle; or the person of the operator to any vehicle;
   (F)   Upon a sidewalk or other roadway after sunset and before sunrise
without being equipped with the following:
      (1)   A three-inch wide reflectorized arm band which encircles the arm,
worn on both arms midway between the shoulder and elbow;
      (2)   Reflectorized material affixed to the entire rear portion of the
rear track of the skateboard or the shoe or other foot wear of the operator of
roller skates or roller blades; or
      (3)   A bicycle equipped with night operating equipment in operable
condition as required by state law.
   (G)   Upon any public street or right-of-way, except for bicycles, which
shall be permitted thereon provided the operator obeys all laws and regulations
relating to operation.
(Prior Code, § 8.61) (Ord. 216, Third Series, effective 7-8-1999) Penalty, see
§
73.99
§ 73.27 VIOLATIONS.
   In addition to the criminal penalties provided for violation of this
subchapter, the person owning any skateboard, roller skates, roller blades or
bicycle is deemed to have consented by allowing or suffering its use upon
public property and, as civil penalty, to the impoundment by a law enforcement
officer of the skateboards, roller skates, roller blades and bicycles for a
minimum period of three days to a maximum 60 days when the operator is
violating any provisions of law or the city code relating to the operation of
the devices.
(Prior Code, § 8.61) (Ord. 216, Third Series, effective 7-8-1999)
SPECIAL VEHICLES
§ 73.40 [RESERVED].
§ 73.41 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   Definition. ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE means a self-
balancing device with two non-tandem wheels, designed to transport not more
than one person, and operated by an electric propulsion system that limits the
maximum speed of the device to 15 miles per hour.
   (B)   Rights and responsibilities. Except as otherwise provided by law, a
person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device has the rights
and responsibilities of a pedestrian.
   (C)   Operation.
      (1)   Bicycle path. An electric personal assistive mobility device may be
operated on a bicycle path.
      (2)   How to operate: speed, reasonable and prudent; due care in
operation. No person may operate an electric personal assistive mobility device
on a roadway, sidewalk, or bicycle path at a rate of speed that is not
reasonable and prudent under the conditions. Every person operating an electric
personal assistive mobility device on a roadway, sidewalk, or bicycle path is
responsible for becoming and remaining aware of the actual and potential
hazards then existing on the roadway or sidewalk and must use due care in
operating the device.
      (3)   Circumstances under which device may be operated. An electric
personal assistive mobility device may be operated on a roadway only under the
following circumstances:
         (a)   While making a direct crossing of a roadway in a marked or
unmarked crosswalk.
         (b)   Where no sidewalk is available.
         (c)   Where a sidewalk is so obstructed as to prevent safe use.
         (d)   When so directed by a traffic control device or by a peace
officer.
         (e)   Temporarily in order to gain access to a motor vehicle.
         (f)   As provided in division (7) below by Council resolution.
      (4)   Speed. An electric personal assistive mobility device may not be
operated at any time on a roadway with a speed limit of more than 35 miles per
hour except to make a direct crossing of the roadway in a marked crosswalk.
      (5)   Prohibition against carrying more than one person. An electric
personal assistive mobility device may not be operated at any time while
carrying more than one person.
      (6)   Designated exclusive city streets. The City Council may, by
resolution, designate exclusive city streets within its jurisdiction where the
operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices is not permitted,
provided that any street so designated has a speed limit of more than 35 miles
per hour.
      (7)   Right-of-way. A person operating an electric personal assistive
mobility device on a sidewalk must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians at all
times. A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device on a
bicycle path must yield the right-of-way to bicycles at all times.
      (8)   Reflectorized material. An electric personal assistive mobility
device may not be operated unless the device bears reflectorized material on
the front, back, and wheels, visible at night from 600 feet when illuminated by
the lower beams of headlamps of a motor vehicle.
§ 73.42 MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS.
   (A)   MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTER means a device with handlebars designed to be
stood or sat upon by the operator, and powered by an internal combustion engine
or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without
human propulsion, and that has no more than two 12-inch or smaller diameter
wheels and has an engine or motor that is capable of a maximum speed of 15
miles per hour on a flat surface with not more than 1% grade in any direction
when the motor is engaged. An electric personal assistive mobility device, a
motorized bicycle, an electric-assisted bicycle, or a motorcycle is not a
motorized foot scooter.
   (B)   Operation of a motorized foot scooter on city bicycle paths, bicycle
lanes, bicycle trails, or bikeways is prohibited except as provided in division
(C) below.
   (C)   The City Council may, by resolution, designate specific bicycle paths,
bicycle lanes, bicycle trails, or bikeways as available for use by motorized
foot scooters.
   (D)   Every person operating a motorized foot scooter shall have all rights
and duties applicable to the operator of a bicycle, except in respect to those
provisions relating expressly to motorized foot scooters and in respect to
those provisions of law that by their nature cannot reasonably be applied to
motorized foot scooters.
   (E)   No person may operate a motorized foot scooter upon a sidewalk, except
when necessary to enter or leave adjacent property. No person may operate a
motorized foot scooter that is carrying any person other than the operator.
   (F)   No person under the age of 12 years may operate a motorized foot
scooter.
   (G)   No person under the age of 18 years may operate a motorized foot
scooter without wearing properly fitted and fastened protective headgear that
complies with standards established by the commissioner of Public Safety.
   (H)   A motorized foot scooter must be equipped with a headlight and a
taillight that comply with standards established by the Commissioner of Public
Safety if the vehicle is operated under conditions when vehicle lights are
required by law.
   (I)   A person operating a motorized foot scooter on a roadway shall ride as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except in
the following situations:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction.
      (2)   When preparing for a left turn, in which case the operator shall
stop and dismount at the right-hand curb or right edge of the roadway, and
shall complete the turn by crossing the roadway on foot, subject to
restrictions placed by law on pedestrians.
      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid impediments or conditions that
make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge, including, but
not limited to, fixed or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians,
animals, surface hazards, or narrow lanes.
§ 73.43 MEDIUM-SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   MEDIUM SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLE means an electrically powered four-
wheeled motor vehicle, equipped with a roll cage or crushproof body design,
that can attain a maximum speed of 35 miles per hour on a paved level surface,
is fully enclosed and has at least one door for entry, has a wheelbase of 40
inches or greater and a wheel diameter of ten inches or greater, and except
with respect to maximum speed, otherwise meets or exceeds regulations in the 49
C.F.R. § 571.500, and successor requirements.
      (2)   NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE means an electrically powered motor
vehicle that has four wheels, and has a speed attainable in one mile of at
least 20 miles per hour, but not more than 25 miles per hour on a paved level
surface.
   (B)   City streets; operation prohibited. Operation of neighborhood electric
vehicles on city streets is prohibited except as provided in (C) below.
   (C)   Use; designated exclusive city streets. The City Council may, by
resolution, designate exclusive city streets within its jurisdiction where the
operation of neighborhood electric vehicles or medium-speed electric vehicles
is permissible, provided that no street so designated has a speed limit of more
than 35 miles per hour.
   (D)   Equipment and vehicle safety requirements. A neighborhood electric
vehicle or a medium-speed electric vehicle may be operated on public streets
and highways only if it meets all equipment and vehicle safety requirements in
49 C.F.R. § 571.500, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   City staff; use. Authorized city staff may operate city owned
neighborhood electric vehicles and medium-speed electric vehicles within the
city on city streets, sidewalks, trails, rights-of-way, and public property
when conducting city business.
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definition
   
90.02   Keeping animals
   
90.03   Housing
   
90.04   Treatment
   
90.05   Restraint and confinement
   
90.06   Trespass
Licensing and Regulations
   
90.20   Definitions
   
90.21   License required
   
90.22   Revocation of licenses
   
90.23   Impounding, release and adoption
   
90.24   Notice of impounding and termination of ownership rights
   
90.25   Rabies control
   
90.26   Unlawful acts and remedies
   
90.27   Injured animals
   
90.28   Purpose
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITION.
   The term ANIMALS means cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies,
ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens, guinea hens, dogs and all other animals and
feathered fowl; provided that, this definition shall extend to this subchapter
only.
(Prior Code, § 10.12)
§ 90.02 KEEPING ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal, not in transit, in any
part of the city not zoned for agricultural purposes, except for household pets
which shall be kept for personal use only.
(Prior Code, § 10.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03 HOUSING.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep any animals in any structure infested
with rodents, vermin, flies or insects.
(Prior Code, § 10.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04 TREATMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to treat any animal in a cruel or inhumane
manner.
(Prior Code, § 10.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit animals to run at large in
the streets or public places, or to be herded or driven thereon unless each
animal is confined within a vehicle or restrained by means of bridles, halters,
ropes or other means of individual restraint.
(Prior Code, § 10.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.06 TRESPASS.
   It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive or ride any animal over and
upon any grass, turf, boulevard, city park, cemetery, garden or lot without
specific permission therefor from the owner.
(Prior Code, § 10.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
§ 90.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies, ducks, geese,
turkeys, chickens, guinea hens, dogs, cats and all other animals and feathered
fowl.
   ANIMAL POUND. The facility designated or recognized by the city for the
purposes of impounding and caring for animals impounded by the city whether the
same is located within or outside the corporate limits of the city.
   AT LARGE and RUNNING AT LARGE. An animal off or away from the premises owned
or directly controlled by its owner and not on a leash or under restraint.
   CAT. Both the male and female sex whether neutered or not of any variety of
the Felidae family, including all varieties and species of the common or
domestic cat whether the same are wild or tame.
   DANGEROUS DOG and POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. The same meanings as given them
in M.S. § 347.50, as it may be amended from time to time.
   DOG. Both the male and female sex whether neutered or not of the Canidae
family, including the common or domestic dog whether wild or tame.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. Dogs, cats, rabbits birds and the like for family use only
(noncommercial) with cages, pens and the like.
   LEASH. A cord, thong, rope, leather or chain not exceeding eight feet in
length and of sufficient strength and condition so as to endure unbroken the
maximum strength or force placed against it by the animal in which the devise
is attached. For purposes of this definition, the collar, bridle, halter or
other harness on the animal to which the device is attached shall be included
as part of the LEASH.
   NEUTERED. Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction.
   OWNER. Any person who owns, harbors, feeds, boards, keeps or otherwise
possesses an animal and is presumed to be the owner or tenant of the residence
real estate at which the animal is normally kept, remains or to which it
returns; or the owner or manager in charge of the establishment or premises at
which the animal is kept, remains or to which it returns. Any parent or
guardian of any non-emancipated minor owner under the age of 18 years of age
shall be presumed to be the actual OWNER of the animal and the responsible
party for the animal’s care, control, licensing and actions.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization
or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit and if it consists of more
than one person, not including husbands and wives, the PERSON shall be deemed
to be any of the officers, directors, leaders of the entity.
   RESTRAINT and UNDER CONTROL. An animal shall be strictly located at all
times within the real property limits owned or under the control of its owner,
or by the direct permission of the owner or person in control of the real
property, or secured by a leash with one end properly attached and secured to
the animal and the other end held securely or fastened to a person of
sufficient age and discretion so as to maintain control over the animal and
with sufficient strength to direct and control the movement or lack of movement
of the animal.
(Prior Code, § 10.11)
§ 90.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner of a dog over six months of age to fail
to obtain and maintain a current city license therefor; provided, however,
that, if the owner is a legally blind person and a dog is specifically trained
and used for guide purposes, no license shall be required.
   (B)   Applications for a dog license shall be on a form supplied by the city
and shall be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian which
shall certify the immunization against rabies for at least the period for which
the license is applied; provided, however, that, if the immunization
certificate expires prior to the expiration of the license period, the license
will continue to be effective if the owner files with the city a new
certificate covering the remaining period of the license.
   (C)   All licenses shall expire on April 1 of each year. The fee for a
license shall be established and may, from time to time, be amended by
resolution of the Council. The fees for impounding and maintenance of animals
in the animal pound shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. A copy of the resolution setting forth current fees shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Administrator and shall be open to inspection
during regular business hours.
   (D)   The owner of any other animal other than a dog may voluntarily license
the animal by meeting the same conditions as that required of a dog for
licensing and payment of the same fees.
   (E)   All licensed dogs shall wear a collar or other device around the neck
of the dog and firmly affix thereto the current tag indicating that the dog is
properly licensed. In the event that the tag is lost, a duplicate tag may be
obtained from the city upon the payment of a duplicate tag fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Council. Tags or licenses shall not be
transferable and no refund shall be made of any license or duplicate tag fee
because of leaving the city, death of the animal or other reasons. License fees
shall not be pro rated, however, new license applications for dogs recently
coming under the jurisdiction of the city shall be given without charge during
the period three months prior to the expiration period for all licenses
provided the application and fee for the next ensuring license period is paid
and made at the same time as the initial application for the new license.
(Prior Code, § 10.11) (Ord. 88, Third Series, effective 8-2-1990; Ord. 273,
Third Series, effective 3-31-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.22 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The City Council may revoke any license if the owner refuses or fails
to comply with the provisions of city code and regulations promulgated by the
city or any other law governing the keeping and protection of animals.
   (B)   If the owner is shown to have withheld or falsified any material
information on the application for a license or other information requested by
the city, it shall result in the immediate revocation of the license by the
City Administrator. The giving of false information on an application shall, in
addition, be grounds for refusing to issue the license by the city.
   (C)   It shall be a condition of issuance of any license that the city shall
be permitted to inspect the dog and the premises where the dog is kept at any
reasonable time during normal business hours for purposes of assuring that the
provisions of the city code and other laws governing the keeping and protection
of animals are being obeyed and complied with.
(Prior Code, § 10.11) (Ord. 88, Third Series, effective 8-2-1990)
§ 90.23 IMPOUNDING, RELEASE AND ADOPTION.
   (A)   Any dog or cat found in the city without a license tag, or any animal
running at large or in violation of any other provision of city code or any law
relating to the keeping or protection of animals, or required to be impounded
hereunder, shall be placed in the animal pound and an accurate record of the
time of the placement shall be kept on each animal. In cases where the animal
is found running at large and prior to impoundment, the city shall attempt to
return a licensed animal to its registered owner. Every animal so placed in the
animal pound shall be held for redemption by the owner for a period of not less
than five calendar days.
   (B)   (1)   Impoundment records shall be preserved for a maximum of six
months and shall show:
         (a)   The description of the animal by breed, sex, approximate or
estimated age and other distinguishing characteristics or traits;
         (b)   The location at which the animal was seized;
         (c)   The date and time of seizure;
         (d)   The name and address of the person, if any, from whom any animal
was received; and
         (e)   The name and address of the person to whom any animal was
transferred or released.
      (2)   A person claiming an interest in an animal in custody is allowed to
prevent disposition of the animal by posting a bond or security in an amount
sufficient to provide for the animal’s care and keeping for at least 30 days.
The amount shall be determined based upon animal pound fees set by the Council.
Even if a bond or security is provided, once the amount provided for is
depleted all ownership rights of anyone shall expire; and, upon expiration of
the ownership rights, the animal shall be humanely destroyed and the carcass
disposed of, or, in the alternative, the animal may be released, delivered to
and ownership transferred to any other person agreeing to accept the animal and
comply with all provisions of city code (if the animal is to be kept within the
city) and other laws and regulations relating to the keeping and treatment.
Prior to the release of any animals from the animal pound, the owner thereof
shall provide evidence that the animal is licensed and will be vaccinated
within 48 hours after release against rabies unless the owner thereof can
present a certificate of current vaccination. Animals shall not be released to
the owner thereof until the owner has paid the appropriate animal pound fees
for the keeping of the animal. A person desiring to claim an unclaimed animal
(adoption) must register his or her interest in animal adoption prior to the
time of the seizure of the animal the person desires to adopt. Animal pound
fees for the keeping of animals shall be waived for adopted animals.
(Prior Code, § 10.11) (Ord. 114, Third Series, effective 6-18-1992; Ord. 273,
Third Series, effective 3-31-2005)
§ 90.24 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING AND TERMINATION OF OWNERSHIP RIGHTS.
   Upon the impounding of any animal, the city shall attempt to notify the
owner of the animal, if known. If the owner is unknown, a written notice shall
be posted for five days at City Hall describing the animal and the place and
time of taking. The notice shall also state the time and date on which the
five-day redemption period shall expire and the animal eligible for being
destroyed, donated for medical research or adopted. A copy of M.S. § 343.235
(Laws 91, Ch. 122, § 4), as it may be amended from time to time, shall be
delivered by the authority taking custody of an animal to the person residing
on the property or adjacent public rights-of-way or easements from which the
animal was taken. If no one resides on the property, the authority shall post a
copy of it at the place where the animal is taken into custody. All rights of
ownership shall strictly expire and be null and void for all animals unclaimed
by the owner at the expiration of the five-day redemption period unless a bond
or deposit is placed pursuant to §
90.23 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.11) (Ord. 231, Third Series, effective 6-29-2000)
§ 90.25 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   When any owner of an animal has been notified that the animal has, or
is suspected to have, bitten or attacked any person, he or she must, within 24
hours, place the animal under the care and observation (quarantine) of the city
or a licensed veterinarian for a period of not less ten days, except in those
cases where an animal has bitten or attacked while on the premises of the owner
and the owner has a current rabies vaccination for the animal, in which case,
the city may, if it feels that the facilities are adequate and if the owner is
a responsible person, quarantine the animal on the owner’s premises. In this
case, the owner must sign a statement acknowledging the understanding of the
responsibility and assuming the liability that is involved with the quarantine
of the animal that has bitten. The quarantined animal must, at all times, be
available for inspection by the city or its agents during the quarantine
period. At the end of the quarantine period, the animal shall be examined by
the city and, if cleared, the quarantine reflect and, if applicable, reclaimed
by the owner. The owner must pay the expense incurred incident thereto. Any
animal not claimed within five calendar days may be disposed of as provided
under the provisions of this section. Any animal placed under quarantine
showing active signs of rabies, suspected of having rabies or known to have
been exposed to rabies, shall be confined under competent observation of a
licensed veterinarian for such time as may be deemed necessary to determine a
diagnosis. Any animal that has bitten or attacked that cannot be captured may
be destroyed in a manner that the head is not damaged and can be submitted for
a rabies examination to a laboratory.
   (B)   Any person who shall suspect that an animal in the city is infected
with rabies shall report the animal to the law enforcement officials describing
the animal and giving the names and address of the owner, if known.
   (C)   Any rabid animal may be destroyed by the law enforcement officials or
a licensed veterinarian upon a diagnosis of rabies by a licensed veterinarian.
   (D)   Whenever it is determined that there is a substantial danger of the
existence or spread of rabies in the city and the same is confirmed by the
public health officer having jurisdiction over the city, the Mayor, upon
receipt of the facts, may, by proclamation, and in the interests of public
safety and the general welfare of the citizenry, order all animals muzzled when
off the premises of the owner. After the giving of notice of the proclamation
as required for the adoption of emergency ordinances, all animals found off the
premises of the owner and which are unmuzzled shall be seized and impounded or
may be immediately destroyed if all reasonable effort including use of
tranquilizer guns fail and the animal remains running at large. All animals
seized and impounded shall be held for an observation period of not less than
ten days and may be claimed by the owner after examination and clearance by a
licensed veterinarian certifying that the animal is free from rabies. The cost
of the maintenance and examination must be paid prior to release by the owner.
Any animal not claimed shall be kept for an additional five calendar days and
may be disposed of as provided under the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 10.11)
§ 90.26 UNLAWFUL ACTS AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit the animal to run
at large in the city. Whenever an animal is found running at large, the same
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner permitted the animal to
run at large.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of any potentially dangerous dog to allow
the animal out of a contained secure premises, when not chained with a leash or
one that is attached or securely held by a substantial stake or an owner or
member of the owner’s immediate family over 16 years of age and of substantial
strength so as to control all movement or lack of movement by the dog. Any
potentially dangerous dog which is not in compliance with the terms of this
division (B) may be seized and impounded. If the animal cannot be seized,
including the use of tranquilizer guns, and is running at large, it may be
destroyed. At the request of the city, the owner of any dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog who has been seen running at large, bitten any person
or other animal, or in any other manner endangered or threatened to endanger
the lives or safety of humans or domestic animals shall forthwith deliver the
dog to the animal pound and may be ordered by the city to appear in court to
show cause why the animal should not be destroyed.
   (C)   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to suffer or permit the
animal to disturb the peace and quiet of the city or any of its residents by
howling, crying, barking or making any other loud or unusual noise. If a dog is
outside on any private premises and is so disturbing the peace, a law
enforcement officer may summarily abate the nuisance by impounding the dog. It
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this division (C) if an animal
continues to disturb the peace and quiet for a period of five minutes or more.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to maltreat, abuse or neglect, or in any
other manner treat any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any stray animal.
Animals known to be strays shall be immediately reported to the law enforcement
officials.
   (F)   It is unlawful for any person, not acting under instructions from the
owner or the city, to willfully or maliciously administer or cause to be
administered, poison of any sort whatsoever to any animal, with the intent to
injure or destroy the animal, or to willfully or maliciously place any poison
or poison food where the same is accessible to any animal. The provisions of
this division (F) shall not apply to the poisoning of common rodents or
insects; however, the placement of the poison shall be in areas which are
inaccessible to domesticated animals.
   (G)   It is unlawful for the owner or person attending any animal to allow
it to defecate on any public or private property other than that owned by the
owner or attendant or under his or her direct control and with consent of the
owner; or to permit any accumulation thereof on the owner or attendant’s
property. If the animal does defecate on public or private property in
violation of the provisions of this division (G), it shall not be a violation
of the provisions herein if the owner or attendant shall immediately and
thoroughly clean up and remove the fecal material from the property and
properly dispose of it in a manner permitted by law.
   (H)   It is unlawful for any person to abandon or set loose any animal owned
or controlled by the person.
   (I)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a non-emancipated minor
under 18 years of age to allow the minor to own an animal in violation of this
section or to allow the animal to be kept, maintained or in any other manner
controlled in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 10.11) (Ord. 7, Fourth Series, effective 5-30-2019)  Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 90.27 INJURED ANIMALS.
   (A)   When an animal without identification is injured and the owner cannot
be found or is unknown, it is the duty of the law enforcement officials to
determine if the animal for humane reasons and due to the extent of the injury
and suffering should be destroyed and put to death. The law enforcement
officials may, but is not obligated to, use the services of a licensed
veterinarian to determine the extent of the injuries. If the animal is
destroyed, neither the city, nor its agents, shall be liable for its humane
act.
   (B)   When an animal with identification, including a dog license, is
injured, the law enforcement officials shall immediately notify the licensed
owner who shall immediately pick up the animal. In the event the owners are not
able to be immediately located or the animal is not immediately picked up, the
law enforcement officials shall deliver the animal to a licensed veterinarian.
All expenses of the city and the veterinarian fees and charges shall be paid by
the owner.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or
molest any law enforcement officer or agent of the city in the performance of
any duties provided for under the terms of this section.
(Prior Code, § 10.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.28 PURPOSE.
   The City Council hereby finds, determines and declares that the provisions
of this subchapter are necessary for the preservation of the public health,
safety and welfare of the city and the inhabitants thereof. The owners of any
animals which are located or allowed to enter the corporate limits of the city
are deemed to have consented to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.11) (Ord. 88, Third Series, effective 8-2-1990)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Air pollution control
   
91.02   Recreational fires
   
91.03   Abandoning motor vehicles
   
91.04   Mobile homes and recreational camping vehicles
   
91.05   Garage or rummage sale
Public Nuisances
   
91.15   Public nuisances defined
   
91.16   Public nuisances affecting health
   
91.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
91.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
91.19   Public nuisances within public waters
   
91.20   Duties of law enforcement
   
91.21   Abatement
   
91.22   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement
   
91.23   Immediate abatement
   
91.24   Recovery of cost; personal liability
   
91.25   Assessment
   
91.26   Additional remedies
   
91.27   Managed natural lawn area
Shade Tree Disease Control and Prevention
   
91.40   Shade tree pest control
   
91.41   Declared shade tree pests, control measures, and control areas
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to burn or permit burning of any grass,
weeks, leaves, rubbish or other substance upon premises owned or occupied by
him or her.
   (B)   The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Rules are hereby adopted by
reference as though set forth verbatim herein.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.02 RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   (A)   Definitions.
      PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE. A portable, outdoor, solid-fuel-burning
fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other
noncombustible material. A PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE may be open in design or
may be equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney
opening in the top.
      RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish
where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor
fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a
total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height for pleasure, religious ceremony, cooking, warmth or similar purposes.
   (B)   Restrictions and prohibitions.
      (1)   Recreational fires must be at least 25 feet from all buildings or
combustible materials and no closer than 10 feet from an adjacent property
line.
      (2)   Recreational fires must be contained within a noncombustible and
non-smoke- producing border that is no more than a three-foot diameter circle
or three-foot-by-three-foot square, measured from the inside of the fire ring
or border.
      (3)   Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instruction and shall not be operated within 15 feet of a
structure or combustible materials.
      (4)   The fire must be constantly attended to and supervised by an adult
until the fire has been completely extinguished.
      (5)   A connected garden hose, fire extinguisher or other means to
immediately extinguish the fire must be readily available.
      (6)   Only clean, dry, natural wood can be burned. Treated or painted
wood, plastic, rubber, leaves and grass are not allowed to be burned.
      (7)   Fires shall produce very little detectable smoke, odor or soot
beyond the property line.
      (8)   The fire must be extinguished immediately if they pose a fire
safety risk, if they are not in compliance with the above or when directed to
do so by the Fire Code Official or law enforcement officer(s) having
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Penalty. A violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor and
is punishable in accordance with §
10.99 of this code, including, but not limited to a fine in the amount set
forth in the city’s fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 10.44) (Ord. 52, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988; Ord. 53,
Fourth Series, effective 7-3-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.03 ABANDONING MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public
or private property without the consent of the person in control of the
property.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a MOTOR VEHICLE is as defined in M.S.
Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 10.51) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.04 MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLES.
   (A)   The terms MOBILE HOME and RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE shall mean and
include the following definitions.
      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation.
      (2)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled
vehicle.
      (3)   PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses, permanently identified “Travel Trailer” by the manufacturer of
the trailer.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to park a mobile home or recreational
camping vehicle upon public or private property for human habitation, except in
a licensed mobile home park.
(Prior Code, § 10.52) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05 GARAGE OR RUMMAGE SALE.
   (A)   Definition.
      GARAGE OR RUMMAGE SALE. Any display and sale of personal property,
conducted on the premises of the owner/occupant and which garage or rummage
sales does not require a business license or make taxable sales, lease, or
services.
   (B)   Restrictions and prohibitions.
      (1)   None of the items offered for sale shall have been obtained for
resale or received on consignment for sale.
      (2)   Any garage or rummage sales shall be conducted solely within the
boundaries of the property owned or occupied by the occupant who is conducting
the sale.
      (3)   There shall be no more than three garage or rummage sales conducted
at any one premises during any period of 12 calendar months.
      (4)   No garage or rummage sale shall be conducted more than four
consecutive days.
      (5)   There shall be no more than two consecutive sales with a 45-day
separation between all others. (Example: A garage or rummage sale may be held
for two consecutive weekends but would then need a 45-day separation period for
the third sale during any 12-month period.)
      (6)   Three off-site signs and one on-site sign are allowed during the
sale but must be removed immediately upon termination of the sale. Signs may be
up to five square feet, with a maximum height of three feet.
   (C)   Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to any sale under court
order, nor to any bona fide auction sale, nor to a sale of farm or garden
products by the person producing the same.
   (D)   Penalty. A violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor and
is punishable in accordance with §
10.99 this code, including, but not limited to a fine in the amount set forth
in the city’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 54, Fourth Series, effective 7-3-2025)
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 91.15 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   Whoever intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a
public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor, and each day the act or failure to
perform is suffered or permitted shall constitute a separate offense:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or deposits garbage or refuse upon, or
otherwise renders dangerous for passage, any public highway or right of way, or
waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or city code to
be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.56) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (D)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (E)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (F)   The pollution of any public or private well or cistern, stream or
lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (G)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (H)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (I)   Open or controlled burning in violation of state statutes and
regulations;
   (J)   All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease; and
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute and not licensed
by the city.
(Prior Code, § 10.56) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards kept in violation
of law;
   (B)   Illegal betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such
occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor and illegal drugs are
manufactured, or disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law,
persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor
or using illegal drugs, or where intoxicating liquor or illegal drugs are kept
for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor or illegal
drugs and other property used for maintaining such a place; and
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the transportation of illegal intoxicating liquor
or drugs, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or
illegal purpose.
(Prior Code, § 10.56) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks by the owner or
occupant in control of the abutting private property adjacent thereto, within
24 hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased
to fall;
   (B)   All deciduous tree leaves not promptly removed and cleaned up from
private property and abutting public rights-of-way by the owner or occupant in
control of the property after the type or variety of the deciduous trees has
substantially seasonally lost its leaves;
   (C)   All grass or weeds growing upon any private property or abutting
public rights-of-way by the owner or occupant in control of the property when
the grass or weeds is greater than six inches in height or is going to seed;
   (D)   All trees, hedges, signs, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent persons within 50 feet of a street (or other public right-or-way)
intersection from having a clear view of all other traffic approaching the
intersection;
   (E)   All wires and limbs of trees which are within eight feet of the
surface of a sidewalk or within 14 feet of a street or other public right-of-
way or otherwise constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (F)   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;
   (G)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public
of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such conditions
as are permitted by city code or other applicable law;
   (H)   Radio aerials or television antennas erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner so as to constitute a hazard to surrounding property;
   (I)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free uses of the streets or sidewalks unless the
same is authorized by a permit issued by the city;
   (J)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
permitted, constructed and maintained as provided by city code;
   (K)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure or to be deposited or placed by a private person upon any street or
sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (L)   The pumping or intentional movement of any ground or subsurface water
upon any street or sidewalk as to flow across any sidewalk;
   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (O)   Untreated wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon any property;
   (P)   (1)   The outdoor storage of abandoned, junked, discarded or
unlicensed vehicles, whether self-propelled or towed, upon private property
within the city is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the community, aesthetically unattractive and detracting
from the enjoyment of the environment by the residents, tending to depreciate
neighborhood property values and is an infringement on their properties and
homes. The same also constitutes a potential nuisance to the community and may
imperil safety. The control of the outdoor storage of abandoned, junked or
discarded vehicles, seldom or never used recreational vehicles or trailers is
therefore regulated for the preservation of the health, safety and general
welfare of the city.
      (2)   In addition, the accumulation or storage of discarded, worn out,
inoperable materials or items which are no longer used for the purposes for
which they were manufactured or made is hereby declared to be detrimental to
the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, aesthetically
unattractive and detracting from the enjoyment of the environment by the
residents, tending to depreciate neighborhood property values, and is an
infringement on their properties and homes. The same also constitutes a
potential nuisance to the community and may imperil safety. The control of the
accumulation and storage of the items and materials is, therefore, regulated
for the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the city.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, company,
partnership or corporation, either as a private property owner, vehicle owner,
occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to openly store or deposit or
cause or permit to be openly stored or deposited an abandoned, junked,
discarded or unlicensed vehicle or vehicles, whether self-propelled or towed,
or parts or pieces thereof, on any private property within the city, except as
permitted in junkyards as described in other sections of this code, unless the
vehicle or part or piece thereof is stored or deposited in a completely
enclosed building. The covering of the vehicles with a tarpaulin or car cover
of any type will not be permitted and will be deemed a violation of this code.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, company,
partnership or corporation, whether by principal or agent, to park, store or
permit to be parked or stored any abandoned vehicle or vehicles, whether self-
propelled or towed, on the public streets or alleys of the city.
         (c)   The parking of any type of vehicle or vehicles including
automobiles, trailers, campers, camper shells, utility vehicles, snowmobiles
and boats, whether self-propelled or towed, shall be limited to four (4) per
residential unit and shall be parked in garage, carport, parking pad or
driveway of said residential unit. All such vehicles shall be in operable
condition and must be currently registered or licensed.
         (d)   No vehicles, whether self-propelled or towed, shall be parked or
kept in the front yard area of a residence. Properly licensed and operable
vehicles may be stored in the rear yard of a residential unit. Parking areas,
other than the principal driveway, must maintain a minimum three-foot setback
from lot lines.
         (e)   At all times that a vehicle which is being repaired or restored
is not being worked on, the vehicle shall be covered by a vehicle cover capable
of resisting wind, rain and other weather-related circumstances. The area where
the vehicle is being repaired or restored shall be free of debris, litter,
discarded parts or equipment. The vehicle cover must cover the entire vehicle
and be securely fastened to the vehicle. The use of bricks, stones, blocks or
other material as a fastener shall not be permitted. Any such vehicle repairs
or restoration shall be limited to a period not longer than 30 calendar days or
the area wherein the vehicle is being repaired or restored shall be in an
enclosed structure.
         (f)   No vehicle including, but not limited to, automobiles, trailers,
campers, camper shells, utility vehicles, snowmobiles and boats, whether self-
propelled or towed, shall be offered for sale on any property within city
limits which property is not the primary residence of owner, and limited to one
vehicle per parcel, unless the property is zoned appropriately and a designated
parking area for vehicle display has been established. The display or storage
of vehicles on the sites shall be in compliance with other provisions of the
code in regards to parking. This division (P)(2)(f) does not apply to car
dealerships properly licensed by the state or prohibit any person from
displaying a “for sale” sign on a self-propelled vehicle being legally operated
in compliance with other provisions of the code.
         (g)   No person shall store or accumulate any worn out or discarded
materials or items which are no longer used for the purposes for which they
were manufactured or made, including, but not limited to, motor vehicle parts,
motor vehicle waste, household appliances or parts thereof, tools, building
materials, tin cans, glass, furniture, mattresses, box springs, crates,
cardboard or other debris, brush or materials. This division (P)(2)(g) does not
apply to persons and sites licensed as solid waste or recycling operations.
         (h)   Tires, for sale at an appropriate business location, shall be
stored in a totally enclosed structure or securely covered to prevent the
collection of stagnant rain water. Any tires not stored in such a manner shall
be considered waste material and must be disposed of in a proper and lawful
manner to prevent the collection of stagnant rain water in the tires.
         (i)   Cans, buckets, pots, tires, pools and other similar containers
that may hold standing/ stagnant water are considered potential breeding
grounds for mosquitoes and are thus considered a public nuisance and must be
removed.
   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
such other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child coming on the
premises where it is located;
   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash or other materials;
   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottle, dirt, snow, ice or other substance
which litters public property or which may injure any person or animal or
damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the substance;
   (T)   Entry upon the premises of another if the person entering has been
given oral or written notice not to, or if the premises are clearly marked with
“no trespassing” signs posted so as to be in plain view along all routes of
access to the premises, unless the entry is upon official business of a
government agency or public utility;
   (U)   The depositing of garbage, construction debris or other refuse on a
public right-of-way or on adjacent private property; and
   (V)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone.
(Prior Code, § 10.56) (Ord. 107, Third Series, effective 5-2-1991; Ord. 271,
Third Series, effective 1-13-2005; Ord. 353, Third Series, effective 4-13-2017)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.19 PUBLIC NUISANCES WITHIN PUBLIC WATERS.
   (A)   “Public waters” defined. For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC
WATERS shall have the meaning given in M.S. § 103G.005, subd. 15, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   “Public water nuisance” defined. Whoever does any of the following is
guilty of a public waters nuisance, which is a misdemeanor, and each separate
act shall constitute a separate offense:
      (1)   Swimming or wading at any time in any public waters within the
limits of the city;
      (2)   Diving, jumping or otherwise entering any public waters from any
bridge, roadway, railroad bridge, railroad trestle, dam or any other structure
within or over the channel of any public waters;
      (3)   Entering onto the ice of Veteran’s Pond, or any other public waters
within the limits of the city marked by signs indicating “Thin Ice”; and
      (4)   Operating motorized watercraft in any public waters within the
limits of the city, except watercraft propelled by an electric motor with
battery power of 12 volts or less. No watercraft shall be operated within a
water area that has been marked off or set aside as a swimming or bathing area
as prescribed by rules of the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Authorized emergency and law enforcement personnel are exempt from
the provisions of this section while acting in the performance of their
assigned duties; and
      (2)   Persons swimming or wading where “No Lifeguard on Duty” signs are
posted.
(Prior Code, § 10.57) (Ord. 337, Third Series, effective 8-12-2014) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 91.20 DUTIES OF LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Administrator or his or her designees shall enforce the provisions
relating to nuisances affecting public health, peace and safety. The law
enforcement officials shall enforce provisions relating to nuisances affecting
morals and decency and shall assist the City Administrator or his or her
designees in the enforcement of health, peace, safety and other nuisances. The
officers shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all
reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public
nuisances.
(Prior Code, § 10.56)
§ 91.21 ABATEMENT.
   Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines that a public
nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises in the city, the officer
shall notify in writing the owner or occupant of the premises of the fact and
shall order that the nuisance be terminated and abated. The notice shall be
served in person or by certified mail. If the premises are not occupied and the
owner is unknown, the notice may be served by posting it on the premises. The
notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time,
not exceeding 30 days, within which the nuisance is to be abated. If the notice
is not complied with within the time specified, the enforcing officer shall
report the fact forthwith to the City Administrator who shall schedule a
hearing before the Council and give notice thereof to the owner or occupant.
Thereafter, the Council may, after the owner or occupant has an opportunity to
be heard or fails to appear, provide for abating the nuisance by the city. The
notice shall be served in the same manner as notice by the enforcing officer is
served and shall be given at least ten days before the date stated in the
notice when the Council will consider the matter. If notice is given by
posting, at least 30 days shall elapse between the day of posting the notice
and the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 10.56)
§ 91.22 EMERGENCY PROCEDURE; SUMMARY ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   In cases where delay in abatement caused by the notice and procedure
requirements set forth in §
91.21 of this chapter will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably
endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City Administrator may order
summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary
enforcement, the officer charged with enforcement shall determine that a public
nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay
in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety
or welfare. The enforcement officer shall notify in writing the occupant or
owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the city’s intention
to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of a meeting with the City
Administrator to consider the question of summary enforcement. The City
Administrator shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the
notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or
welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to
complete the procedure set forth in §
91.21 of this chapter and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated
or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City
Administrator may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (B)   Removal of ice/snow, grass and noxious weeds.
      (1)   Declared a hazard. The Council hereby finds that the removal of
snow and ice from public sidewalks, grass and noxious weed mowing will
unreasonably endanger the public health, safety and welfare and that summary
enforcement shall be ordered by the officer charged with enforcement.
      (2)   Abatement. The city may cause to be served upon the owner of the
property upon which such nuisance exists, by registered or certified mail, or
by posting on the premises, a notice ordering such owner to remove the nuisance
within 36 hours after the time of the notice, and stating that in the event the
owner does not comply with such order, the necessary work may be performed or
caused to be performed by the city at the expense of the owner, and that if the
owner does not pay for such expense, the cost of the work will be assessed
against the property benefitted.
(Prior Code, § 10.56) (Ord. 37, Fourth Series, effective 8-24-2023)
§ 91.23 IMMEDIATE ABATEMENT.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the city, without notice or other
process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent and
serious hazard to human life or safety.
(Prior Code, § 10.56)
§ 91.24 RECOVERY OF COST; PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city shall
be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including
administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and cost
determined, the Finance Director or other designated city employee shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount
shall be immediately due and payable.
(Prior Code, § 10.56)
§ 91.25 ASSESSMENT.
   Any unpaid charges by the city for the cost of elimination of the nuisance
may be collected as a special assessment pursuant to city code.
(Prior Code, § 10.56)
§ 91.26 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   The provision of this subchapter shall not be the exclusive remedy for
abating nuisances, but the city may proceed as the city deems appropriate by
seeking an injunction or other order from a court of competent jurisdiction
requiring abatement, or under any other applicable statutory or city code
provision, or under applicable common law. The filing of criminal charges shall
not prohibit, void or nullify any abatement proceedings or alter any other
remedy available to the city, nor shall the commencement or completing of
abatement proceedings prohibit the filing of criminal charges or conviction
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10.56) (Ord. 107, Third Series, effective 5-2-1991)
§ 91.27 MANAGED NATURAL LAWN AREA.
   (A)   Intent. The City Council determines some residents' desire to use
portions of lawns on residential parcels for the planting of native vegetation,
which can grow to a height of greater than six inches. The Council finds these
types of plantings may preserve, restore, or maintain natural plants and may
utilize environmentally sound practices. As guidance for the community, this
change in vegetation and lawn use must be properly planned, managed, and
maintained. The transition period must be minimized, or the property is likely
to create a public nuisance and shall be abated.
   (B)   Definitions.
      MANAGED NATURAL LAWN AREA. A planned, intentional, and maintained
planting of native vegetation that is free from noxious weeds as defined by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and may exceed six inches in length.
      NATIVE VEGETATION. Ferns, wildflowers, grasses, sedges, rushes, shrubs,
vines, and forbs that are native to the State of Minnesota ecological section
222 (Minnesota and Northeast Iowa Morainal Section), subsection 251Ba
(Minnesota River Prairie), and subsection 222Mb (Big Woods) as defined by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and that can be found in the
Minnesota Department  of Natural Resources Native Plant Encyclopedia.
      TURF GRASSES. Bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends with non-woody
vegetation interspersed with them, commonly used in regularly cut lawns.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   Residential zoning districts.
      (2)   Managed natural lawn area, as defined in division (B) above, is a
term used to describe a variety of lawn management practices that include but
are not limited to natural lawns, natural landscapes, native lawns, pollinator
gardens, rain gardens, meadow vegetation, native prairie, prairie gardens,
monarch waystations, native plantings, native gardens, and butterfly habitat.
   (D)   Requirements.
      (1)   Any owner of a residential lot in the city may transition an area
of lawn on the lot to a managed natural lawn area not to exceed 30% of the
pervious surface area within the defined setbacks of the lot.
      (2)   A managed natural lawn area may include native vegetation more than
six inches in height and which have gone to seed, may not include any noxious
weeds, must be maintained pursuant to the requirements of this section, and
shall not create a public nuisance.
      (3)   A managed natural lawn area shall not include turf grass lawns left
unattended for the purpose of returning to a natural state.
      (4)   Any managed natural lawn area shall meet the following property-
line setbacks. Corner lots shall have two front setbacks:
         (a)   Front - ten feet.
         (b)   Sides - five feet.
         (c)   Rear - ten feet.
      (5)   A managed natural lawn area shall be cut at least once annually to
a height no greater than 12 inches, and at no time be allowed to grow to a
height of more than 60 inches.
      (6)   When establishing a managed natural lawn area, turf grass and/or
other existing vegetation shall be eliminated, and native vegetation shall be
planted through transplanting or seeding by human or mechanical means. Soil
erosion should be controlled while the ground is bare of plant growth that is
sufficient to inhibit erosion and is the sole responsibility of the owner or
occupant.
      (7)   Properties with a managed natural lawn area must be free of blight,
and blighting factors, free of public nuisances, and other areas of the lawn
must be properly maintained in accordance with the City Code.
      (8)   Managed natural lawn areas shall not be located within any drainage
utility easement, public right-of-way, or within three feet to any driveway or
parking areas.
      (9)   Managed natural lawn areas shall not be located within 20 feet of a
road intersection unless the height of the plantings within 20 feet of an
intersection does not exceed 12 inches in height.
      (10)   At no time shall a managed natural lawn area interfere with
motorists' views of the street or roadway.
   (E)   Failure to maintain.
      (1)   If a property owner chooses to install a managed natural lawn area,
and it is determined by the Weed Inspector that the area fails to meet the
definition and requirements of a managed natural lawn area as defined in
divisions (B) through (D) above, it shall be considered prima facie evidence of
the failure of the owner and occupant to comply with this section.
      (2)   The city may then proceed as follows:
         (a)   Concerning public rights-of-way, the Weed Inspector or his/her
designee shall provide written notice to the property owner, advising such
owner or occupant that the managed natural lawn area must be removed within
five days. If the owner fails to remove the managed natural lawn area, then the
city shall perform the necessary work to remove the managed natural lawn area,
keeping an accurate account of the cost. The cost shall be assessed to the
abutting private property in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   Concerning private property, the Weed Inspector or his/her
designee shall provide written notice to the property owner advising such owner
that the managed natural lawn area must be brought into compliance with the
requirements of this section within 14 days of receipt of the letter. Such
notice shall also advise the owner that the city shall perform such work, with
the presumed consent of the owner, if the owner fails to bring the managed
natural lawn area into compliance with the requirements of this section. If
city employees are utilized to cut the managed natural lawn area, an accurate
account of the time and charges shall be maintained. Such costs shall be
assessed to the benefitted property in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 36, Fourth Series, effective 6-29-2023)
SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
§ 91.40 SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL.
   (A)   Declaration of policy. The health of the trees in the city is
threatened by shade tree pests, and the loss or ill health of trees growing
upon public and private property substantially depreciates the value of
property within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare
and convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with M.S. §§
89.001, 89.01, and 89.51 to 89.64, as they may be amended from time to time,
the provisions of this section are adopted as an effort to control and prevent
the spread of these shade tree pests.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The city shall have control of all street trees, shrubs,
and other plantings now or hereafter in any street, park, public right-of-way
or easement, or other public place within the city limits, and shall have the
power to plant, care for, maintain, remove, and replace such trees, shrubs, and
other plantings.
   (C)   Declaration of a shade tree pest. The Council may by ordinance declare
any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or plant in the
community threatening to cause significant damage to a shade tree or community
forest, as defined by M.S. § 89.001, as it may be amended from time to time, to
be a shade tree pest and prescribe control measures to effectively eradicate,
control, or manage the shade tree pest, including necessary timelines for
action.
   (D)   Public nuisances defined. A shade tree pest, as defined by § 94.41
occurring within a defined control zone is a public nuisance.
   (E)   Shade tree pest nuisances are unlawful. It is unlawful for any person
to permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on any
premises the person owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be
abated as provided in this section.
   (F)   Tree Inspector. The Council may appoint a tree inspector to coordinate
the activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of damage by
shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector will recommend to the Council the details
of any program for the declaration, control, and prevention of shade tree
pests. The Tree Inspector is authorized to enforce or cause to be enforced the
tasks incident to such a program adopted by the Council. The term “tree
inspector” includes any person designated by Council or the Tree Inspector to
carry out activities authorized in this section.
   (G)   Abatement of shade tree pest nuisances. In abating a nuisance, defined
by ordinance under division (C), the organism, condition, plant, tree, wood, or
material identified as injurious to the health of shade trees shall be removed
or effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the
spread of the shade tree pest. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out
in accordance with the control measures and areas prescribed by §
91.41.
   (H)   Reporting discovery of shade tree pest. Any owner or occupier of land
or any person engaged in tree trimming or removal who becomes aware of the
existence of a public nuisance caused by a shade tree pest as defined under
division (C) shall report the same to the city.
   (I)   Registration of tree care firms. Any person, firm, or corporation that
provides tree care, tree trimming, or removal of trees, limbs, branches, brush,
or shrubs for hire must be registered with the Minnesota Commissioner of
Agriculture under M.S. § 18G.07, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (J)   Inspection and application of control measures.
      (1)   The Tree Inspector is authorized to inspect premises and places
within the city to determine whether shade tree pests exist thereon and to
investigate all reported incidents of shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector is
authorized to take all reasonable measures to prevent the maintenance of public
nuisances and may enforce the provisions relating to abatement in this section.
Diagnosis of shade tree pests may be by the presence of commonly recognized
symptoms; by tests as may be recommended by the commissioner of the Minnesota
Department of Agriculture or the commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources; or other reliable means.
      (2)   Except in situations of imminent danger to human life and safety,
the Tree Inspector shall not enter private property for the purpose of
inspecting or preventing maintenance of public nuisances without the permission
of the owner, resident, or other person in control of the property, unless the
Tree Inspector has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
      (3)   No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with the Tree
Inspector or with anyone acting under the Tree Inspector's authority while
engaged in activities authorized by this section.
   (K)   Standard abatement procedure. Except as provided in divisions (L) and
(N), whenever a Tree Inspector determines with reasonable certainty that a
public nuisance, as described by this chapter, is being maintained or exists on
premises in the city, the Tree Inspector is authorized to abate a public
nuisance according to the procedures in this section.
      (1)   The Tree Inspector will notify in writing the owner of record of
the premises that a public nuisance exists and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated. The notice may be given in person or by mail. Failure of
any party to receive the mail does not invalidate the service of the notice. A
copy of the notice shall be filed with the City Clerk.
      (2)   The notice of abatement shall state that unless the public nuisance
is abated by the owner, it will be abated by the city at the expense of the
owner. The notice shall specify the control measures to be taken to abate the
nuisance, and provide a reasonable amount of time to abate the nuisance. The
notice will also state that the owner has the right to appeal the determination
that a public nuisance exists by submitting a request in writing to the city
clerk within seven days after service of the notice, or before the date by
which abatement must be completed, whichever comes first.
      (3)   If no timely appeal is submitted, and the control measures
prescribed in the notice of abatement are not complied with within the time
provided by the notice or any additional time granted, the Tree Inspector or
designated person shall have the authority to obtain permission or an
administrative search warrant, enter the property, and carry out abatement in
accordance with the notice of abatement.
   (L)   High-cost abatement. If the Tree Inspector determines that the cost of
abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good faith
estimate, the written notice referred to in division (K) must provide that if
the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of time provided, the
matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing. The date, time, and
location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.
   (M)   Appeal procedure. If the City Clerk receives a written request for a
hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance exists, the City Council
shall hold a hearing within 14 calendar days following receipt by the Clerk of
the written request. At least three-days’ notice of the hearing shall be given
to the individual who made the written request for the hearing. The Council may
modify the abatement notice or extend the time by which abatement must be
completed. Each owner, agent of the owner, occupant, and lienholder of the
subject property or properties in attendance, if any, shall be given the
opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. After holding the hearing, the
City Council may issue an order requiring abatement of the nuisance, upon a
majority vote of the City Council present at the hearing.
   (N)   Abatement procedure in event of imminent danger.
      (1)   If the Tree Inspector determines that the danger of infestation to
other shade trees is imminent, and delay in control measures may put public
health, safety, or welfare in immediate danger, the Tree Inspector may provide
for abatement without following divisions (K) or (L). The Tree Inspector must
reasonably attempt to notify the owner of the affected property of the intended
action and the right to appeal the abatement and any cost recovery at the next
regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or
other process, from immediately abating any condition that poses an imminent
and serious hazard to human life or safety.
   (O)   Recovery of cost of abatement; liability and assessment.
      (1)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the
city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement,
including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the
cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall prepare a bill for the
cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due
and payable at the office of the City Clerk.
      (2)   After notice and hearing, as provided in M.S. § 429.061 (which may
be amended from time to time), the city clerk shall, on or before September 1
next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges as well
as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as
it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to
which the charges are attributable. The City Council shall then certify the
charges against the property to the county auditor for collection along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments as the City Council
may determine in each case.
§ 91.41 DECLARED SHADE TREE PESTS, CONTROL MEASURES, AND CONTROL AREAS.
   (A)   Oak Wilt.
      (1)   Definition. OAK WILT DISEASE is a shade tree pest and is defined as
any living or dead tree, log, firewood, limb, branch, stump, or other portion
of a tree from any species of the genus Quercus existing within the control
area defined that has bark attached and that exceeds three inches in diameter
or ten inches in circumference and contains to any degree any spore or
reproductive structures of the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum.
      (2)   Control measures. Control measures that may be taken to abate oak
wilt disease are:
         (a)   Installation of a root graft barrier. A root graft barrier can
be ordered installed to prevent the underground spread of oak wilt disease. The
city will mark the location of the root graft barrier. The barrier disrupts
transmission of the fungus within the shared vascular systems of root grafted
trees. The barrier is created by excavating or vibratory plowing a line at
least 42 inches deep between any oak tree infected with oak wilt disease and
each nearby and apparently healthy oak tree within 50 feet of the infected
tree.
         (b)   Removal and disposal of trees.
            1.   On property zoned for residential and commercial use.
               a.   On property that is zoned residential and commercial the
city may mark for removal trees that have the potential to produce spores of
the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum. After, and in no case before, the
installation of the root graft barrier and no later than May 1 of the year
following infection, all marked trees must be felled. The stump from such
felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if
taller, must be completely debarked.
               b.   If, however, after the city prescribes the location for a
root graft barrier, the city determines that installation of the barrier is
impossible because of the presence of pavement or obstructions such as a septic
system or utility line, the city may mark for removal all oak trees whether
living or dead, infected or not and located between an infected tree and the
marked barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and disposed of no
later than May 1 of the year following infection. The stump from such felled
trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller,
must be completely debarked.
            2.   On all other property.
               a.   On all other property, the city may mark for removal all
oak trees whether living or dead, infected or not and located between an
infected tree and the marked barrier location. These marked trees must be
felled and disposed of no later than May 1 of the year following infection. The
stump from such felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the
ground or, if taller, must be completely debarked.
               b.   All wood more than three inches in diameter or ten inches
in circumference from such felled trees must be disposed of by burying,
debarking, chipping, or sawing into wane-free lumber, or by splitting into
firewood, stacking the firewood, and immediately covering the woodpile with
unbroken four-mill or thicker plastic sheeting that is sealed into the ground
until October 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the
tree was felled, or by burning before May 1 of the year following infection.
Wood chips from infected trees may be stockpiled or immediately used in the
landscape.
      (3)   Control area. The control area for oak wilt disease is defined as
all lands within the boundaries of the city.
   (B)   Emerald Ash Borer.
      (1)   Definition. EMERALD ASH BORER is a shade tree pest and is defined
as an insect that attacks and kills ash trees. The adults are small, iridescent
green beetles that live outside of trees during the summer months. The larvae
are grub- or worm-like and live underneath the bark of ash trees.
      (2)   Control measures. Control measures that may be taken to manage and
abate Emerald Ash Borer are those currently advised by the University of
Minnesota Extension website at http://www.extension.umn.edu/garden/insects/
find/emerald-ash-borer/#management and the Emerald Ash Borer Information
Network at http://www.emeraldashborer.info/resources.php.
      (3)   Control areas. The control area for Emerald Ash Borer is defined as
all lands within the boundaries of the city.
   (C)   Dutch Elm Disease.
      (1)   Definition. DUTCH ELM DISEASE is a shade tree pest and is defined
as a disease of elm trees caused by the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma
novo-ulmi, and includes any living or dead tree, log, firewood, limb, branch,
stump, or other portion of a tree from any species of the genus Ulmus existing
within the control area defined that has bark attached and that exceeds three
inches in diameter or ten inches in circumference and could contain bark
beetles or any spore or reproductive structures of the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi
or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi.
      (2)   Control measures. Control measures that may be taken to abate Dutch
elm disease are:
         (a)   Use of fungicide. Fungicides may be effective in preventing
Dutch Elm disease when injected into living trees that do not already show
symptoms of Dutch Elm disease. Fungicide injections on private lands are
optional and, if performed, are at the landowner's expense.
         (b)   Removal and disposal of trees. Prompt removal of diseased trees
or branches reduces breeding sites for elm bark beetles and eliminates the
source of Dutch Elm disease fungus. Trees that wilt before July 15 must be
removed within 20 days of detection. Trees that wilt after July 15 must be
removed by April 1 of the following year. Diseased trees not promptly removed
will be removed by the city at the landowner's expense. Wood may be retained
for use as firewood or saw logs if it is debarked or covered from April 15 to
Oct. 15 with four-mill plastic. The edges of the cover must be buried or sealed
to the ground.
      (3)   Control area. The control area for Dutch elm disease is defined as
all lands within the boundaries of the city.
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter for
which there is no penalty, is subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Sections 91.40 and 91.41.
      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of §§
91.40 and
91.41 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty, which
may be imposed for any crime that is a misdemeanor under this section,
including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a
sentence of not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which
a violation occurs or continues.
      (3)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this section shall not subject the officer or employee
to the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (4)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this
section, the City Council or any official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the
violation.
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
92.01   Adoption
   
92.02   Unlawful acts
   
92.03   Traffic and parking control
§ 92.01 ADOPTION.
   The rules and regulations established herein shall become effective only
after being sign-posted in conspicuous places in the city park, and it is
unlawful for any person to violate the same when so sign-posted.
(Prior Code, § 10.43) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.02 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Park hours. It is unlawful for any person to be upon the park premises
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
   (B)   Littering. Bottles, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, garbage, swill,
papers, ashes, refuse, offal, trash, rubbish or any other form of offensive
matter shall be disposed of by being placed in the park trash cans, and it is
unlawful for any person to fail to so dispose of the litter.
   (C)   Dog regulations. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or
other person in possession of a dog, to permit the dog to be upon the picnic/
play area, the area being defined as the area whose perimeter abuts the traffic
lane.
   (D)   Removal of or damage to property. It is unlawful to damage or remove
any of the structures, buildings, tables, play equipment, trees or other
components of or facilities within the city park.
(Prior Code, § 10.43) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.
   (A)   The maximum speed limit on roads in the city park shall be 20 mph and
shall be so sign-posted.
   (B)   The Council shall approve and direct the erection and maintenance of
the devices, signs or signals as are deemed appropriate for traffic and parking
control within the city park.
(Prior Code, § 10.43)
CHAPTER 93: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
93.01   Findings, purpose and intent
   
93.02   Election to manage the public rights-of-way
   
93.03   Definitions
   
93.04   Administration
   
93.05   Utility Coordination Committee
   
93.06   Registration and right-of-way occupancy
   
93.07   Registration information
   
93.08   Reporting obligations
   
93.09   Permit requirement
   
93.10   Permit applications
   
93.11   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
93.12   Action on small wireless facility permit applications
   
93.13   Permit fees
   
93.14   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
93.15   Joint applications
   
93.16   Supplementary applications
   
93.17   Other obligations
   
93.18   Denial or revocation of permit
   
93.19   Installation requirements
   
93.20   Inspection
   
93.21   Work done without a permit
   
93.22   Supplementary notification
   
93.23   Revocation of permits
   
93.24   Mapping data
   
93.25   Location and relocation of facilities
   
93.26   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
93.27   Damage to other facilities
   
93.28   Right-of-way vacation
   
93.29   Indemnification and liability
   
93.30   Abandoned and unusable facilities
   
93.31   Appeal
   
93.32   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
§ 93.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code
relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter imposes
reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and
equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this
chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons
using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws,
Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”), as they may be amended from time to
time, and 2017 Session Laws, Chapter 94 amending the Act and the other laws
governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This
chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules parts 7819.0050
to7819.9950 and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560 where possible. To the extent any
provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota
Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable
statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to
limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 93.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant M.S.
§ 237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different mean. References hereainafter
to “sections” are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this
chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or not capitalized.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The city of Luverne, Minnesota. For purposes of §
93.29, CITY also means the city's elected officials, officers, employees and
agents.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the
city or other governmental unit.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with MS. § 216D.04, subd. 3, over a continuous length in excess
of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee's option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules part7819.1100 means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minn. Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DEPARTMENT. The department of public works of the city.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of public works of the city, or her
or his designee.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established
by permit.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement
of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An Excavation permit
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
93.13
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless
facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-
way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and
the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small
wireless facility permits. MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way,
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees
tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by the
right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the
interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or
237.163, as they may be amended from time to time; or any ordinance enacted
under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken
pursuant to §
93.31 of this chapter.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in §
93.13.
   PATCH or PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate
base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city's
five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
   PERMIT. Has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this chapter.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified
in writing that they have been put on probation.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or
facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or
seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment
in the right-of-way.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the
city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit,
or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. §
237.162, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that
is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a
right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes (1) those services provided by a public
utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6, as they may be amended
from time to time; (2) services of a telecommunications right-of-way user,
including transporting of voice or data information; (3) services of a cable
communications systems as defined in M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from
time to time; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric
association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may be amended from time to
time; and (6) water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or
heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish 'gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's premises.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet
in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city's two-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless
service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.
For purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and
regulated under M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to time, and
telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric
energy services, a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be
amended from time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency
organized under M.S. Chs. 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to
time, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as
it may be amended from time to time, are not telecommunications right-of-way
users for purposes of this chapter except to the extent such entity is offering
wireless service.
   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two years.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
(M.S. § 237.162, subd. 12, as it may be amended from time to time)
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision
of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a
small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures,
wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly
associated with a specific antenna.
(M.S. § 237.162, subd. 13, as it may be amended from time to time)
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless
service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the city.
(M.S. § 237.162, subd. 16, as it may be amended from time to time)
§ 93.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
§ 93.05 UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.
   The city may create an advisory utility coordination committee.
Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and, by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the
size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants
that have expressed a desire to assist the city.
§ 93.06 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information.
   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain
boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their
property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and
shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements
for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this
chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, Gopher
One Call Law.
§ 93.07 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities and collapse of property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
         (f)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
         (g)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
         (h)   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or
approval from the applicable state or federal agency to lawfully operate, where
the person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from
said commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
§ 93.08 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December
1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground
facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format
designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city
to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency
of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of
all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
“next-year project”); and
         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year project”).
      (3)   The term “project” in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      (4)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for
inspection in the city's office a composite list of all projects of which the
city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for
keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant
listed by the other registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
§ 93.09 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in
the right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way
permit from the city to do so.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-
of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.
      (3)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless facility permit is
required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to
collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless
facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified
therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of
time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rule part 7819.1000, subp. 3
and notwithstanding division (B) above, the city shall establish and impose a
delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction,
patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to
time by city council resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
§ 93.10 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.
   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city;
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing.
   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
§ 93.11 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to M.S
§§ 216D.01 to 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System), as it may be
amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560.
   (C)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to division (B), the
erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a
small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless facility in
the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the
particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications,
and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application.
      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way
shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written authorization,
provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit
to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way
and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an
existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a
structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may
be imposed in the applicable permit.
      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its
wireless support structure.
      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements
between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of-way.
      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support
structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.
   (D)   Small wireless facility agreement.
      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small
wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city
asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small
wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard collocation
agreement may require payment of the following:
         (a)   Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure.
         (b)   $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation.
         (c)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
            1.   $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
            2.   $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or
            3.   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the
foregoing.
      (2)   The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not
in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however,
that the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or
franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit
does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the
city and applicant,
§ 93.12 ACTION ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such application.
The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit
application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the
application within the review periods established in this section.
   (B)   Consolidated applications.
      (1)   An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit
application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless
facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local government unit,
provided that all small wireless facilities in the application:
         (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;
         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support
structures.
      (2)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the
city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not
use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless
facilities in the application.
   (C)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
      (1)   The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking
approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-
day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of such
extension.
      (2)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information
and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within
30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or
information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of
any still-missing information.
      (3)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing
to toll the review period.
§ 93.13 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose establish an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
      (1)   Management costs;
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose establish the an
obstruction permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover management costs.
   (C)   Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
      (1)   Management costs, and;
      (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated
with collocation of small wireless facilities.
   (D)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
   (E)   Non refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
93.23 are not refundable.
   (F)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
§ 93.14 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
93.17.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city
may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule
part 7819.3000.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rule part 7819.1100.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under §
93.17.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
§ 93.15 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
§ 93.16 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
(i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
§ 93.17 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to M.S. §§ 216D.01 to
216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System), as it may be amended from
time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited
to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560
and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities
before excavating, as determined by the director.
§ 93.18 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be
made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days
of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied, the
right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and
resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of
receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30
days after submission.
§ 93.19 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so
far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they
may be amended from time to time. Installation of service laterals shall be
performed in accordance with Minn. Rules Ch. 7560 and these ordinances. Service
lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions
set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in
§
93.24(B).
§ 93.20 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. Rule part 7819.1300.
   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the
city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that
the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within
the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to §
93.23.
§ 93.21 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event
regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency
situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event,
the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 93.22 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
§ 93.23 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee's control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
93.20.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so
contact the city, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee's failure to
so contact the city, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
§ 93.24 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules parts
7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of any work
pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the director accurate maps
and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all equipment installed,
owed and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the
horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be
provided consistent with the city's electronic mapping system, when practical
or as a condition imposed by the director. Failure to provide maps and drawings
pursuant to this subsection shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder's
registration.
   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules §
7560.0150 subp. 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of
establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the director reasonably
requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the director
evidence satisfactory to the director of the installed service lateral
locations. Compliance with this division (B) and with applicable Gopher State
One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after 12-
31-2005 shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for:
      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project
including those under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other subdivision or
site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be amended from time to time.
The director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing
such information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate
information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of
the permit issued for the work or future permits to the offending permittee or
its subcontractors.
§ 93.25 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the
Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules parts 7819.3100, 7819.5000
and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise
available to cities.
   (B)   Undergrounding. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise or other
agreement between the applicable right-of-way user and the City, Facilities in
the right-of-way must be located or relocated and maintained underground in
accordance with Chapter 93 of this code.
   (C)   Corridors.
      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position
at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at
the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the
registrant.
   (D)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   (E)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
§ 93.26 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 to 216D.09
(“One Call Excavation Notice System”), as it may be amended from time to time,
before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has
facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal
and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities
are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and
work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of
its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
§ 93.27 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably
possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and
must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which
it or its facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost
of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during
the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities.
§ 93.28 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the
facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way
are governed by Minn. Rules parts 7819.3200.
§ 93.29 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rule part 7819.1250.
§ 93.30 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.
§ 93.31 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been
denied a permit; (3) has had a permit revoked; (4) believes that the fees
imposed are not in conformity with M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6, as it may be
amended from time to time; or (5) disputes a determination of the director
regarding §
93.24(B) may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed,
upon written request, by the city council. The city council shall act on a
timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided the
right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the
appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the city council affirming the
denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
§ 93.32 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION
      
113.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
114.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
      
115.   JUNK YARDS AND RECYCLING CENTERS
      
116.   LODGING TAX
      
117.   REGULATING LAWFUL GAMBLING
      
118.   CANNABIS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Applications
   
110.03   Applicants for city licenses
   
110.04   Action on application, transfer, termination and duplicate license
   
110.05   Carrying or posting
   
110.06   Penalty for property owners
   
110.07   Responsibility of licensee
   
110.08   Denial of license; conviction of crime
   
110.09   Conditional licenses
   
110.10   Renewal of licenses
   
110.11   Fixing license fees
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this business title, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.
   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for a business.
   BOND. A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions
acceptable and specifically approved by the City Attorney.
   BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services or transaction
that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the
terms and conditions of this business title.
   LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him or her
to carry on and transact a business.
   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior
to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business.
   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds a
valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the city for carrying on a
business.
   SALE, SELL and SOLD. All forms of barter and all manner or means of
furnishing merchandise to persons.
(Prior Code, § 6.01)
§ 110.02 APPLICATIONS.
   All applications shall be made as follows.
   (A)   All applications shall be made at the office of the City Administrator
upon forms that have been formulated by the city for such purposes.
   (B)   All applications must be subscribed, sworn to and include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s name and citizenship;
      (2)   The applicant’s present address and length of time he or she has
lived at that address;
      (3)   The applicant’s occupation and length of time so engaged;
      (4)   The applicant’s addresses and occupations for the three years last
preceding the date of application;
      (5)   Names and addresses of applicant’s employers, if any, for the three
years last preceding the date of application;
      (6)   Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross
misdemeanor or misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal ordinance but
excluding traffic violations and, if so, the date and place of conviction and
the nature of the offense;
      (7)   Type of license and location of premises for which application is
made;
      (8)   At least four character references if applicant has not resided in
the city for two years last preceding the date of application; and
      (9)   Such other information as the Council shall deem necessary
considering the nature of the business for which license application is made.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false
statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such
application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on
such application form, shall, upon discovery of such falsehood, work an
automatic refusal of license or, if already issued, shall render any license or
permit issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect the applicant
from prosecution for violation of this business title or any part hereof.
   (D)   The City Administrator may, upon receipt of each application completed
in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of statements made
therein and the moral character and business reputation of each applicant for
license to such extent as he or she deems necessary. For the investigation, the
City Administrator may enlist the aid of the chief law enforcement officer.
   (E)   Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such abbreviated form
as the Council may, by resolution, adopt.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 APPLICANTS FOR CITY LICENSES.
   (A)   General. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized
criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing
background checks.
   (B)   Criminal history license background investigations. The County
Sheriff’s Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the
city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for
the following licenses within the city: solicitors; dances; junkyards;
recycling centers; commercial refuse collection; arcades; theaters/shows; tent
shows; carnival; and fireworks licenses.
      (1)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the County Sheriff’s Department is
authorized to access data maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions computerized criminal history information system in accordance
with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at
the County Sheriff’s Department under the care and custody of the chief law
enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the
computerized criminal history data may be released by the County Sheriff’s
Department to the licensing authority, including the City Council, the City
Administrator or the designee.
      (2)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in
M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject
an applicant for a license on the basis of the
applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the
license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant’s request
on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license; and
         (d)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 6.021) (Ord. 329, Third Series, effective 5-3-2013)
§ 110.04 ACTION ON APPLICATION, TRANSFER, TERMINATION AND DUPLICATE LICENSE.
   (A)   Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period of the
remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing license
year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be consistent
with this business title.
   (B)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Administrator shall
forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the
Council upon proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate license fee and
approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if
required. All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis unless otherwise
specified herein as to particular businesses. Unless otherwise herein
specified, license fees shall be pro rated on the basis of one-twelfth for each
calendar month or part thereof remaining in the then current license year.
Applicable licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises
therein described.
   (C)   Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons. No license
shall be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the
Council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to
make any transfer in violation of this division (C).
   (D)   Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.
   (E)   Refusal and revocation.
      (1)   The Council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any
application or revoke any license.
      (2)   No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral
character or business reputation.
      (3)   Before revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice to
the licensee and grant the licensee opportunity to be heard.
      (4)   Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in
the resolution calling for the hearing.
   (F)   Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued
by the City Administrator, without action by the Council, upon licensee’s
affidavit that the original has been lost and upon payment of a fee of $20 for
issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked
“DUPLICATE”.
(Prior Code, § 6.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.05 CARRYING OR POSTING.
   All solicitors shall, at all times when so engaged, carry their licenses on
their persons. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their place of
business near the licensed activity; provided, however, that, in the case of
machine or other device licensing, the city may provide a sticker for the
current license year which shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring
the sticker. All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any
officer or citizen.
(Prior Code, § 6.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06 PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or
controlled by him or her to be used, without a license, for any business for
which a license is required by this business title.
(Prior Code, § 6.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.07 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
   The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or permit
is issued shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee himself or herself.
(Prior Code, § 6.06)
§ 110.08 DENIAL OF LICENSE; CONVICTION OF CRIME.
   A license may be denied to an applicant by the Council solely or in part due
to a prior conviction of a crime by an applicant only upon a finding that the
conviction directly relates to the occupation for which the license is sought,
and then only after considering evidence of rehabilitation and other evidence
as may be presented, all in accordance with state statutes; provided, however,
that, an applicant must show his or her present fitness to perform the
occupation for which the license is sought.
(Prior Code, § 6.07)
§ 110.09 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon
a finding of the necessity therefor, place such conditions and restrictions
upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.
(Prior Code, § 6.08)
§ 110.10 RENEWAL OF LICENSES.
   Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 30
days prior to the date of expiration of the license and shall contain such
information as is required by the city. This time requirement may be waived by
the Council for good and sufficient cause.
(Prior Code, § 6.09)
§ 110.11 FIXING LICENSE FEES.
   Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this
business title shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by
resolution, and uniformly enforced. The license fees may, from time to time, be
amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth
currently effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Administrator and be open to inspection during regular business hours. For
the purpose of fixing the fees, the Council may subdivide and categorize
licenses under a specific license requirement; provided that, any subdivision
or categorization shall be included in the resolution authorized by this
section.
(Prior Code, § 6.10) (Ord. 48, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Definitions
   
111.002   Municipal Dispensary
   
111.003   Consumption and display
   
111.004   Nudity or obscenity prohibited
Alcoholic Liquor
   
111.015   Applications and licenses
   
111.016   Applicants for city licenses
   
111.017   Renewal license applications
   
111.018   Delinquent taxes and charges
   
111.019   Limitation of ownership
   
111.020   Conditional licenses
   
111.021   Premises licensed
   
111.022   Financial responsibility and insurance requirements
   
111.023   Unlawful acts
   
111.024   Exceptions
   
111.025   Conduct on licensed premises
   
111.026   Sale by employee
   
111.027   License condition and unlawful acts
   
111.028   License fees
   
111.029   Minors; unlawful acts
   
111.030   Gambling prohibited
   
111.031   Consumption and possession on streets, public property and the like
   
111.032   Coin-operated amusement devices
   
111.033   License required
3.2% Malt Liquor
   
111.045   License required
   
111.046   Temporary license required
   
111.047   Restrictions and regulations
   
111.048   Hours and days of sale
Liquor Licenses
   
111.060   Liquor license required
   
111.061   Temporary liquor license
   
111.062   Sports, conventions, cultural facilities or community festivals
   
111.063   Hours and days of sales
   
111.064   Off-sale malt liquor “growlers”
   
111.065   Off-sale malt liquor “128 ounces”
   
111.066   Brewer taprooms
On-Sale Wine Sales
   
111.080   License required
   
111.081   Hours and days of sales
   
111.082   Unlawful acts
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   3.2% MALT LIQUOR. Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by
volume, nor more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume, including, but not limited to, beer, wine and liquor as defined in this
section.
   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this chapter
at least 21 years of age or older.
   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and
completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for a business.
   BREWER. A person who manufactures malt liquor for sale.
   BREWER TAPROOM. A facility on or adjacent to premises owned by a brewer
licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (6)(i) or (6)(j), as it may be
amended from time to time, and produces less than 250,000 barrels of malt
liquor annually, and where the on-sale and consumption of malt liquor produced
by the brewer is permitted pursuant to M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(b), as it may
be amended from time to time.
   CHURCH. A building which is principally used as a place where persons of the
same faith regularly assemble for public worship.
   CITY. The City of Luverne.
   CLUB.
      (1)   An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state
for civic, fraternal, social or business purposes, for intellectual improvement
or for the promotion of sports or a congressionally chartered veterans’
organization, which:
         (a)   Has more than 30 members;
         (b)   Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more
than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its
members; and
         (c)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee or
other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose.
      (2)   No member, officer, agent or employee shall receive any profit from
the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the CLUB, or their
guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the
governing body. The CLUB or congressionally chartered veterans’ organization
must have been in existence for at least three years.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of Public Safety, except as otherwise
provided.
   CONVENTION CENTER. A building or set of buildings designed to have a guest
capacity of at least 100 persons designed exclusively for organized events such
as banquets, receptions, or other large- scale social events.
   DISTILLED SPIRITS. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions
and mixtures thereof, for non-industrial use.
   FARM WINERY. A winery operated by the owner of a Minnesota farm and
producing table, sparkling or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice, other
fruit bases or honey with a majority of the ingredients grown or produced in
Minnesota.
   HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to
transients and which has:
      (1)   A resident proprietor or manager;
      (2)   A dining room serving the general public at tables and having
facilities for seating at least 50 guests at one time; and
      (3)   At least 20 guest rooms.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous
and malt beverages containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.
   LICENSE. A document, issued by the city, to an applicant permitting him or
her to carry on and transact the business stated therein.
   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior
to issuance of a license to transact and carry on the business stated therein.
   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her approved application,
holds a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor
is then under suspension, from the city for carrying on the business stated
therein.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The premises described in the approved license
application, subject to the provisions of M.S. § 340A.410, subd. 7, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   LIQUOR CATERER’S PERMIT. A state liquor catering permit for on-sale of
intoxicating liquor as an incidental part of a food service that serves
prepared meals at a place other than the premises for which the holder’s on-
sale intoxicating license is issued.
   MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale or other beverage made from malt by fermentation
and containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.
   MANUFACTURER. A person who, by a process of manufacture, fermenting,
brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending or by the combination of
different materials, prepares or produces intoxicating liquor for sale.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years.
   OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the licensed premises only.
   OFF-SALE MALT LIQUOR (128 OUNCES). Brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses may
also be issued, with approval of the Commissioner, to a holder of a brewer's
license under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i) or (j) and meeting the criteria
established by M.S. § 340A.29 as may be amended from time to time. The amount
of malt liquor sold at off-sale under this license may not exceed 128 ounces
per customer per day.
   OFF-SALE MALT LIQUOR (GROWLER). The sale of malt liquor in 64-ounce
containers, commonly known as growlers, by a brewery licensed under M.S. §
340A.301, as it may be amended from time to time, for consumption off the
premises. This license is exempt from maintaining minimum food service
requirements. A state wholesaler’s/manufacturers intoxicating liquor license is
required. Brewers are limited to producing less than 3,500 barrels of malt
liquor per year. Example: microbrewery.
   ON-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed
premises only.
   PACKAGE and ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding alcoholic
beverages, which container or receptacle is corked, capped or sealed by a
manufacturer or wholesaler.
   PUBLIC FACILITY. A park, community center or other accommodation or facility
owned or managed by or on behalf of a subdivision of the state, including any
county, city, town, township or independent district of the state.
   RESTAURANT. As defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 25, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   RETAIL. Sale for consumption.
   SALE, SELL and SOLD. All barters and all manners or means of furnishing
alcoholic beverages to persons, including the furnishing in violation or
evasion of law.
   THEATER. A building containing an auditorium in which live dramatic,
musical, dance or literary performances are regularly presented to holders of
tickets for those performances.
   WHOLESALER. Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic
beverages to a licensee from a stock maintained in a warehouse.
   WINE. The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes,
including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed
grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes,
imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in
each instance containing not less than 0.5%, nor more than 24%, alcohol by
volume for non-industrial use. WINE does not include distilled spirits, as
defined herein.
(Prior Code, § 5.01) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014; Am. Ord. 17,
Fourth Series, effective 5-27-2021; Ord. 28, Fourth Series, effective 7-7-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.101
§ 111.002 MUNICIPAL DISPENSARY.
   (A)   Establishment.
      (1)   A Municipal Dispensary is hereby established to be operated within
the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages and related items.
      (2)   The Dispensary shall be at a place or places as the Council shall
determine and may be either leased or owned by the city. It shall be in the
charge of a person known as the manager who shall have such assistants as may
be necessary.
   (B)   Dispensary Fund. A Liquor Dispensary Fund is hereby created into which
all revenues received from the operation of the Dispensary shall be paid and
from which all operating expenses shall be paid.
(Prior Code, § 5.60)
§ 111.003 CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   (1)   Consumption and display license required. It is unlawful for any
business establishment or club, not holding an on-sale liquor license to
directly or indirectly, or on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep
for sale or otherwise dispose of any liquid for the purpose of mixing the same
with liquor, or permit its members to bring and keep a personal supply of
liquor in lockers assigned to the members, without a license therefor from the
city.
      (2)   Consumption and display restrictions and regulations.
         (a)   Eligible licensees. If the applicant is otherwise eligible,
licenses may be issued only to:
            1.   Persons who have not, within five years prior to application,
been convicted of a felony or of violating provisions of this chapter of other
law relating to the sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages;
            2.   A restaurant;
            3.   A hotel;
            4.   A beer licensee;
            5.   A resort as defined by statute; or
            6.   A club or an unincorporated club otherwise meeting the
definition of a club; provided that, no license may be issued to a club holding
an on-sale liquor license.
         (b)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful to sell liquor on licensed
premises.
         (c)   License expiration.
            1.   In order to coordinate the expiration of a consumption and
display license with a state permit, all licenses shall expire at the same time
as the state consumption and display permit expires.
            2.   Any changes in the state license period shall change the city
license period, and the fees therefor shall be pro-rata adjusted for any
partial year periods.
         (d)   State permit required. Licenses shall be issued only to holders
of a consumption and display permit from the Commissioner.
         (e)   Lockers. A club to which a license is issued under this section
may allow members to bring and keep a personal supply of liquor in lockers on a
club’s premises. All bottles kept on the premises must have attached labels
signed by the member. No minor may keep a supply of liquor on club premises.
         (f)   Hours and days. No licensee may permit a person to consume or
display liquor, and no person may consume or display liquor, between 2:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon on Sundays, and between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday
through Saturday.
(Prior Code, § 6.70)
   (B)   (1)   License required. Any non-profit organization desiring to serve
liquids for the purpose of mixing with liquor and permitting the consumption
and display of liquor in conjunction with a social activity sponsored by it,
shall first obtain a license therefor from the city. It is unlawful for any
such organization to fail to obtain the license.
      (2)   Term. The term of the license shall be one day only.
      (3)   Limitation on number. The city shall issue no more than ten
licenses in a calendar year.
      (4)   Approval. In addition to Council approval, the license must be
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 6.71)
(Ord. 47, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988; Ord. 69, Third Series, effective
5-4-1989; Ord. 111, Third Series, effective 7-4-1991; Ord. 281, Third Series,
effective 1-12-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.004 NUDITY OR OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the post pubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or the covered human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is
considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
      OBSCENE PERFORMANCE. A play, motion picture, dance, show or other
presentation, whether pictured, animated or live, performed before an audience
and which is whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, or which includes obscenities or explicit
verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct.
      OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular
use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts,
sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have no other
meaning or that, in context, are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or
excretory meaning.
      SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is
nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the
part of one so clothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching
of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals or the
breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual
experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person issued a license provided
for in this chapter to permit upon licensed premises any nudity, obscene
performance or continued use of obscenities by any agent, employee, patron or
other person.
(Prior Code, § 6.90) Penalty, see §
10.99
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
§ 111.015 APPLICATIONS AND LICENSES.
   (A)   Application. All applications shall be made at the office of the City
Administrator upon forms prescribed by the city or, if by the Commissioner,
then together with such additional information as the Council may desire.
Information required may vary with the type of business organization making
application. All questions asked or information required by the application
forms shall be answered fully and completely by the applicant. Every
application for the issuance or renewal of a liquor or beer license must
include a copy of each summons received by the applicant during the preceding
year under M.S. § 340A.802, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally
make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Any false
statement in the application, or any willful omission to state any information
called for on the application form shall, upon discovery of the falsehood, work
an automatic refusal of license or, if already issued, shall render any license
issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect the applicant from
prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part thereof.
   (C)   Application and investigation fees. At the time the initial
application is made, an applicant for a license under this chapter shall
accompany the application with payment of a fee to be considered an application
and investigation fee, not refundable to the applicant, to cover the cost of
the city in processing the application and the investigation of the applicant.
No fee shall be required of an applicant for a temporary beer license.
   (D)   Action.
      (1)   Granting. The Council may approve any application for the period of
the remainder of the then current license year or for the entire ensuing
license year. All applications including proposed license periods must be
consistent with this chapter. Prior to consideration of any application for a
license, the applicant shall pay the license fee and, if applicable, pay the
investigation fee. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon
withdrawal of an application before consideration by the Council, the license
fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Failure to pay any portion of a fee
when due shall be cause for revocation.
      (2)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Administrator
shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the
city or the Commissioner, as the case may be, and upon payment of the license
fee. All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis unless otherwise specified
herein. For licenses issued and which are to become effective other than on the
first day of the licensed year, the fee to be paid with the application shall
be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Licenses shall be valid only at
one location and on the premises therein described.
      (3)   Transfer. A license shall be transferable between persons upon
consent of the Council and payment of the investigation fee. No license shall
be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the Council
and payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make any
transfer in violation of this division (D)(3).
      (4)   Refusal and termination. The Council may, in its sole discretion
and for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application. No license shall
be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation.
Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
      (5)   Public interest. No license under this chapter may be issued,
transferred or renewed if the results of any investigation show, to the
satisfaction of the Council, that the issuance, transfer or renewal would not
be in the public interest.
      (6)   Revocation or suspension. The Council shall revoke or suspend, for
a period not to exceed 60 days, a license granted under the provisions of this
chapter, or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000, for each violation on a
finding that the licensee has failed to comply with a statute, regulation or
provision of the city code relating to alcoholic beverages and/or drugs or
controlled substances. If it shall be made to appear at the hearing thereon
that the violation was not willful, the Council may order suspension; provided
that, revocation shall be ordered upon the third violation or offense. No
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a committee of the Council or
a hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, being M.S. §§ 14.001 to
14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, or may be determined by the
Council in action calling the hearing. The hearing shall be called by the
Council upon written notice to the licensee, served in person or by certified
mail, not less than 15, or more than 30, days prior to the hearing date,
stating the time, place and purpose thereof. As additional restrictions or
regulations on licensees under this chapter, city code or statute, the
following shall also be grounds for the action:
         (a)   The licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon licensed
premises unrelated to the sale of beer, wine, liquor, drugs or controlled
substances;
         (b)   The licensee had knowledge of the illegal acts upon licenses
premises, but failed to report the same to law enforcement;
         (c)   The licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with law
enforcement in investigating the alleged illegal acts upon licensed premises;
or
         (d)   The activities of the licensee created a serious danger to
public health, safety or welfare.
      (7)   Corporate applicants and licensees. A corporate applicant, at the
time of application, shall furnish the city with a list of all persons that
have an interest in the corporation and the extent of the interest. The list
shall name all shareholders and show the number of shares held by each, either
individually or beneficially for others. It is the duty of each corporate
licensee to notify the City Administrator in writing of any change in legal
ownership, or beneficial interest in the corporation or in the shares. Any
change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the shares entitled to be
voted at a meeting of the shareholders of a corporate licensee, which results
in the change of voting control of the corporation by the persons owning the
shares therein, shall be deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license issued
to the corporation, and any license shall be revoked 30 days after any change
in ownership or beneficial interest of shares unless the Council has been
notified of the change in writing and has approved it by appropriate action.
The Council, or any officer of the city designated by it, may at any reasonable
time examine the stock transfer records and minute books of any corporate
licensee in order to verify and identify the shareholders, and the Council or
its designated officer may examine the business records of any other licensee
to the extent necessary to disclose the interest which persons other than the
licensee have in the licensed business. The Council may revoke any license
issued upon its determination that a change of ownership of shares in a
corporate licensee or any change of ownership of any interest in the business
of any other licensee has actually resulted in the change of control of the
licensed business so as materially to affect the integrity and character of its
management and its operation, but no such action shall be taken until after a
hearing by the Council on notice to the licensee.
   (E)   Duplicate licenses. Duplicates of all original licenses under this
chapter may be issued by the City Administrator without action by the Council,
upon licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of
a fee of $20 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be
clearly marked “DUPLICATE”.
   (F)   Posting. All licensees shall conspicuously post their licenses in
their places of business.
   (G)   Resident manager or agent.
      (1)   Before a license is issued or renewed to an individual who is not a
resident of the county, to more than one individual whether or not they are
residents of the county, or to a corporation, partnership or association, the
applicant or applicants shall appoint in writing an individual person who is a
resident of the county as its manager or agent. The resident manager or agent
shall, by the terms of the appointment:
         (a)   Take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed
premises; and
         (b)   Serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating
to the license.
      (2)   The manager or agent must be a person who, by reason of age,
character, reputation and other attributes, could qualify individually as a
licensee. If the manager or agent ceases to be a resident of the county or
ceases to act in the capacity for the licensee without appointment of a
successor, the license issued pursuant to the appointment shall be
automatically suspended by the City Administrator and subject to permanent
revocation by the Council. The suspension shall remain in effect for up to 60
days until a new resident manager is appointed, background investigated,
approved by the Council, and appropriate investigative fees paid. For the
purposes of this division (G)(2), the term RESIDENT means a bona fide resident
who qualifies to vote and has a residence which, if owned by the manager or
agent, could be homesteaded for real estate tax purposes.
   (H)   Persons disqualified.
      (1)   No license under this chapter may be issued to:
         (a)   A person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
         (b)   A person who within five years of the license application has
been convicted of a willful violation of a federal or state law, or local
ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale
or distribution, of alcoholic beverages;
         (c)   A person who has had an alcoholic beverage license revoked
within five years of the license application, or to any person who at the time
of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than 5% of the
capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the
premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation,
partnership, association, enterprise, business or firm in which any person is
in any manner interested;
         (d)   A person under the age of 21 years;
         (e)   A person not of good moral character and repute; or
         (f)   A person who, within five years of the license application, has
been convicted of a willful violation of any federal or state law, or local
ordinance, governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of any
drug or controlled substance.
      (2)   No person holding a license from the Commissioner as a
manufacturer, brewer or wholesaler may have a direct or indirect interest, in
whole or in part, in a business holding an alcoholic beverage license from the
city.
(Prior Code, § 5.02) (Ord. 47, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988; Ord. 142,
Third Series, effective 12-24-1992; Ord. 228, Third Series, effective 5-18-
2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.016 APPLICANTS FOR CITY LICENSES.
   (A)   General. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized
criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing
background checks.
   (B)   Criminal history license background investigations. The County
Sheriff’s Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the
city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for
the following licenses within the city: beer; wine; and liquor licenses.
      (1)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the County Sheriff’s Department is
authorized to access data maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions computerized criminal history information system in accordance
with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at
the County Sheriff’s Department under the care and custody of the chief law
enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the
computerized criminal history data may be released by the County Sheriff’s
Department to the licensing authority, including the City Council, the City
Administrator or the designee.
      (2)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in
M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject
an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction
unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction
is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the
city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city shall notify the
applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license; and
         (d)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 5.021) (Ord. 328, Third Series, effective 5-3-2013)
§ 111.017 RENEWAL LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for renewal of all licenses under this chapter shall be made at
least 60 days prior to the date of expiration of the license and shall contain
such information as is required by the city. This time requirement may be
waived by the Council for good and sufficient cause.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
§ 111.018 DELINQUENT TAXES AND CHARGES.
   No license under this chapter shall be granted for operation on any premises
upon which taxes, assessments or installments thereof, or other financial
claims of the city, are owed and are delinquent and unpaid.
(Prior Code, § 5.04)
§ 111.019 LIMITATION OF OWNERSHIP.
   No person shall be granted liquor licenses at more than one location. For
the purpose of this section, any person owning an interest of 5% or more of the
entity to which the license is issued, or the ownership by a member of his or
her immediate family, shall be deemed to be a licensee.
(Prior Code, § 5.05)
§ 111.020 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon
a finding of the necessity therefor, place the special conditions and
restrictions, in addition to those stated in this chapter, upon any license as
it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.
(Prior Code, § 5.06) (Ord. 47, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988)
§ 111.021 PREMISES LICENSED.
   Unless the express written permission of the Council is obtained, a license
issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only in the compact
and continuous building or structure situated on the premises described in the
license, and all transactions relating to a sale under the license must take
place within the building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 5.07) (Ord. 69, Third Series, effective 5-4-1989)
§ 111.022 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Proof. Applicants for a new or renewal license shall file with the
City Administrator proof of financial responsibility with regard to the
liability imposed by M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to time,
or acts amendatory and supplementary thereto, in the manner and in the amount
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time, or acts amendatory and supplementary thereto, or such other
insurance as may be required from time to time by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Any liability insurance policy required by this section must further
provide that no cancellation of the same for any cause can be made either by
the insured or the insurance company without first giving ten days’ written
notice to the city of intention to cancel the same, the notice to be addressed
to the City Administrator. Failure of any licensee to maintain insurance
required under this section throughout the license period shall result in the
immediate suspension of the license for up to 60 days and until such time as
the required insurance is obtained and proof filed with the City Administrator.
Upon the administrative suspension, the Council shall thereafter require the
licensee to show cause why the license should not be revoked. An annual
aggregate of $300,000 may be included in the insurance coverage.
   (B)   Documents submitted to Commissioner. All proofs of financial
responsibility and exemption affidavits filed with the city under this section
shall be submitted by the city to the state’s Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (C)   Insurance requirements. No liquor, 3.2% malt liquor or wine license
may be issued, maintained or renewed unless the applicant demonstrates proof of
financial responsibility with regard to civil liability or dram shop actions.
This applies to all types of liquor licenses. The city must submit to the state
the applicant’s proof of financial responsibility. A local government may
require higher insurance or bond coverage or a larger deposit of cash or
securities. An insurer may provide the below coverage in combination with other
insurance coverage. The minimum requirement for proof of financial
responsibility is:
      (1)   A certificate that there is in effect for the license period an
insurance policy issued by an insurer providing at least $50,000 of coverage
because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, $100,000
because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence, $10,000
because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any
one occurrence, $50,000 for other pecuniary loss of any one person in any one
occurrence and $100,000 for other pecuniary loss of two or more persons in any
one occurrence;
      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as provided in
division (C)(1) above; and
      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has
deposited with the State Treasurer $100,000 in cash or securities, which may
legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market value
of $100,000.
(Prior Code, § 5.08) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014)
§ 111.023 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   (1)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any
licensee to permit consumption of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises more
than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made;
provided, further, that, it is unlawful for any licensee to permit any glass,
bottle or other container to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other surface
where customers are served, more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale
thereof can legally be made.
      (2)   Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than a licensee’s
bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties, to
be on premises licensed under this chapter more than 30 minutes after the legal
time for making licensed sales.
      (3)   Inspection. It is unlawful for any licensee, his or her employee or
agent, to hinder or prevent a law enforcement officer from making an inspection
to observe whether or not this division (A) and all other laws are being
observed.
(Prior Code, § 5.09)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any:
      (1)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or
purchase of an alcoholic beverage;
      (2)   Licensee to sell or serve an alcoholic beverage to any person who
is obviously intoxicated;
      (3)   Licensee to fail, where doubt could exist, to require adequate
proof of age of a person upon the licensed premises;
      (4)   Licensee to sell an alcoholic beverage on any day, or during any
hour, when the sales are not permitted by law;
      (5)   Licensee to allow consumption of an alcoholic beverage on licensed
premises on any day, or during any hour, when the consumption is not permitted
by law; and/or
      (6)   Person to purchase an alcoholic beverage on any day, or during any
hour, when the sales are not permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 5.19)
(Ord. 47, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.024 EXCEPTIONS.
   Licensing requirements in this chapter shall not apply to sales by
manufacturers to wholesalers, nor to sales by wholesalers, as those terms are
defined herein and within such definitions. Nor shall the requirements apply to
sales made by Municipal Liquor Store employees in Municipal Liquor Store
buildings.
(Prior Code, § 5.10)
§ 111.025 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   Except as herein provided, every licensee under this chapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and shall maintain
conditions of sobriety and order therein.
(Prior Code, § 5.11)
§ 111.026 SALE BY EMPLOYEE.
   Any sale of an alcoholic beverage in or from any premises licensed under
this chapter by any employee authorized to make the sale in or from the place
is the act of the employer as well as of the person actually making the sale;
and every employer is liable to all of the penalties, except criminal
penalties, provided by law for the sale, equally with the person actually
making the sale.
(Prior Code, § 5.12)
§ 111.027 LICENSE CONDITION AND UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   All premises licensed under this chapter shall, at all times, be open
to inspection by any law enforcement officer to determine whether or not this
chapter and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to
being issued the license, consent to the inspection by the officers and without
a warrant for searches or seizures.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee,
to hinder or prevent a law enforcement officer from making the inspection.
(Prior Code, § 5.13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.028 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Fixing fees.
      (1)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, all fees for licenses
provided for in this chapter, including, but not by way of limitation, license
fees, investigation and administration fees, shall be fixed and determined by
the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced.
      (2)   The fees may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by
resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Administrator and open to inspection during regular business hours.
      (3)   For the purpose of fixing the fees, the Council may categorize and
classify; provided that, the categorization and classification shall be
included in the resolution authorized by this section.
   (B)   Refundment. A pro rata share of an annual license fee a license to
sell liquor or beer, either on-sale or off-sale, shall be refunded to the
licensee, or to his or her estate, if:
      (1)   The business ceases to operate because of destruction or damage;
      (2)   The licensee dies; or
      (3)   The business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than a license
revocation or suspension.
(Prior Code, § 5.14)
§ 111.029 MINORS; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any:
      (1)   Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic beverages on
licensed premises; and/or
      (2)   Minor to consume alcoholic beverages, except in the household of
the minor’s parent or guardian, and then only with the consent of the parent or
guardian.
   (B)   Purchasing. It is unlawful for any:
      (1)   Person to sell, barter, furnish or give alcoholic beverages to a
minor unless the person is the parent or guardian of the minor, and then only
for consumption in the household of the parent or guardian;
      (2)   Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage;
and/or
      (3)   Person to induce a minor to purchase or procure any alcoholic
beverage.
   (C)   Possession.
      (1)   It is unlawful for a minor to possess any alcoholic beverage with
the intent to consume it at a place other than the household of the minor’s
parent or guardian.
      (2)   Possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor at a place other
than the household of the parent or guardian is prima facie evidence of intent
to consume it at a place other than the household of his or her parent or
guardian.
   (D)   Entering licensed premises.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any minor, as defined in this chapter, to enter
licensed premises or the municipal liquor store for the purpose of purchasing
or consuming any alcoholic beverage. It is not unlawful for any person who has
attained the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises for the following
purposes:
         (a)   To perform work for the establishment, including the serving of
alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute;
         (b)   To consume meals; and
         (c)   To attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
establishment where liquor is not sold.
      (2)   It is unlawful for a licensee to permit a person under the age of
18 years to enter or remain upon licensed premises unless the person is in the
company of his or her parent or guardian.
   (E)   Misrepresentation of age. It is unlawful for a minor to misrepresent
his or her age for the purpose of purchasing alcoholic beverage.
   (F)   Proof of age. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming alcoholic
beverages may be established only by a valid driver’s license issued by
Minnesota, another state or a province of Canada, and including the photograph
and date of birth of the licensed person; or by a valid Minnesota
identification card; or by a valid Canadian identification card with the
photograph and date of birth of the person, issued by a Canadian province; or,
in the case of a foreign national, from a nation other than Canada, by a valid
passport.
(Prior Code, § 5.15) (Ord. 47, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988; Ord. 142,
Third Series, effective 12-24-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.030 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any licensee to keep, possess, operate or permit the
keeping, possession or operation on licensed premises of dice or any other
gambling device, or permit raffles to be conducted, except as are licensed by
the Charitable Gambling Control Board or exempt from the licensing.
(Prior Code, § 5.16) (Ord. 47, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 111.031 CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION ON STREETS, PUBLIC PROPERTY AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed
container, any alcoholic beverage on any city park, street, public property,
private parking lot to which the public has access, except on the premises when
and where permission has been specifically granted by the City Administrator or
licensed by the Council; provided that, this section shall not apply to the
possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle when the container is
kept in the trunk of the vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in
some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or
passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose
of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within
the area occupied by the driver or passengers.
(Prior Code, § 5.17)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon, or have in his or her
possession upon, or in, any school ground, any schoolhouse or school building
any alcoholic beverage, except for experiments in laboratories and except for
those organizations who have been issued temporary licenses to sell beer, and
for any person to possess beer as a result of a purchase from those
organizations holding temporary licenses.
(Prior Code, § 5.18)
(Ord.69, Third Series, effective 5-4-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.032 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit coin-operated amusement devices on
premises licensed for the off-sale of liquor.
(Prior Code, § 5.20) (Ord. 69, Third Series, effective 5-4-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.033 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Unless a specific exemption is provided in this chapter, no sale of an
alcoholic beverage shall be made without a license therefor from the city. It
is the policy of the Council to permit only those sales on licensed premises
for which an application has been made and a license granted.
(Prior Code, § 5.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
3.2% MALT LIQUOR
§ 111.045 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense
or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of 3.2%
malt liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor
from the city. This section shall not apply to sales by manufacturers to
wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to a person holding a 3.2% malt liquor
license from the city. Annual 3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses may be issued
only to drug stores, restaurants, hotels, bowling centers, clubs and
establishments used exclusively for the sale of beer with the incidental sale
of tobacco and soft drinks.
   (B)   The Council may authorize a holder of an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
license issued pursuant to division (A) above who is also licensed to sell wine
at on-sale pursuant to M.S. § 340A.404, as it may be amended from time to time,
to sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license.
(Prior Code, § 5.30) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014) Penalty, see
§
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. §§ 340A.404 and 340A.411
§ 111.046 TEMPORARY LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Applicant. A club or charitable, religious or non-profit organization,
duly incorporated as a non-profit or religious corporation under the laws of
the state, and having its registered office and principal place of activity
within the city, shall qualify for a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
license.
   (B)   Conditions.
      (1)   An application for a temporary license shall state the exact dates
and premises (detailed description or drawing of where the sales and
consumption will occur) of proposed temporary sale.
      (2)   No applicant shall qualify for a temporary license for more than a
total of 12 days in any calendar year.
      (3)   The applicant shall comply with all other restrictions, limitations
and regulations for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor under the city code and state
statutes.
(Prior Code, § 5.31) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014) Penalty, see
§
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.403
§ 111.047 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No 3.2% malt liquor licensee shall, during the effective period of the
license, be the owner or holder of a federal retail liquor dealer’s tax stamp
for the sale of intoxicating liquor, and ownership or holding thereof shall be
grounds for revocation.
   (B)   No license shall be granted to a manufacturer of 3.2% malt liquor or
to anyone holding a financial interest in the manufacture.
   (C)   Except as herein otherwise provided, every licensee shall be
responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and shall maintain
conditions of sobriety and order.
   (D)   No person who has not attained the age of 18 years shall be employed
to sell or serve 3.2% malt liquor in any on-sale establishment.
   (E)   No person who has not attained the age of 18 years shall be employed
to sell 3.2% malt liquor in any off-sale establishment, except in the capacity
of a cashier at a check-out counter.
   (F)   No license shall be granted for any building within 300 feet of any
public elementary school or secondary school structure or within 100 feet of
any church structure. This provision shall not be applicable to a temporary
3.2% malt liquor license.
(Prior Code, § 5.32) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014) Penalty, see
§
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.411
§ 111.048 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   No sale of 3.2% malt liquor shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Saturday, inclusive, nor on any Sunday
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 5.33) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014) Penalty, see
§
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.504
LIQUOR LICENSES
§ 111.060 LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense
or by any device to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of liquor,
as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from the city.
This section shall not apply:
      (1)   To such potable liquors as are intended for therapeutic purposes
and not as a beverage;
      (2)   To industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for
beverage purposes;
      (3)   To wine in the possession of a person duly licensed under this
chapter as an on-sale wine licensee;
      (4)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by
the Commissioner;
      (5)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor licenses from the
city; or
      (6)   To the Municipal Liquor Store.
   (B)   The city may issue annual on-sale liquor licenses only to the
following:
      (1)   Hotels;
      (2)   Restaurants;
      (3)   Bowling centers; and
      (4)   Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations with the
approval of the Commissioner; provided that, the organization has been in
existence for at least three years and liquor sales will only be to members and
bona fide guests, except that a club may permit the general public to
participate in a wine tasting conducted at the club under M.S. § 340A.419, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   The city may issue an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, an on-sale
wine license or an on-sale malt liquor license to a theater within the city,
notwithstanding any law, local ordinance or charter provision. A license issued
under this division (C) authorizes sales on all days of the week to persons
attending events at the theater.
   (D)   On-sale wine license and an on-sale malt liquor license to a person
who is the owner of a summer collegiate league baseball team or baseball team
competing in a league established by the Minnesota Baseball Association, or to
a person holding a concessions or management contract with the owner, for
beverage sales at a ballpark or stadium located within the municipality for the
purposes of summer collegiate league baseball games, town ball games, and any
other events at the ballpark or stadium, notwithstanding any law, local
ordinance, or charter provision. A license issued under this paragraph
authorizes sales on all days of the week to persons attending baseball games
and any other events at the ballpark or stadium.
   (E)   The city may issue Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses only to
a restaurant, club or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least 30
persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which serves
liquor only in conjunction with the service of food.
   (F)   An on-sale intoxicating liquor license, on-sale wine license, or an
on-sale malt liquor license may be issued to a convention center located within
the city pursuant to M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from
time to time. A license under this division authorizes sales on all days of the
week to persons attending events at the convention center subject to the hours
of sale provisions of this Code.
(Prior Code, § 5.40) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014; Ord. 350,
Third Series, effective 12-8-2016; Ord. 17, Fourth Series, effective 5-27-2021;
Ord. 34, Fourth Series, effective 5-25-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.404
§ 111.061 TEMPORARY LIQUOR LICENSE.
   (A)   License authorized.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of the city code to the contrary, the
Council may issue a license for the temporary on-sale of liquor in connection
with a social event sponsored by the licensee.
      (2)   The license may provide that the licensee may contract with the
holder of a full-year on-sale license, issued by the city, for liquor catering
services.
   (B)   Applicant.
      (1)   A club or charitable, religious or other non-profit organization in
existence for at least three years, a political committee registered under M.S.
§ 10A.14, as it may be amended from time to time, or a state university, a
temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a
social event within the municipality sponsored by the licensee. The city may
issue to a brewer who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a
year a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection
with a social event within the municipality sponsored by the brewer. The terms
and conditions specified for temporary licenses under division (A) above shall
apply to a license issued under this division (B)(1); except that, the
requirements of M.S. § 340A.409, subd. 1 to 3a, as it may be amended from time
to time, shall apply to the license.
      (2)   The city may issue to a farm winery licensed under M.S. § 340A.315,
as it may be amended from time to time, a temporary license for the on-sale at
a county fair located within the municipality of intoxicating liquor produced
by the farm winery. The licenses are subject to the terms, including a license
fee, imposed by the issuing municipality and all laws and ordinances governing
the sale of intoxicating liquor not inconsistent with this section.
   (C)   Terms and conditions of license.
      (1)   No license is valid until approved by the Commissioner.
      (2)   No license shall be issued for more than four consecutive days.
      (3)   All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions of
statutes and the city code relating to liquor sale and licensing. The licensee
shall provide proof of financial responsibility coverage and, in the case of
catering by a full-year on-sale licensee, the caterer shall provide proof of
the extension of the coverage to the licensed premises.
      (4)   Licenses may authorize sales on premises other than those owned or
permanently occupied by the licensee.
   (D)   Insurance required.
      (1)   The Council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation
whatsoever to, grant a temporary liquor license on premises owned or controlled
by the city. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified or restricted as
the Council sees fit.
      (2)   If the premises to be licensed are owned or under the control of
the city, the applicant shall file with the city, prior to issuance of the
license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of
$50,000 for injury to any one person, $100,000 for injury to more than one
person and $10,000 for property damage, naming the city as an insured during
the license period.
(Prior Code, § 5.41) (Ord. 47, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988; Ord. 176,
Third Series, effective 8-3-1995; Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.404
§ 111.062 SPORTS, CONVENTIONS, CULTURAL FACILITIES OR COMMUNITY FESTIVALS.
   (A)   The city may authorize a holder of a retail on-sale intoxicating
liquor license issued by the city or by an adjacent municipality to dispense
intoxicating liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social
affair conducted on the premises of a sports, convention or cultural facility
owned by the municipality or instrumentality thereof having independent policy-
making and appropriating authority and located within the municipality. The
licensee must be engaged to dispense intoxicating liquor at an event held by a
person or organization permitted to use the premises, and may dispense
intoxicating liquor only to persons attending the event. The licensee may not
dispense intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in a
youth amateur athletic event (for persons 18 years of age or younger) held on
the premises.
   (B)   The city may authorize a holder of a retail on-sale intoxicating
liquor license issued by the city to dispense intoxicating liquor off premises
at a community festival held within the city. The authorization shall specify
the area in which the intoxicating liquor must be dispensed and consumed, and
shall not be issued unless the licensee demonstrates that it has liability
insurance as prescribed by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to
time, to cover the event and names the city as additional insured.
(Prior Code, § 5.42) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.404
§ 111.063 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALES.
   No sale of liquor shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on any weekday, Monday through Saturday, inclusive, nor on any Sunday between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 5.43) (Ord. 350, Third Series, effective 12-8-2016) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 111.064 OFF-SALE MALT LIQUOR “GROWLERS”.
   A brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(d), (6)(i) or (6)(j), as
they may be amended from time to time, may be licensed for the “off-sale” of
malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises, subject to the
following conditions.
   (A)   No off-sale of malt liquor may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00
a.m. on Sunday, nor between 2:00 a.m. and until 8:00 a.m. on Monday, nor
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday.
   (B)   The malt liquor shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers commonly
known as “growlers” or in 750 milliliter bottles.
   (C)   The malt liquor sold at “off-sale” must be removed from the licensed
premises before the applicable closing time at exclusive liquor stores.
   (D)   The “growler” must be sealed in such a manner that the seal must be
broken in order to open the container and the seal must bear the name and
address of the brewer, and the legend “Not for Consumption in Public” must be
prominently displayed on the seal.
(Prior Code, § 5.44) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.065 OFF-SALE MALT LIQUOR “128 OUNCES”.
   A brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (6)(i) or (6)(j), as
they may be amended from time to time, may be licensed for the “off-sale” of
malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises, subject to the
following conditions.
   (A)   No off-sale of malt liquor may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00
a.m. on Sunday, nor between 2:00 a.m. and until 8:00 a.m. on Monday, nor
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday.
   (B)   The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale under this license may not
exceed 128 ounces per customer per day.
   (C)   The malt liquor sold at “off-sale” must be removed from the licensed
premises before the applicable closing time at exclusive liquor stores.
   (D)   Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale under this license must comply
with the provisions of Minn. Rules, parts 7515.1080 to 7515.1120, as they may
be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 28, Fourth Series, effective 7-7-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.301
§ 111.066 BREWER TAPROOMS.
   A brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (6)(i) or (6)(j), as
they may be amended from time to time, may be issued an on-sale liquor license
for the “on sale” of malt liquor produced on the licensed premises, subject to
the following conditions.
   (A)   No on-sale of malt liquor may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
on Sunday, nor between 2:00 a.m. and until 8:00 a.m. on Monday, nor between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday.
   (B)   A brewer may only hold one brewer taproom license under this chapter.
   (C)   The only beverage alcohol that may be sold or consumed on the premises
of a brewery taproom will be the malt liquor produced by the brewer upon the
brewery premises.
   (D)   All other provisions of this chapter and this business title in
general shall be applicable to the licenses and licensees unless inconsistent
with the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Licensed brewer taprooms may operate a restaurant on the premises
without additional licensure.
(Prior Code, § 5.45) (Ord. 343, Third Series, effective 1-28-2016; Ord. 28,
Fourth Series, effective 7-7-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.301
ON-SALE WINE LICENSES
§ 111.080 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense
or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of wine
on-sale, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from
the city. This section shall not apply:
      (1)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by
the Commissioner;
      (2)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale or off-sale
liquor licenses from the city;
      (3)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale wine license
from the city; or
      (4)   To sales by on-sale liquor licensees on days and during hours when
on-sale liquor sales are permitted.
   (B)   An on-sale wine license may be issued by the city only with the
approval of the Commissioner to a restaurant having facilities for seating at
least 25 guests at one time. A wine license permits the sale of wine of up to
24% alcohol by volume for consumption. A wine license authorizes the sale of
wine on all days of the week unless the issuing authority restricts the
license’s authorization to the sale of wine on all days, except Sundays.
   (C)   The Council may authorize a holder of an on-sale wine license issued
pursuant to division (A) above who is also licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquor at
on-sale pursuant to M.S. § 340A.411, as it may be amended from time to time, to
sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license.
   (D)   The city may issue an on-sale wine license with the approval of the
Commissioner to a licensed bed and breakfast facility. A license under this
division (D) authorizes a bed and breakfast facility to furnish wine only to
registered guests of the facility.
   (E)   (1)   A farm winery licensed under M.S. § 340A.315, as it may be
amended from time to time, may be issued a temporary license for on-sale of
intoxicating liquor produced by the farm winery at an approved festival or
event pursuant to the provisions of this code.
      (2)   The licenses are subject to the terms, including a license fee,
imposed by the city and all laws and ordinances governing the sale of
intoxicating liquor. Licenses under this division (E) are not valid unless
first approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.50) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014) Penalty, see
§
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.404
§ 111.081 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALES.
   No on-sale of wine shall be made between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday,
nor between 2:00 a.m. and until 8:00 a.m. on Monday, nor between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday.
(Prior Code, § 5.51) (Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014) Penalty, see
§
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.S. § 340A.504
§ 111.082 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   The number of licenses which the Council may issue shall be one less
than the number of on-sale liquor licenses authorized by state statute.
   (B)   A license may not be issued to a person in connection with the
premises of another to whom a license could not be issued under the provisions
of this chapter. This division (B) does not prevent the granting of a license
to a proper lessee because the person has leased the premises of a minor, a
non-citizen who is not a resident alien or a person who has been convicted of a
crime other than a violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   No person under 18 years of age may serve or sell liquor or wine on
licensed premises.
   (D)   No license shall be granted for any building within 300 feet of any
public elementary or secondary school structure, or within 100 feet of any
church structure. This provision shall not be applicable to a temporary beer
license.
   (E)   No on-sale liquor or wine license shall be granted to any person
unless the applicant shall have an investment in buildings, fixtures and
equipment, but excluding land, of a fair market value of $100,000.
(Prior Code, § 5.55) (Ord. 47, Third Series, effective 3-24-1988; Ord. 69,
Third Series, effective 5-4-1989; Ord. 80, Third Series, effective 12-7-1989;
Ord. 335, Third Series, effective 6-26-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION
Section
Dances
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License required
   
112.03   License fee
   
112.04   Application and license
Public Shows
   
112.20   License required
   
112.21   Exceptions
   
112.22   Obscenity prohibited
Amusement Arcades
   
112.35   Definitions
   
112.36   License required
   
112.37   Unlawful use and devices
   
112.38   License fees
   
112.39   Granting of licenses
   
112.40   Ineligibility for license
   
112.41   Insurance
   
112.42   Conditions of licensure
   
112.43   Suspension or revocation of license
Cross-reference:
   Curfew and Loitering, see
Ch. 131
   Disorderly conduct, see §
130.05
   Furnishing obscene material, see §
130.07
   Street and Sidewalks, see
Ch. 151
   Zoning, see
Ch. 153
DANCES
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance wherein the public may participate by payment,
directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing, which fee may
be in the form of a club membership, or payment of money, directly or
indirectly. Dances sponsored indirectly by a public school or other unit of
government for the purposes of this section are deemed to be PUBLIC DANCES.
   PUBLIC DANCING PLACE. Any room, place or space open to public patronage in
which dancing, wherein the public may participate, is carried on and to which
admission may be had by the public by payment, directly or indirectly, of any
admission fee or price for dancing.
(Prior Code, § 6.21) (Ord. 84, Third Series, effective 5-3-1990)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a public dancing place, or hold a
public dance, without first having obtained a license therefor from the city.
No license shall be issued to any applicant under the age of 18 years. In lieu
of a per dance license for a specific dance, the Council may grant an annual
license under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 6.21) (Ord. 84, Third Series, effective 5-3-1990) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The license fee shall be fixed and determined by the Council at the
time the application is approved, which fee shall include the cost of any
investigation and the fees and expenses of providing attendance of a law
enforcement officer.
   (B)   An annual fee may be charged for the application processing and
investigation portion when licensee applicants contemplate numerous public
dances throughout a calendar year.
   (C)   Any portion or all the license fee may be waived if the Council finds
that the applicant is a charitable, religious or fraternal committee,
association or organization operating on a purely non-profit basis and all
dance proceeds other than direct operating expenses are used for benevolent and
charitable purposes.
(Prior Code, § 6.21) (Ord. 84, Third Series, effective 5-3-1990)
§ 112.04 APPLICATION AND LICENSE.
   (A)   A verified application for a dance license shall be filed with the
city and shall specify the names and addresses of the person, persons,
committee or organization that is to hold the dance, time and place thereof,
area of the dance floor, estimated number of dance patrons and such other
information as the city may reasonably request.
   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by an affidavit that the
applicant has not been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or violation of
any public dance laws within the past five years. No license shall be issued to
any person who has been so convicted.
   (C)   No license shall be granted by the Council for any place having so-
called “private apartments” or “private rooms” furnished or used for any
purposes other than a legitimate business purpose which adjoins the dancing
place, or which may be reached by stairs, elevators or passageways leading from
the dancing place. Nor shall a license be granted for any place which is not
properly ventilated and equipped with necessary toilets, washrooms and lighting
facilities.
   (D)   Applicants shall be referred to the chief law enforcement official for
investigation prior to being acted upon by the Council.
   (E)   The application shall require a detailed explanation of any security
measures to be provided by the applicant. If recommended by the chief law
enforcement official, the Council may require the law enforcement officials to
provide security based on the facility in which the dance is located, the
anticipated number of dance patrons, the availability of alcoholic beverages or
other factors the Council deems pertinent. The total cost of law enforcement
security must be paid by the applicant and the Council may require an advance
deposit or a corporate surety bond guaranteeing payment.
   (F)   The dance license shall be posted in the public dancing place and
shall state the name of the licensee, the amount paid therefor and the time and
place licensed. The license shall also state that the licensee is responsible
for the manner of conducting the dance.
(Prior Code, § 6.21) (Ord. 84, Third Series, effective 5-3-1990)
PUBLIC SHOWS
§ 112.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to present any public show, movie, caravan,
circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition without first
having obtained a license therefor from the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.21 EXCEPTIONS.
   No license shall be required in the following instances:
   (A)   Performances presented in the local schools and colleges, under the
sponsorship of the schools and colleges, and primarily for the students thereof
only;
   (B)   Performance of athletic, musical or theatrical events sponsored by
local schools or colleges using student talent only; and/or
   (C)   Any performance or event in, or sponsored by, bona fide local church
and non-profit organizations; provided that, the organization shall be
incorporated.
(Prior Code, § 6.23)
§ 112.22 OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or the covered human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is
considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
      OBSCENE PERFORMANCE. A performance which in whole or in part depicts or
reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, or
which includes obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative
accounts of sexual conduct.
      OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular
use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts,
sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have no other
meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or
excretory meaning.
      PERFORMANCE. Any play, motion picture film, dance or other exhibition
pictured, animated or live, performed before an audience.
      SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is
nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the
part of one so clothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any touching of
the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals or the
breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual
experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee, for a monetary consideration or other
valuable commodity or service, to knowingly or recklessly:
      (1)   Exhibit an obscene performance;
      (2)   Directly or indirectly sell an admission ticket or other means to
gain entrance to an obscene performance; or
      (3)   Directly or indirectly permit admission of a person to premises
whereon there is exhibited an obscene performance.
   (C)   Any prosecution under this section shall include the following
elements:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find the performance, taken as a whole, appealing to the prurient
interest of the audience;
      (2)   The performance describes or depicts, in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct included in the definition of “obscene performance”; and
      (3)   The performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
(Prior Code, § 6.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
AMUSEMENT ARCADES
§ 112.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT ARCADE. The operation by any person, firm, partnership or
corporation of more than 15 mechanical amusement devices kept for public use
upon premises solely within one enclosure.
   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE.
      (1)   Any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, token or slug,
operates or may be operated and is available to the public generally for
entertainment or amusement; any machine or contrivance including a pinball
machine, pool tables, mechanical miniature pool table, bowling machine, shuffle
board, electric rifle or gun range; any miniature and mechanical device and
game or other amusement patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey and
similar games; any video or computerized games; and any amusement device
designed for and used exclusively as a ride by children such as, but not
limited to, a kiddie car, miniature airplane ride, mechanical horse or other
miniature mechanical devices, not operated as part of or in connection with any
carnival, circus, show or other entertainment or exhibition.
      (2)   All games and operations similar thereto under whatever names they
may be indicated shall be included.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993)
§ 112.36 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall own, operate or permit the operation of an amusement
arcade on premises owned, leased or operated by him or her or engage in the
business of operating an amusement arcade in the city unless he or she shall
have first obtained a license therefor.
   (B)   The application forms and information required thereon shall be
devised by the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 112.37 UNLAWFUL USE AND DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Sell or maintain a machine or device which is for gambling or contains
an automatic payoff device;
   (B)   Give any prize, award, merchandise, gift or thing of value to any
person on account of operation of the device;
   (C)   Sell or maintain, or permit to be operated in his or her place of
business, any mechanical amusement device equipped with an automatic payoff
device;
   (D)   Equip any mechanical amusement device with an automatic payoff device;
   (E)   Operate an amusement center within 300 feet of any church, public or
private school grounds or public playground.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 112.38 LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for an amusement arcade license shall be established by resolution
adopted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993)
§ 112.39 GRANTING OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Any application for a license hereunder shall be referred to the chief
law enforcement officer and to other persons on the city’s staff as the City
Administrator shall deem necessary. The city official to whom the application
has been referred shall investigate the location wherein the applicant is
proposing to operate the amusement arcade; shall ascertain if the applicant, or
the manager of the licenses business, is under 21 years of age, an alien or a
foreign corporation; and shall ascertain whether the applicant, manager or
person owning the proposed licensed activity is of good moral character and
repute, has not been convicted of an offense which relates to the conduct of
the licenses business, has operated a similar business elsewhere which was not
violative of the provisions of this code and has never been denied a license to
conduct a like or similar activity or had such a license suspended, revoked or
canceled.
   (B)   The chief and any other city official to whom the application has been
referred shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993)
§ 112.40 INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Existence of any of the following conditions shall render the
applicant ineligible for a license, renewal thereof, or be cause for revocation
or suspension unless the Council, in its sole opinion, determines that the
applicant has shown sufficient extenuating circumstances to warrant the
issuance of a license or not revoke or suspend regardless of the existing
conditions:
      (1)   If the applicant, or the manager of the licensed business, is:
         (a)   Under 21 years of age;
         (b)   An alien; and/or
         (c)   A foreign corporation.
      (2)   If the applicant, manager or person owning the licensed activity:
         (a)   Is not a person of good moral character and repute;
         (b)   Has been convicted of an offense which relates to the conduct of
the license or had a similar license within or without the city suspended,
revoked or canceled;
         (c)   Has been denied a license to conduct a similar activity or has
had the license suspended, revoked or canceled; and/or
         (d)   Has been convicted within ten years of any controlled substance
or alcohol-related crimes relating to the sale, distribution, growing,
manufacture or use thereof.
   (B)   The foregoing shall not be the only grounds, however, for denial of
the license.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993)
§ 112.41 INSURANCE.
   If the mechanical amusement devices to be operated in the amusement arcade
are of the type described in §
112.40 of this chapter, the applicant shall also submit along with his or her
application a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum
of $100,000 for injury to any one person, $300,000 for injury to more than one
person, naming the city as an insured during the license period.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993)
§ 112.42 CONDITIONS OF LICENSURE.
   The following conditions shall govern the issuance and holding of all
amusement arcade licenses granted pursuant to this subchapter and the violation
of any provision shall be cause for revocation or suspension thereof.
   (A)   Order. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain
order on the premises of the amusement arcade, and in and upon any parking lot
appurtenant thereto, and adjacent premises, at all times.
   (B)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. The consumption of
alcoholic beverages, whether classified as intoxicating or non-intoxicating, or
the use of any controlled substance shall not be permitted on any part of the
premises of the amusement arcade.
   (C)   Hours of operation. On all weekdays of the year, except Sunday, an
amusement arcade shall be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight. On all Sundays of the year, an amusement arcade shall be open only
between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (D)   Supervision. The licensee shall provide a full-time manager of at
least 21 years of age upon the premises of the amusement arcade during all
hours in which it is open for business.
   (E)   Entrance of minors. No person under the age of ten years shall be
permitted to enter or remain on any part of the premises of the amusement
arcade unless accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   (F)   Compliance with laws. The premises of the amusement arcade, and the
licensee, shall fully comply with all applicable state, federal and local
regulations whatsoever dealing with the operation of the licenses business or
activity.
   (G)   Fire hazards. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee, or his
or her manager, to see that the premises of the amusement arcade do not become
overcrowded and that the same are maintained in a clean and orderly manner so
as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of the persons therein.
   (H)   Exits and entrances. The premises of the amusement arcade shall have
adequate entrances and exits at the front and rear thereof, but may have no
entrances to or exits from adjoining buildings.
   (I)   Smoking prohibited.
      (1)   (a)   The sale, use or smoking of tobacco or any other similar
product in an amusement arcade is prohibited.
         (b)   The licensee shall be responsible to ensure that this
restriction is strictly enforced.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply if the premises of the amusement
arcade is part of a licensed alcoholic beverage premises in which event no
person under 18 is allowed unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or
as otherwise authorized by city code.
   (J)   Illumination. All public portions of the interior of the amusement
arcade shall be so illuminated as to ensure proper and complete observation of
patrons at all times.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 112.43 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days, or revoke
any license issued under this code whenever the licensee, its owner, manager,
employees or agents of the licensee have engaged in any of the following:
   (A)   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing
of the license;
   (B)   Conduct inimical to the interests of public health, safety, welfare or
morals;
   (C)   Conduct involving moral turpitude;
   (D)   Conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude by any court of
competent jurisdiction;
   (E)   Conviction of an offense which relates to the conduct of the licenses
business;
   (F)   Violation of any provision of this code or any other federal, state or
local law, rule or regulation with a potential penalty for violation thereof
greater than a petty misdemeanor; or
   (G)   Failure to comply with any of the conditions imposed on the license,
or the conditions of licensure, or engaging in conduct which would be grounds
for denial of an initial application for licensure.
(Prior Code, § 6.72) (Ord. 152, Third Series, effective 10-7-1993)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
113.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
113.04   License ineligibility
   
113.05   License suspension and revocation
   
113.06   License transferability
   
113.07   Registration
   
113.08   Prohibited activities
   
113.09   Exclusion by placard
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door for the
primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or other
ideological beliefs. For purpose of this ordinance, the term door-to-door
advocate shall fall under the term solicitor and include door-to-door
canvassing and pamphleteering intended for non-commercial purposes.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of offering for sale, displaying for exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise, or other personnel property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting. For purpose of this ordinance, the term peddler
shall have the same common meaning as the term hawker.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership, or similar association.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be considered regular business days.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property, or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. For purposes of this
ordinance, the term solicitor shall have the same meaning as the term
canvasser.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal
property and who does not remain in any one location for more than fourteen
(14) consecutive days.
§ 113.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and
TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to:
      (1)   Non-commercial door-to-door advocates. Nothing within this chapter
shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict non-commercial door-to-door
advocates. Person engaging in non-commercial door-to-door advocacy shall not be
required to register as a solicitor under §
113.07.
      (2)   Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods,
wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property to a retail seller of
the items being sold by the wholesaler.
      (3)   Any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the
purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery
route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products, such as baked
goods or milk.
      (4)   Any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products
to the customers on his or her established delivery route.
      (5)   Any person making deliveries of newspapers, newsletters, or other
similar publications on an established customer delivery route, when attempting
to establish a regular delivery route, or when publications are delivered to
the community at large.
      (6)   Any person conducting the type of sale commonly known as garage
sales, rummage sales, or estate sales.
      (7)   Any person participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or
flea market.
      (8)   Any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer.
      (9)   Any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale.
   (B)   Exemption from these definitions shall not, for the scope of this
chapter, excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory
provision or requirement provided by another city ordinance.
§ 113.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as may be required by
M.S. Ch. 329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a
license for the activity.
   (B)   City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this
ordinance, no person shall conduct business within this jurisdiction as a
solicitor, peddler or a transient merchant without first obtaining a city
license.
   (C)   Application. An application for a city license to conduct business as
a solicitor, peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular
business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting a business
operation within the city. Application for a license shall be made on a form
approved by the City Council and available from the office of the city clerk.
All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The applicant's full legal name.
      (2)   Any and all other names under which the applicant has or does
conduct business, or to which the applicant will officially answer to.
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, any distinguishing marks or features, and the like).
      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence.
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed,
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or an
agent.
      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business, if any
exists.
      (8)   Any and all business-related telephone numbers of the applicant,
including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines.
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license.
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business.
If the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she
will be conducting business within the city, with a maximum of 14 consecutive
days.
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up his or her business.
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
with the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor for
violating any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than minor
traffic offenses.
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
      (15)   Proof of any required county license.
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's
agent for any location to be used by a transient merchant.
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
      (18)   Any and all additional information as may be deemed necessary by
the City Council.
      (19)   The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form
of identification.
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information, vehicle
identification number (VIN) and physical description for any vehicle to be used
in conjunction with the licensed business operation.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established in the city licensing fee schedule as it may
be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the application and payment of the license
fee, the city clerk will, within two regular business days, determine if the
application is complete. An application will be considered complete if all
required information is provided. If the city clerk determines that the
application is incomplete, the city clerk must inform the applicant of the
required, necessary information that is missing. If the application is
complete, the city clerk must order any investigation, including background
checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the application.
Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete application the city
clerk must issue the license unless grounds exist for denying the license
application under §
113.04, in which case the clerk must deny the request for a city peddler or
transient merchant license. If the city clerk denies the license application,
the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for
denial and the applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20
days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City
Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal with 20 days of the date of the
request for a hearing. The decision of the City Council following the public
hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a
writ of certiorari.
   (F)   Duration. An annual license granted under this ordinance shall be
valid for one calendar year from the date of issuance. All other licenses
granted to peddlers and transient merchants under this ordinance shall be valid
only during the time period indicated on the license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required for any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type
of place-to-place movement for the primary purpose of exercising that person's
state or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, freedom
of the press, freedom of religion, and the like. This exemption will not apply
if the person's exercise of constitutional rights is merely incidental to what
would properly be considered a commercial activity.
§ 113.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a peddler or transient merchant
license:
   (A)   Failure to provide proof of required county license. The failure of an
applicant to obtain and demonstrate proof of having obtained any required
county license.
   (B)   Failure to truthfully provide information. The failure of an applicant
to truthfully provide any information requested by the city as part of the
application process.
   (C)   The failure of an applicant to sign the license application.
   (D)   Failure to pay fee. The failure of an applicant to pay the required
fee at the time of application.
   (E)   Conviction within the past five years. A conviction with the past five
years of the date of application for any violation of any federal or state
statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects upon
the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being
sought in a professional, honest and legal manner. Such violations shall
include, but are not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud,
unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm
against another person.
   (F)   Revocation within the past five years. The revocation with the past
five years of any license issued to an applicant for the purpose of conducting
business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant.
   (G)   When an applicant has a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad
business reputation shall include, but is not limited to, the existence of more
than three complaints against an applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the
Office of the Minnesota Attorney General or other state attorney general's
office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency, with the
preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed with the city against an
applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 113.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or
incorrect statements provided by an applicant on the application form.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      (3)   Subsequent conviction of any offense to which the granting of the
license could have been denied under §
113.04.
      (4)   Engaging in any prohibited activity as provided under §
113.08.
      (5)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide a license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, of if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the city clerk within ten days
following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension
or revocation. For the purpose of a mailed notice, service shall be considered
complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing
is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within
20 days from the date of the request for the public hearing. Within three
regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the
licensee of its decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this ordinance, the City Council
may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (F)   Appeal. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
§ 113.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.07 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter
under §
113.03 shall be required to register with the city prior to engaging in those
activities. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license
application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the
registration form, the City Clerk shall issue to the registrant a certificate
of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration
shall be non-transferrable.
   (B)   Individuals that will be engaging in non-commercial door-to-door
advocacy shall not be required to register.
§ 113.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door
advocate, or other person engaged in other similar activities shall conduct
business in any of the following manner:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or the items to be sold by
means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any
other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian,
on any street, sidewalk, alleyway, or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of any specific individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license, or registration, and
identification when requested.
   (F)   Using the license or registration of another person.
   (G)   Alleging false or misleading statements about the products or services
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor,
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
   (H)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave.
   (I)   Otherwise operating their business in any manner that a reasonable
person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   (A)   Unless specifically invited by the property owner or tenant, no
peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate,
or other person engaged in other similar activities shall enter onto the
property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate, or similar
activity when the property is marked with a sign or placard:
      (1)   At least four inches long.
      (2)   At least four inches wide.
      (3)   With print of at least 48 point in size.
      (4)   Stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants,”
“Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable
statement.
   (B)   No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove,
deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any individual found in violation of any provision of this ordinance, shall
be a guilty of a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 114: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
Taxicabs
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Insurance required
   
114.04   Rates
   
114.05   Mechanical condition
TAXICABS
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over a taxicab
whether he or she be the licensee or in the employ of the licensed operator.
   OPERATOR. A licensee owning or otherwise having control of one or more
taxicabs.
   TAXICAB. Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or traversing a
scheduled or unscheduled route for public use or hire upon payment of a fare or
at regular fare rates, but not including such as are designed for mass
transportation as buses, trains or streetcars.
(Prior Code, § 6.60)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab without a
license therefor from the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.60) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Before a taxi cab license is issued by the Council, and at all times
effective during the licensed period, the licensee is required to maintain
commercial automobile liability insurance protecting it from claims for damages
for bodily injury and property damage resulting from the ownership, operation,
maintenance or use of all autos which may arise from operation of the taxicab
service in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence combined single
limit/$2,000,000 annual aggregate. A certificate of insurance with the required
limits and naming the city as an additional insured must be provided to the
city before a license is issued
§ 114.04 RATES.
   Each applicant shall file with the City Administrator, before a taxicab
license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed maximum rates to be
charged by him or her during the licensed period for which the application is
made. The schedule of proposed maximum rates, or a compromise schedule thereof,
shall be approved by the Council before granting the license. The schedule
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab in full view of
passengers riding therein. Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee from
petitioning the Council for review of the rates during the licensed period, and
the Council may likewise consider the petition and make new rates effective at
any time. No taxicab licensee shall charge rates in excess of maximum rates
approved by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.60) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.05 MECHANICAL CONDITION.
   Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present to the Council
a certificate signed by a competent and experienced mechanic showing that the
taxicab conveyance is in good mechanical condition, that it is thoroughly safe
for transportation of passengers and that it is in neat and clean condition.
The similar certificate may be required from time to time during the licensed
period. In lieu of the certificate, the Council may accept the report of the
chief law enforcement officer relative thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6.60) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 115: JUNK YARDS AND RECYCLING CENTERS
Section
Junk Yards
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   License required
   
115.03   Duration of license
   
115.04   Requirements for licensing
Recycling Centers
   
115.15   Definitions
   
115.16   License required
   
115.17   Duration of license
   
115.18   Requirements for licensing
   
115.19   Compliance by certain date
JUNK YARDS
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity keeping,
maintaining or operating a junk yard. For purposes of this subchapter, the JUNK
DEALER for other than sole proprietorships shall be deemed to be any partner,
officer or other person who is directing the operation or authorized to apply
for a junk yard license.
   JUNK YARD. Any building, structure, premises or place at, upon, or within
which there is kept, stored or piled in any quantity, whether temporarily,
irregularly or continually, old, used or secondhand materials of any kind,
including, but not limited to, the following: clothing; paper; bottles; rubber
materials; iron, brass or other scrap metals; furniture; used inoperative motor
vehicles including those not currently licensed; parts of motor vehicles;
agricultural or construction equipment or parts thereof; building materials; or
any other articles which from its worn or damaged condition renders it
practically useless for the purpose for which it was intended and originally
manufactured without substantial repair. A JUNK YARD includes activities which
are commonly referred to as salvage or salvage yards where the substantial
purpose of the junk yard business is to salvage or remove usable parts or
components for replacement or resale. The term JUNK YARD does not include
“recycling centers” which are defined and regulated under §
115.15 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.70) (Ord. 133, Third Series, effective 6-18-1992)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate a junk yard
without first having obtained a license therefor from the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.70) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   Each junk dealer’s license shall be valid for a period of one year
commencing on the date of acceptance of the license application by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.70)
§ 115.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING.
   No license shall be granted without a satisfactory showing to the Council
that the following conditions exist and shall be maintained.
   (A)   The premises and all structures thereon, used for conducting the junk
yard business, shall be adequately maintained so as to not constitute a health
or safety hazard; and that all aisles within and exits from the structures upon
the premises are kept clear and in usable condition. To assure compliance with
this provision, the City Administrator shall cause the premises used in the
applicant’s junk yard business to be inspected at least once during the license
year and the license is deemed to have given permission for the inspection.
   (B)   The premises upon which the junk yard business is conducted is
enclosed with a fence or screened by natural growing material and of sufficient
height so as to screen the entire premises from public view, all of which shall
be maintained in good condition; that no articles shall be piled, stored,
worked upon or repaired outside of the enclosed area; that no articles shall be
piled or stored so as to lean on or protrude through the fence or natural
growth; that all gates, drives and exterior aisles shall be kept clear at all
times; and that all approaches to the premises shall be policed and kept free
of material and articles that would cause damage to persons or vehicles; and
that junk yards shall be located only in areas properly zoned for that purpose
according to Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6.70)
RECYCLING CENTERS
§ 115.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RECYCLING CENTER. Any building, structure, premises or place at, upon or
within which there is kept, stored or piled in any quantity, whether temporary,
irregularly or continually, old, used or secondhand materials of any kind,
including, but not limited to, the following: clothing; paper; bottles; rubber
materials; iron, brass or other scrap metals; furniture; used inoperative motor
vehicles including those not currently licensed; parts of motor vehicles;
agricultural or construction equipment or parts thereof; building materials;
other materials which from its worn or damaged condition renders it practically
useless for the purpose for which it was intended where the primary purpose is
to assemble the materials in like kind or origin and in sufficient quantity to
allow for the efficient and economical delivery of the materials to a recycling
or remanufacturing facility. The term RECYCLING CENTER does not include “junk
yards” which are defined and regulated under §§
115.01 through
115.04 of this chapter. RECYCLING CENTERS do not include operation which
primarily collect and retain materials of any nature for the purpose of
offering the material or parts thereof for sale as replacement parts.
   RECYCLING CENTER OPERATOR.
      (1)   Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity keeping,
maintaining or operating a recycling center.
      (2)   For purposes of this subchapter, the RECYCLING CENTER OPERATOR for
other than sole proprietorships shall be deemed to be any partner, officer or
other person who is in charge of the operation or authorized to apply for a
recycling center license.
(Prior Code, § 6.71) (Ord. 133, Third Series, effective 6-18-1992)
§ 115.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate a recycling
center without first having obtained a license thereof from the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.71) (Ord. 133, Third Series, effective 6-18-1992) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 115.17 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   Each recycling center’s license shall be issued on a calendar year basis
unless otherwise specified therein. For licenses that are to become effective
on other than the first day of the license year, the fee to be paid with the
application shall be pro rated based on the number of months or portion thereof
remaining in the license year. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and
on the premises therein described.
(Prior Code, § 6.71) (Ord. 133, Third Series, effective 6-18-1992)
§ 115.18 REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING.
   No license shall be granted without a satisfactory showing to the Council
that the following conditions exist and shall be maintained.
   (A)   The premises and all structures thereon, used for conducting the
recycling center business, shall be adequately maintained so as to not
constitute a health or safety hazard; and that all aisles within and exits from
the structures upon the premises are kept clear and in usable condition. To
assure compliance with this provision, the City Administrator shall cause the
premises used in the applicant’s recycling center business to be inspected at
least once during the license year and the license is deemed to have given
permission for the inspection.
   (B)   The premises upon which the recycling center business is conducted is
enclosed with a fence or screened by natural growing material and of sufficient
height so as to screen the entire premises from public view, all of which shall
be maintained in good condition; that no articles shall be piled, stored,
worked upon or repaired outside of the enclosed area; that no articles shall be
piled or stored so as to lean on or protrude through the fence or natural
growth; that all gates, drives, and exterior aisles shall be kept clear at all
times; and that all approaches to the premises shall be policed and kept free
of material and articles that would cause damage to persons or vehicles; and
that recycling centers shall be located only in areas properly zoned for
limited industrial uses or light manufacturing including when the same is
allowed by conditional use according to Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances; and
that the license complies with all provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6.71) (Ord. 133, Third Series, effective 6-18-1992)
§ 115.19 COMPLIANCE BY CERTAIN DATE.
   Any existing business or person currently operating a recycling center must
obtain a recycling center license within 30 days after the effective date of
this subchapter and must comply with all of the provisions contained herein
including, but not limited to, the fencing or screening requirements not later
than 7-1-1993, and all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed upon
the issuing of the initial license and the first renewal thereof by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.71) (Ord. 133, Third Series, effective 6-18-1992)
CHAPTER 116: LODGING TAX
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Imposition of tax
   
116.03   Collections
   
116.04   Exceptions and exemptions
   
116.05   Advertising no tax
   
116.06   Payment and returns
   
116.07   Examination of returns; adjustments; notices and demands
   
116.08   Refunds
   
116.09   Failure to file a return
   
116.10   Tax penalties
   
116.11   Administration of tax
   
116.12   Examination of records
   
116.13   Violations
   
116.14   Use of proceeds
   
116.15   Appeals
   
116.16   Effective date
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
   CITY. The City of Luverne.
   DIRECTOR. The Fiscal and Management Services Coordinator of the city.
   LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel or
rooming house except where the lodging shall be for a continuous period of 30
days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms owned or provided
by religious, educational or non-profit organizations shall not constitute
LODGING for purposes of this chapter.
   OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent or
employee of the person.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or any other
combination or individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision
of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, association or partnership shall mean the officers or partners
thereof as the case may be.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether
paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services
rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge
itself.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator
for providing lodging to any persons after 4-1-1995. The tax shall be stated
and charged separately and shall be collected by the operator from the lodger.
The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator to the
city and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city.
   (B)   In no case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator
exceed the amount of tax which the operator is authorized and required by this
chapter to collect from the lodger.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995; Ord. 323,
Third Series, effective 3-1-2012)
§ 116.03 COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the
time the rent is paid.
   (B)   The tax collection shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator
for the city.
   (C)   The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the receipt charged
for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a receipt of
payment from the operator.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.04 EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No tax shall be imposed on rent paid by a lodger at any hotel, motel
or rooming house where 50% or more of the rent received from all lodgers is for
lodging furnished for a continuous period of 30 days or more to the same lodger
(s).
   (B)   No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid by any officer or
employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provisions
of federal law or international treaty.
   (C)   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose
occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be
granted, except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected,
and such a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty or perjury on forms
provided by the city. All such claims shall be forwarded to the city when the
returns and collections are submitted as required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.05 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
hereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. In
computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than $0.01 shall be
considered an additional cent.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 116.06 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the operator to the
city monthly not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the
taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a
return upon the forms and containing such information as the Director may
require.
   (B)   The return shall contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return;
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of an agent
duly authorized in writing;
      (4)   The period covered by the return; and
      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charged subject to the lodging
tax.
   (C)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable, with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by the ordinance previously paid
as a result of any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectible
during the reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of the
consideration which become uncollectible.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.07 EXAMINATION OF RETURNS; ADJUSTMENTS; NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
   The Director shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make any
investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making
the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed
on the basis of the examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is
found to be greater than that paid, the excess shall be paid to the city within
ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or sent by
registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater
than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who
paid the tax to the city within ten days after determination of the refund.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.08 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the Director for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period; provided
that, no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one
year after the tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return,
whichever period is the longer. The Director shall examine the claim and make
and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in
part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to the person at the
address stated upon the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part,
the Director shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due
under this chapter from the claimant and the balance of the allowance, if any,
shall be paid by the Director to the claimant.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.09 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return shall fail
to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice
on demand, file the return or corrected return within five days of receipt of
the written notice and shall, at the same time, pay any tax due on the basis
thereof. If the persons shall fail to file the return or corrected return, the
Director shall make a return or corrected return, for the person from the
knowledge and information as the Director can obtain, and assess a tax on the
basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on account of the
tax for the taxable period covered by the return) shall be paid upon within
five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for the payment. Any
return or assessment made by the Director shall be prima facie correct and
valid, and the person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness
or invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including penalties
thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the City
Attorney may institute legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount
due plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursement of any action.
   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the Director may grant an operator one
30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of
taxes as required by this chapter; provided that, interest during the period of
extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per annum.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.10 TAX PENALTIES.
   (A)   If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time
specified for the payment of an extension thereof, there shall be added thereto
a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.
   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that the failure is not due to
willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax, in addition to the 10%
specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure is for not
more than 30 days with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction
thereof during which the failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the aggregate.
If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of $10 shall
be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time
and the same manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid
before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added shall
be collected in the same manner as the tax.
   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment
required by this chapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such a tax or payment
thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any
tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of the false or fraudulent return)
found due for the period to which the return related. The penalty imposed by
this division (C) shall be collected as part of the tax and shall be in
addition to any other penalties provided by this chapter.
   (D)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to
interest, and then to the tax due.
   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided
by this section, shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the time
the tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and penalty shall be
added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.11 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   (A)   The Director shall administer and enforce the assessment and
collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter.
   (B)   The Director shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns
and other documents required by this chapter and shall distribute the same
throughout the city and furnish them an application, but failure to receive or
secure them shall not relieve any person from any obligation required of him or
her under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.12 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   The Director and those persons acting on behalf of the Director
authorized in writing by the Director may examine the books, papers and records
of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no
return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Every operator is directed and required to give to the Director or to
his or her duly authorized agent or employee the means, facilities and
opportunity for the examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.13 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
chapter, or who shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or
who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed
by this chapter after written demand for the payment or who shall refuse to
permit the Director or any duly authorized agents or employees to examine the
books, records and papers under his or her control, or who shall willfully make
any incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 116.14 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   One-hundred percent proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant
to this chapter shall be used in accordance with the M.S. § 469.190, as the
same may be amended from time to time, to fund a local convention or tourism
bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or
convention center.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.15 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by
the Director under this chapter may file a petition for review of the notice,
order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the petitioner,
the petitioner’s address and the location of the lodging subject to the order,
notice or determination.
   (B)   The petition for review shall be filed with the City Administrator
within ten days after the notice, order or determination for which review is
sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition the City Administrator, or his or her
designee, shall set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five
days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner’s choosing at
petitioner’s own expense.
   (E)   The hearing shall be conducted by the City Administrator or his or her
designee; provided only that, the person conducting the hearing shall not have
participated in the drafting of the order, notice or determination for which
review is sought.
   (F)   The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact
and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this chapter and the
evidence presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or
modify the notice, order or determination made by the Director.
   (G)   Any decision rendered by the City Administrator pursuant to this
division (G) may be appealed to the City Council. A petitioner seeking to
appeal a decision must file a written notice of appeal with the City
Administrator within ten days after the decision has been mailed to the
petitioner. The matter will thereupon be place on the City Council agenda as
soon as it is practical. The City Council shall then review the findings of
fact and conclusions to determine whether they were correct. Upon a
determination by the City Council that findings and conclusions were incorrect,
the City Council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the City
Administrator or his or her designee upon the same standards as set forth in
division (F) above.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
§ 116.16 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter became effective 4-1-1995 and the tax imposed should apply to
rents collected for lodging furnished on that date and thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 6.81) (Ord. 168, Third Series, effective 3-9-1995)
CHAPTER 117: REGULATING LAWFUL GAMBLING
Section
   
117.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
117.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
117.03   Purpose
   
117.04   Definitions
   
117.05   Applicability
   
117.06   Lawful gambling permitted
   
117.07   Council approval
   
117.08   Application and local approval of premises permits
   
117.09   Revocation and suspension of local permit
   
117.10   License and permit display
   
117.11   Notification of material changes to application
   
117.12   Designated trade area
   
117.13   Records and reporting
   
117.14   Hours of operation
   
117.15   Effective date
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, with
reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, provisions
relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful gambling are
hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out
in full. It is the intention of the Council that all future amendments of M.S.
Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
chapter was adopted.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained in
M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.03 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the City
of Luverne, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of
operations, and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.04 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 349.12, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter.
   BOARD. The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
   CITY. The City of Luverne.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Luverne.
   LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board and the
activities of the organization directly or primarily benefit the citizens of
Luverne.
   LOCAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city.
   TRADE AREA. The corporate limits of the City of Luverne, and the contiguous
Townhips of Luverne and Mound.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.05 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling
within the city except exempt lawful gambling and bingo conducted within a
nursing home or a senior citizen housing project or by a senior citizen
organization if the prizes for a single bingo game do not exceed $10, total
prizes awarded at a single bingo occasion do not exceed $200, only members of
the organization, residents of the nursing home or housing project, and their
guests, are allowed to play in a bingo game, no compensation is paid for any
persons who conduct the bingo, and a manager is appointed to supervise the
bingo.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.06 LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.
   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city provided it is conducted in
accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75-609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from
time to time; M.S. §§ 349.11-349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from
time to time; and this chapter.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.07 COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11-349.23, inclusive, as they may
be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved by the
Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and state law.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.08 APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.
   (A)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit from the Board
shall file with the City Clerk an executed, complete duplicate application,
together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as will
be filed with the Board.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance of a premises permit, the
City Clerk shall transmit the application to the Rock County sheriff for review
and recommendation.
   (C)   The Rock County sheriff shall investigate the matter and make the
review and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no
event later than 45 days following receipt of the notification by the city.
   (D)   Organizations applying for a state-issued premises permit shall pay
the city an investigation fee according to the city's policy. This fee shall be
refunded if the application is withdrawn before the investigation is commenced.
If approved by the City Council and the Board, a licensed organization will be
responsible for an annual investigative fee for conducting lawful gambling
within the city.
   (E)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the
Council will consider the recommendation.
   (F)   The Council shall receive the sheriff's report and consider the
application within 45 days of the date the application was submitted to the
City Clerk.
   (G)   The Council shall by resolution approve or disapprove the application
within 60 days of receipt of the application.
   (H)   (1)   The Council shall deny an application for issuance or renewal of
a premises permit for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute,
state rule, or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three years.
         (b)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing
its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule, or city ordinance
relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to,
laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances,
suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three
years.
         (c)   Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other than those
for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued.
         (d)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to
health, safety, and welfare of the community.
      (2)   Otherwise, the Council shall pass a resolution approving the
application.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.09 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LOCAL PERMIT.
   (A)   A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a violation
by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule, or city
ordinance relating to gambling.
   (B)   A license shall not be revoked or suspended until written notice and
an opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the permitted person. The
notice shall be personally served or sent by certified or registered mail. If
the person refuses to accept notice, notice of the violation shall be served by
posting it on the premises. Notice shall state the provision reasonably
believed to be violated and shall also state that the permitted person may
demand a hearing on the matter, in which case the permit will not be suspended
until after the hearing is held. If the permitted person requests a hearing,
the Council shall hold a hearing on the matter at least one week after the date
on which the request is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the Council finds
that an ordinance violation exists, then the Council may suspend or revoke the
permit.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.10 LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.
   All permits issued under state law or this chapter shall be prominently
displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.11 NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.
   An organization holding a state-issued premises permit or a local permit
shall notify the city within ten days in writing whenever any material change
is made in the information submitted on the application.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.12 DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall
expend 80% of its lawful purpose expenditures of gross profits derived from
lawful gambling conducted at premises within the City of Luverne on lawful
purposes conducted within the city's trade area.
   (B)   This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross
profits derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the city's trade
area.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.13 RECORDS AND REPORTING.
   (A)   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the City
Clerk one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the Board,
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, and rules
adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time. The records
and reports shall be filed annually.
   (B)   Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with the city
proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed. Such
report shall be made on a form prescribed by the city and shall be submitted
annually.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.14 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
any day of the week.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter becomes effective seven days after publication, or upon the
publication of a summary of the ordinance as provided by M.S. § 412.191, subd.
4, as it may be amended from time to time, which meets the requirements of M.S.
§ 331A.01, subd. 10, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter; M.S. §§ 609.75-
609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; or M.S. §§
349.11-349.21, as they may be amended from time to time; or any rules
promulgated under those sections, as they may be amended from time to time,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, plus in either case
the costs of prosecution. In addition, violations shall be reported to the
Board and recommendation shall be made for suspension, revocation, or
cancellation of an organization's license.
(Ord. 38, Fourth Series, effective 10-26-2023)
CHAPTER 118: CANNABIS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
118.01   Findings and purpose
   
118.02   Authority and jurisdiction
   
118.03   Enforcement
   
118.04   Definitions
   
118.05   Registration of cannabis retail businesses
   
118.06   Pre-license application response to OCM required
   
118.07   Registration and application fees
   
118.08   Application submittal
   
118.09   Application approval
   
118.10   Preliminary inspection prior to retail registration
   
118.11   Annual compliance checks
   
118.12   Location change
   
118.13   Renewal of registration
   
118.14   Renewal fees
   
118.15   Renewal application
   
118.16   Violations and suspension of registration
   
118.17   Civil penalties
   
118.18   Subject to investigation, inspection and audit
   
118.19   Limiting of registrations
   
118.20   Minimum buffer requirements
   
118.21   Hours of operation
   
118.22   Advertising
   
118.23   Public display required
   
118.24   Duties of licensee
   
118.25   On-site consumption
   
118.26   Prohibited acts
   
118.27   License or permit required for temporary cannabis events
   
118.28   City of Luverne as a cannabis retailer
   
118.29   Use in public places
§ 118.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The city makes the following legislative findings:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S. Ch.
342, as it may be amended from time to time, which authorizes the city to
protect the public health, safety, welfare of its residents by regulating
cannabis businesses within the legal boundaries of the city.
   (B)   The city finds and concludes that the proposed provisions are
appropriate and lawful land use regulations for the city, that the proposed
amendments will promote the community’s interest in reasonable stability in
zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions are in the
public interest and for the public good.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.02 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The city has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to:
      (1)   M.S. § 342.13(c), as it may be amended from time to time, regarding
the authority of a local unit of government to adopt reasonable restrictions of
the time, place, and manner of the operation of a cannabis business provided
that such restrictions do not prohibit the establishment or operation of
cannabis businesses.
      (2)   M.S. § 342.22, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding
the local registration and enforcement requirements of state-licensed cannabis
retail businesses and lower-potency hemp edible retail businesses.
      (3)   M.S. § 152.0263, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time,
regarding the use of cannabis in public places.
      (4)   M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding
the authority of a local authority to adopt zoning ordinances.
   (B)   This chapter shall be applicable to the legal boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Office of the City Administrator is responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements constitutes a petty
misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. Violations of this chapter can
occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a regulated
activity listed in this chapter.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.04 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise noted in this chapter, words and phrases contained in M.S.
§ 342.01, as it may be amended from time to time, and the rules promulgated
pursuant to any of these acts, shall have the same meanings in this chapter.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES. A cannabis retailer location and the retail
location(s) of mezzobusinesses with a retail operations endorsement,
microbusinesses with a retail operations endorsement, medical combination
businesses operating a retail location, and lower-potency hemp edible
retailers.
   CANNABIS RETAILER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
   DAYCARE. A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human Services
to provide the care of a child in a location outside the child’s own home for
gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. As defined under M.S. § 342.01, subd. 50, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAILER. A hemp business, as defined under M.S. §
342.01, subd. 34, as it may be amended from time to time, licensed by the OCM
for the sale of lower-potency hemp edibles.
   OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as “OCM” in this chapter.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
   PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL. An OCM-issued preliminary license approval for
a cannabis business license applicant who qualifies under M.S. §§ 342.14 or
342.17, as they may be amended from time to time, as evidenced by a document or
other written communication from the OCM to the applicant.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY. Major structures such as aquatic centers, arenas,
athletic fields and shelters located within lands under the ownership or
control of the City of Luverne.
   RESIDENT. A bona fide resident who qualifies to vote and has a residence
which, if owned by the manager or agent, could be homesteaded for real estate
tax purposes.
   RESIDENT MANAGER OR AGENT. A person who, by reason of age, character,
reputation and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee.
   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. As defined under M.S. § 245.462, subd. 23,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the city to a state-
licensed cannabis retail business.
   SCHOOL. A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05, as it may be
amended from time to time, or a nonpublic school that must meet the reporting
requirements under M.S. § 120A.24, as it may be amended from time to time.
   STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota’s Office
of Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025; Ord. 56, Fourth Series, effective
8-7-2025)
§ 118.05 REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES.
   (A)   No individual or entity may operate a state-licensed cannabis retail
business within the city without first registering with the Office of the City
Administrator.
   (B)   Any state-licensed cannabis retail business that sells to a customer
or patient without valid retail registration shall incur a civil penalty not to
exceed $2,000 for each violation, as specified in the city’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.06 PRE-LICENSE APPLICATION RESPONSE TO OCM REQUIRED.
   Pursuant to M.S. Ch. 342, as it may be amended from time to time, within 30
days of receiving a copy of a state license application from OCM, the city
shall certify on a form provided by OCM whether a proposed cannabis retail
business complies with local zoning ordinances and, if applicable, whether the
proposed business complies with the state fire code and building code.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.07 REGISTRATION AND APPLICATION FEES.
   (A)   The city shall not charge an application fee.
   (B)   A registration fee, as established in the city’s fee schedule, shall
be charged to applicants depending on the type of retail business license
applied.
   (C)   Any renewal retail registration fee imposed by the city shall be
charged at the time of the second renewal and each subsequent renewal
thereafter.
   (D)   A medical combination business operating an adult-use retail location
may only be charged a single registration fee, not to exceed the lesser of a
single retail registration fee, defined under this section, of the adult-use
retail business.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.08 APPLICATION SUBMITTAL.
   (A)   (1)   The Office of the City Administrator shall issue a retail
registration to a cannabis retail business that adheres to the requirements of
M.S. § 342.22, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter.
      (2)   An applicant for retail registration shall fill out an application
form, as provided by the city. Said form shall include, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
         (b)   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
         (c)   The address and parcel ID for the property which the retail
registration is sought and, if applying with only a preliminary license
approval issued by the OCM and not a full license, evidence of interest or
control of the property or premises for which the retail registration is
sought;
         (d)   Certification that the applicant complies with the requirements
of this chapter; and
         (e)   Full name, email address, and telephone number of the resident
manager(s), if:
            1.   The applicant is not a resident of the county.
            2.   The applicant is made up of more than one individual, whether
or not they are residents of the county.
            3.   The applicant is a corporation, partnership or association.
            4.   The applicant or applicants shall appoint in writing an
individual person who is a resident of the county as its manager or agent. The
resident manager or agent shall, by the terms of the appointment take full
responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises; and serve as agent for
service of notices and other process relating to the license.
            5.   If an application is submitted with only a preliminary license
approval issued by the OCM and not a valid license, the application may be
considered complete without such resident manager information, but the
applicant shall be required to provide the required resident manager
information to the Office of the City Administrator prior to making any sales
within the city.
   (B)   The applicant shall include with the form:
      (1)   The registration fee as required in §
118.07.
      (2)   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM license
pre-approval.
      (3)   Certification of compliance for Minnesota workers’ compensation
under M.S. § 176.182, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   The name and address of the applicant, and all other owner(s).
      (5)   The name, home address, email, date of birth and telephone number
of individuals who will actively manage the business for which the license is
sought.
      (6)   The location of the premises for which the license is sought, and
the name of the owners, agents, lessee of the premises where the business is to
be operated.
      (7)   (a)   Include operational plan, organizational structure,
environmental sustainability and mitigation plans, interior floor plans of the
buildings, odor control systems and suitability of the building for the use
proposed, site plan as to parking, traffic movement and aesthetics.
            1.   Include documentation of a state business license.
            2.   Include information of any bankruptcy proceeding involving the
owner(s).
            3.   Include documentation of all necessary licenses from the state
to operate a cannabis establishment.
            4.   Be signed by the owner(s) of the business.
         (b)   If an application is submitted with only a preliminary license
approval issued by the OCM and not a full license, the applicant shall submit
the above information to the extent possible at the time of application and
shall provide final copies of such information when the applicant provides the
Office of the City Administrator a copy of the valid state license issued by
the OCM pursuant to division (E) below.
      (8)   (a)   Evidence of adequate coverage by commercial liability
insurance which shall meet the following minimum limits of liability:
            1.   $1,500,000 each occurrence;
            2.   $3,000,000 general aggregate; and
            3.   $3,000,000 products and completed operations aggregate.
         (b)   If an application is submitted with only a preliminary license
approval issued by the OCM and not a full license, the retail registration may
be considered complete, but the applicant shall be required to submit a copy of
the required certificate of insurance to the Office of the City Administrator
prior to making any sales within the city.
   (C)   Once an application is considered complete, the Office of the City
Administrator shall inform the applicant as such, process the application fees,
and forward the application to the City Council for approval or denial.
   (D)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
   (E)   If the City Council approves a retail registration application
submitted with a preliminary license approval and prior to the issuance of a
license by the OCM to the applicant, the applicant shall be required to submit
a copy of a valid state license issued by the OCM to the Office of the City
Administrator and allow an inspection be conducted pursuant to §
118.10 of this chapter prior to making any sales within the city.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025; Ord. 52, Fourth Series, effective
7-3-2025; Ord. 56, Fourth Series, effective 8-7-2025)
§ 118.09 APPLICATION APPROVAL.
   (A)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application for registration
shall not be approved or renewed if the applicant is unable to meet the
requirements of this chapter. No application for registration shall be approved
if such business would result in non-compliance.
   (B)   A cannabis retail business application for registration shall not be
approved if the cannabis retail business would exceed the maximum number of
cannabis retail business registrations permitted under §
118.19. The city shall process cannabis retail business registration
applications in the order in which the applications are received until the
maximum number of registered cannabis retail businesses has been met.
   (C)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application that meets the
requirements of this chapter shall be approved, provided that such approval
shall not result in the city exceeding the maximum number of registered
cannabis retail businesses as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025; Ord. 57, Fourth Series, effective
8-28-2025)
§ 118.10 PRELIMINARY INSPECTION PRIOR TO RETAIL REGISTRATION.
   Prior to issuance of a cannabis retail business registration to an applicant
with a valid license from the OCM, the city shall conduct a preliminary
inspection to ensure the cannabis retail business is in compliance with local
ordinances. If the City Council approves a retail registration application
submitted by an applicant with a preliminary license approval and prior to the
issuance of a license by the OCM to the applicant, the city shall conduct a
preliminary inspection to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable local ordinances after the applicant has
submitted a copy of a valid state license to the Office of the City
Administrator pursuant to §
118.08(E). The applicant shall not make sales within the city prior to the
completion of the preliminary inspection.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025; Ord. 56, Fourth Series, effective
8-7-2025)
§ 118.11 ANNUAL COMPLIANCE CHECKS.
   (A)   The city shall complete at minimum one compliance check per calendar
year of every cannabis retail business to assess if the business meets age
verification requirements, as required under M.S. § 342.22, subd. 4(b), as it
may be amended from time to time, and this chapter.
   (B)   The city, or designee, shall conduct at minimum one unannounced age
verification compliance check at least once per calendar year.
   (C)   Any failures under this section must be reported to the Office of
Cannabis Management.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.12 LOCATION CHANGE.
   A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be required to submit a new
application for registration under §
118.08 if it seeks to move to a new location still within the legal boundaries
of the city.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.13 RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The city shall process renewals of the annual registration of a state-
licensed cannabis retail business at the same time OCM renews the cannabis
retail business’ license, as long as the state-licensed cannabis retail
business remains in compliance with all city ordinances.
   (B)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall apply to renew
registration on a form established by the city.
   (C)   A cannabis retail registration issued under this chapter shall not be
transferred.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.14 RENEWAL FEES.
   The city shall charge a renewal fee for the registration starting at the
second renewal, as established in the city’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.15 RENEWAL APPLICATION.
   The application for renewal of a retail registration shall include, but is
not limited to:
   (A)   Items required under §
118.08 of this chapter; and
   (B)   A certification of the registrant’s violation history covering the
previous five-year period (violations related to cannabis-related offenses, or
violations of the Minnesota regulations governing the state license).
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.16 VIOLATIONS AND SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   When suspension is warranted. The city may suspend a cannabis retail
business’ registration if it violates this chapter or poses an immediate threat
to the health or safety of the public. The city shall immediately notify the
cannabis retail business in writing of the grounds for the suspension.
   (B)   Notice. Any person or registered cannabis retail business violating
this chapter may be issued, either personally or by mail, a notice of violation
by the city that sets forth the alleged violation, the penalties imposed under
§
118.17, and the timing for serving a suspension, if imposed, and that informs
the alleged violator of the alleged violator’s right to a hearing on the
matter. The notice of violation shall provide notice that a hearing must be
requested by the alleged violator within ten business days of the date of
issuance of the notice of violation and that such hearing rights shall be
waived by the alleged violator and terminated if a hearing is not requested in
writing by the alleged violator and filed with the City Clerk within the ten-
business-day period. The notice of violation shall provide information on how
and where a hearing may be requested, including a contact address and phone
number for the City Clerk.
   (C)   Notification to OCM. Following the issuance of a notice of suspension
of the registration of a registered retail business by the City Clerk pursuant
to this chapter, the City Clerk shall immediately notify the OCM and provide
the OCM a copy of the notice of suspension issued to the registered retail
business. OCM will provide the city and cannabis business retailer a response
to the complaint within seven calendar days and perform any necessary
inspections within 30 calendar days.
   (D)   Timing of suspension. The city may hold a hearing pursuant to this
chapter if timely requested by the alleged violator or stay such hearing
pending a response from OCM if a suspension is to be imposed. If a hearing is
timely requested and held and a suspension is imposed, the City Clerk shall
immediately notify the OCM and provide the OCM a copy of the City Council’s
order of suspension issued to the registered retail business. A suspension
shall not be imposed and served until notice to OCM and any determination by
OCM. The OCM may order reinstatement of the retail registration or take other
action authorized by law, up to and including revocation of the state license
for the cannabis retail business or lower-potency hemp edible retailer. Failure
by OCM to respond or to timely respond following notice from the City Clerk to
OCM as provided herein shall not prohibit or limit the city’s enforcement
action or subsequent enforcement actions.
   (E)   Length of suspension. The suspension of a cannabis retail business
registration shall be for a period not to exceed 30 days, unless action by the
OCM permits a longer suspension or permits of the retail registration for the
business. The business may not make sales to customers if their registration is
suspended.
   (F)   Reinstatement. The city shall reinstate a registration if the city
determines that the violation(s) have been resolved or if the OCM determines
that the violation(s) have been resolved.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.17 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   Subject to M.S. § 342.22, subd. 5(e), as it may be amended from time to
time, the city may impose a civil penalty, as specified in the city’s fee
schedule, for registration violations and violations of this chapter, not to
exceed $2,000.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.18 SUBJECT TO INVESTIGATION, INSPECTION AND AUDIT.
   All licenses are subject to the condition that the licensed premises may,
without notice, be inspected for compliance with state and city laws and
regulations. Office of the City Administrator investigators, Rock County
Sheriff’s investigators, air quality investigators, agents or other city
designees have the right to enter the licensed premises for the purpose of
investigation and inspection. Licensees shall not refuse such right to enter
the premises to inspect or investigate the premises, facilities, qualifications
of personnel, methods or operations, policies and purposes of any cannabis
retail business and of any person proposing to engage in the operation of a
cannabis retail business. An inspection of a facility may include, without
limitation, investigation of standards for public safety and may be conducted
jointly with state and other local government agencies, as well as law
enforcement agencies.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.19 LIMITING OF REGISTRATIONS.
   Under M.S. § 342.13(h), the city may limit the number of cannabis retail
business registrations issued by the city to no fewer than one cannabis retail
business registration for every 12,500 residents. Pursuant to this authority,
the city shall limit the number of cannabis retail business registrations to
five, excluding medical cannabis combination businesses, lower-potency hemp
edible retailers, or a potential municipal cannabis retail business. The city
shall process cannabis retail registration applications in the order in which
the completed registration applications are received.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025; Ord. 57, Fourth Series, effective
8-28-2025)
§ 118.20 MINIMUM BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city shall not issue a registration to a cannabis retail business
that does not comply with the minimum buffer requirements as set forth in §
153.200.
   (B)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis retail business
within 1,000 feet of the property boundaries of another cannabis retail
business.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.21 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Cannabis retail businesses are limited to retail sale of cannabis,
cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived
consumer products:
      (1)   Monday through Thursday: 10:00 a.m. – 9:00 p.m.
      (2)   Friday and Saturday: 9:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.
      (3)   Sunday: 10:00 a.m. – 9:00 p.m.
   (B)   This restriction shall not apply to lower-potency hemp edible
retailers.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.22 ADVERTISING.
   A cannabis retail business must comply with the requirements provided in
this chapter, city code, and any applicable state laws regarding signs and
advertising.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
Cross-reference:
   Sign regulations, see §§
153.145 et seq.
§ 118.23 PUBLIC DISPLAY REQUIRED.
   During all of the period of time for which a state license has been issued
authorizing the operation of a cannabis retail business, the state license
shall be posted and at all times be displayed in a conspicuous place in the
facility where such business is carried on so that all persons visiting such
place may readily see and read the same.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.24 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   It is the affirmative duty of each holder of a cannabis establishment
license to strictly comply with all the applicable provisions of this code and
state statutes and regulations regulating cannabis establishments, and each
holder of a cannabis establishment license must:
   (A)   Maintain and conduct all activities upon the premises in a decent and
respectful manner and shall not knowingly permit any conditions that could
cause disorder, disturbances, excessive loitering, nuisances or other
activities which endanger the health or safety of the patrons or disrupt the
peace or order of the neighborhood;
   (B)   Operate and maintain the cannabis establishment in a professional,
orderly and dignified manner that is consistent with the positive image,
quality, perception and appearance of the community;
   (C)   Maintain at all times the outside premises of the cannabis
establishment free from trash and other debris; and
   (D)   Maintain adequate security to ensure compliance with the requirements
of this chapter and any applicable state laws.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.25 ON-SITE CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   On-site consumption within a cannabis microbusiness.
      (1)   A cannabis microbusiness with an on-site consumption endorsement
may permit on-site consumption of edible cannabis products and lower-potency
hemp edibles if:
         (a)   The portion of the premises in which on-site consumption is
permitted must be definite and distinct from all other areas of the
microbusiness and must be accessed through a distinct entrance.
         (b)   The edible cannabis products and lower-potency hemp edibles sold
for on-site consumption comply with M.S. Ch. 342, as it may be amended from
time to time, and rules adopted pursuant to that chapter regarding the testing,
packaging, and labeling of cannabinoid products.
         (c)   The edible cannabinoid products and lower-potency hemp edibles
sold for on-site consumption are served in the required packaging but may be
removed from the products’ packaging by customers for consumption on site.
         (d)   Food and beverages may be prepared and sold on site provided
that the cannabis microbusiness complies with all relevant state and local
laws, the code, licensing requirements, and zoning requirements.
         (e)   The display and consumption of any edible cannabis product or
lower-potency hemp edible is not visible from outside of the licensed premises
of the business.
         (f)   The cannabis microbusiness may offer recorded or live
entertainment, provided that the cannabis microbusiness complies with all
relevant state and local laws, ordinances, licensing requirements, and zoning
requirements.
      (2)   A cannabis microbusiness with an on-site consumption endorsement
may not:
         (a)   Sell an edible cannabis product or a lower-potency hemp edible
to an individual who is under 21 years of age.
         (b)   Permit an individual who is under 21 years of age to enter the
premises.
         (c)   Sell an edible cannabis product or a lower-potency hemp edible
to a person who is visibly intoxicated.
         (d)   Sell or allow the sale or consumption of alcohol or tobacco on
the premises.
         (e)   Sell products that are intended to be eaten or consumed as a
drink, other than packaged and labeled edible cannabis products and lower-
potency hemp edibles, that contain cannabis flower or hemp plant parts or are
infused with cannabis concentrate, hemp concentrate, or artificially derived
cannabinoids.
         (f)   Permit edible cannabis products or lower-potency hemp edibles
sold in the portion of the area designated for on-site consumption to be
removed from that area.
         (g)   Permit adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products,
hemp-derived consumer products, or tobacco to be consumed through smoking or a
vaporized delivery method on the premises.
         (h)   Distribute or allow free samples of cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products.
   (B)   On-site consumption within a lower-potency hemp edible retailer.
      (1)   A lower-potency hemp edible retailer may permit on-site consumption
of lower-potency hemp edibles if:
         (a)   The lower-potency hemp edible retailer has an on-site
consumption endorsement issued by the OCM.
         (b)   The lower-potency hemp edible retailer holds an on-sale license
issued under M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (c)   Lower-potency hemp edibles that are intended to be consumed as a
beverage are either served in their required packaging or outside of their
packaging if the information that is required to be contained on the label of a
lower-potency hemp edible is posted or otherwise displayed by the lower-potency
hemp edible retailer.
         (d)   Lower-potency hemp edibles sold for on-site consumption, other
than lower-potency hemp edibles that are intended to be consumed as a beverage,
are served in the required packaging. The lower-potency hemp edible products
may be removed from their packaging by customers and consumed on site.
      (2)   A lower-potency hemp edible retailer with an on-site consumption
endorsement may not:
         (a)   Sell, give, furnish, or in any way procure for another lower-
potency hemp edibles for the use of an obviously intoxicated person.
         (b)   Sell lower-potency hemp edibles that are designed or reasonably
expected to be mixed with an alcoholic beverage.
         (c)   Permit lower-potency hemp edibles that have been removed from
the products’ packaging to be removed from the premises of the lower-potency
hemp edible retailer.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.26 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any cannabis retail
business regulated under this chapter, except for lower-potency hemp edible
retailers, to violate any provisions of M.S. Ch. 342, as it may be amended from
time to time, applicable to cannabis retail businesses, including, but not
limited to the following:
      (1)   To operate a state-licensed cannabis retail business within the
corporate limits of the city or make any sale to a customer or patient without
validly registering with the city.
      (2)   To sell cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products to a person who is visibly
intoxicated.
      (3)   To knowingly sell more cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-
potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products than a customer is
legally permitted to possess.
      (4)   To give away immature cannabis plants or seedlings, cannabis
flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products.
      (5)   To operate a drive-through window.
      (6)   To allow for the dispensing of cannabis plants, cannabis flower,
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products in vending machines.
      (7)   To sell cannabis plants, cannabis flower, or cannabis products if
the cannabis retailer knows that any required security or statewide monitoring
systems are not operational.
      (8)   To permit an individual under 21 years of age to enter the business
premises other than entry by a person enrolled in the registry program as
defined by M.S. § 342.01, subd. 59, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (9)   To sell or give cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products to an individual under 21 years
of age unless the individual is a person enrolled in the registry program as
defined by M.S. § 342.01, subd. 59, as it may be amended from time to time, and
the cannabis business holds a medical cannabis retail endorsement.
      (10)   To sell or give cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products by any other means, to any
other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by state or other local
law, ordinance, or other regulation.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any lower-potency hemp
edible retailer to violate any provisions of M.S. Ch. 342, as it may be amended
from time to time, applicable to hemp businesses, including, but not limited to
the following:
      (1)   To operate a state-licensed lower-potency hemp edible retail
business within the corporate limits of the city or make any sale to a customer
or patient without validly registering with the city.
      (2)   To knowingly sell more lower-potency hemp edibles or hemp-derived
consumer products than a customer is legally permitted to possess.
      (3)   To sell lower-potency hemp edibles to individuals who are under 21
years of age.
      (4)   To sell lower-potency hemp edibles to a person who is visibly
intoxicated.
      (5)   To sell cannabis flower, cannabis products, or hemp-derived
consumer products.
      (6)   To allow for the dispensing of lower-potency hemp edibles in
vending machines.
      (7)   To distribute or allow free samples of lower-potency hemp edibles,
except when the business is licensed by the OCM to permit on-site consumption
and samples are consumed within its licensed premises.
      (8)   To sell or give cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products by any other means, to any
other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by state or other local
law, ordinance, or other regulation.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.27 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   License required.
      (1)   A cannabis event organizer license entitles the license holder to
organize a temporary cannabis event lasting no more than four consecutive days.
      (2)   A license or permit is required to be issued and approved by the
city prior to holding a temporary cannabis event.
   (B)   Registration and application fee. A fee, as established in the city’s
fee schedule, shall be charged to applicants for temporary cannabis events and
shall be an amount equal to half of the initial license fee for a cannabis
event organizer license under M.S. § 342.11, as may be amended from time to
time.
   (C)   Application submittal and review.
      (1)   The city shall require an application for temporary cannabis
events.
      (2)   An applicant for a temporary cannabis event shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the city, no less than 60 days from the
event’s first day. Said form shall include, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Full name of the property owner and applicant.
         (b)   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant.
         (c)   No license under this chapter shall be granted for operation on
any premises upon which taxes, assessments or installments thereof, or other
financial claims of the city, are owed and are delinquent and unpaid.
         (d)   Location of the event.
         (e)   Dates and times of the event including setup and tear down.
         (f)   Description of the event sufficient for review of the security,
traffic, sanitation, and sanitary needs of the event.
         (g)   Whether food is to be served, by whom, and whether other vendors
or providers are intended sufficient to ensure proper licensure of those
vendors or providers and sufficient utility services, sanitation, and traffic
controls are available.
         (h)   Whether the event will include any amplification of sounds,
voices, or music.
         (i)   Whether the event is to be advertised and if so the scope of
advertising, with information sufficient to allow planning for crowd control
and security.
         (j)   A detailed map of the event layout.
         (k)   A certificate of insurance evidencing a valid liability policy
providing minimum coverage of $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence,
which certificate(s) must state that no cancellation of such policy may be
effective except upon 30 days’ written notice to the city.
      (3)   The applicant shall include with the form:
         (a)   The fee as required in division (B) of this section; and
         (b)   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application, submitted
pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   The application shall be submitted to the Office of the City
Administrator or other designee for review. If the designee determines that a
submitted application is incomplete, they shall return the application to the
applicant with the notice of deficiencies.
      (5)   Once an application is considered complete, the designee shall
inform the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the City Council for approval or denial.
   (D)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
   (E)   The application for a license for a temporary cannabis event shall
meet the following standards:
      (1)   City requirements.
         (a)   Temporary cannabis events shall only be held between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
         (b)   No more than 12 total temporary cannabis events per calendar
year within the City of Luverne.
         (c)   Consumption of alcohol or tobacco shall not be allowed at the
temporary cannabis event.
         (d)   No consumption of cannabis shall be allowed on the premises of
the temporary cannabis event.
         (e)   The city shall not issue a temporary cannabis event license to a
cannabis business or cannabis event organizer if the proposed event location
does not comply with the minimum buffer requirements as set forth in §
153.200.
      (2)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that does not meet the
requirements of this section or is found to endanger the public safety or
health shall be denied. The city shall notify the applicant of the standards
not met and basis for denial.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.28 CITY OF LUVERNE AS A CANNABIS RETAILER.
   The city may establish, own, and operate one municipal cannabis retail
business subject to approval of the City Council by ordinance.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 118.29 USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Unless allowed by permit under §
118.27, no person shall use cannabis flower or cannabis products in a public
place or a place of public accommodation unless the premises is an
establishment or an event licensed to permit on-site consumption of adult-use.
   (B)   Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of
a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 48, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
Cross-reference:
   Use of tobacco and cannabis in public, see
Ch. 133
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   PUBLIC PROTECTION
      
131.   CURFEW
      
132.   CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS; CHEMICAL DUMP SITES
      133.   USE OF TOBACCO AND CANNABIS IN PUBLIC
CHAPTER 130: PUBLIC PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Unlawful deposit of garbage, litter and the like
   
130.02   [Reserved]
   
130.03   Noisy parties
   
130.04   Dangerous trespass and other acts
   
130.05   Disorderly conduct
   
130.06   Window peeping
   
130.07   Furnishing obscene material
Dangerous Weapons and Articles
   
130.20   Weapons, firearms and explosives
   
130.21   Hunting and trapping
   
130.22   Fireworks; sale and possession
   
130.23   Exposure of unused container
   
130.24   Bow and arrow
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE, LITTER AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term GARBAGE shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to: refuse as defined in §
54.01 of this code of ordinances; rubbish; junk as defined in §
115.01 of this code of ordinances; offal; the body of a dead animal; wastes; or
other litter.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, discharge, dump or place
garbage in or upon any public street, public waters or ice thereon, public
lands or, without the consent of the owner, private lands or water or ice
thereon; except, it shall not be a violation of this section if the garbage is
placed for the purposes of refuse collection in accordance with the provisions
of
Ch. 54 of this code of ordinances and established city policy and procedure.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner or lessee of a
refuse receptacle or dumpster, or the agent or employee of the owner or lessee,
to deposit, discharge, dump or place garbage in a private refuse receptacle or
dumpster.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, discharge, dump or place in
a public refuse receptacle or dumpster, garbage generated at a place or
location other than the location or immediate area of the refuse receptacle or
dumpster. It is unlawful to bring or haul any garbage into a park, recreational
area, public lands or onto any public right-of-way and to deposit the same in
any public refuse receptacle, dumpster, container or commercial receptacle.
Residential garbage is to be deposited for pickup as designated by the city.
   (E)   A person shall be presumed to have deposited, discharged, dumped or
placed garbage in a private or public receptacle if the garbage can be
identified by names, addresses, correspondence or other similar material and
information, as belonging to or having been generated by the person.
(Prior Code, § 10.01) (Ord. 177, Third Series, effective 9-7-1995) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 130.02 [RESERVED].
§ 130.03 NOISY PARTIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any private
lands because of, or participate in, any party or gathering of people from
which noise emanates of a sufficient volume or of such nature as to disturb the
peace, quiet or repose of other persons. Any owner or person in lawful
possession or control of the private lands who has knowledge of the disturbance
and fails to immediately abate the disturbance shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any private
lands of another because of, or participate in, any party or gathering of
people in the absence of the owner of the private lands being present, without
first having obtained written permission from the landowner or other person in
lawful possession of the private lands. The written permission shall, at all
times, be in the possession of one or more persons at the site of the
congregation. The document containing the written permission must bear the
signature of the landowner and date of the permitted use. Failure to display
written permission upon request shall be considered prima facie evidence of an
absence of permission from the owner.
   (C)   A violation of divisions (A) or (B) above shall give a peace officer
the authority to order all persons present, other than person identifying
themselves as the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the land,
to immediately disperse. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being
ordered to do so by a peace officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 10.14) (Ord. 52, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 130.04 DANGEROUS TRESPASS AND OTHER ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Smoke in the presence of explosives, or inflammable materials, or in a
building, or area, in which “No Smoking” notices have been prominently posted;
   (B)   Interfere with or obstruct the prevention or extinguishing of any
fire, or disobey the lawful orders of law enforcement officer or fireman
present at the fire;
   (C)   Show a false light or signal or interfere with any light, signal or
sign controlling or guiding traffic upon a highway, railway track or navigable
water;
   (D)   Place an obstruction upon a railroad track;
   (E)   Expose another or his or her property to an obnoxious or harmful gas,
fluid or substance, with intent to injure, molest or coerce;
   (F)   Trespass or permit animals under his or her control to trespass upon a
railroad track;
   (G)   Permit domestic animals or fowls under his or her control to go upon
the lands of another within the city;
   (H)   Interfere unlawfully with any monument, sign or pointer erected or
marked to designate a point of a boundary, line or a political subdivision or a
tract of land;
   (I)   Trespass upon the premises of another, and without claim of right
refuses to depart therefrom on demand of the lawful possessor;
   (J)   Occupy or enter the dwelling of another, without claim of right,
consent of the owner or the consent of one who has the right to give consent,
except in an emergency situation;
   (K)   Enter the premises of another with intent to take or injure any fruit,
fruit trees or vegetables growing thereon without the permission of the owner
or occupant; or
   (L)   Without the permission of the owner tamper with or get into or upon a
motor vehicle, or ride in or upon the motor vehicle knowing it was taken and is
being driven by another without the permission of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 10.20) (Ord. 52, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 130.05 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing
or having reasonable grounds to know, that it will, or will tend to, alarm,
anger or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of the peace, to do so
permit upon premises owned or controlled by him or her, the following:
      (1)   Engage in brawling or fighting;
      (2)   Disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character;
      (3)   Willfully and lewdly expose his or her person or the private parts
thereof, or procure another to so expose himself or herself; and any open or
gross lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act of public indecency;
      (4)   Voluntarily enter the water of any lake, river or city public
swimming pool between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except with
specific permission; or, enter the water without being garbed in a bathing suit
sufficient to cover his or her person and equal to the standards generally
adopted and accepted by the public;
      (5)   Race the motor of any motor vehicle;
      (6)   Cause the spinning or skidding of wheels or tires causing tire
squeals or similar noise;
      (7)   Cause the making or production of an unnecessary noise by shouting
or by any other means of mechanism including the blowing of any automobile or
other vehicle horn;
      (8)   Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or endanger
others;
      (9)   Drink or display any intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in or
about any premises where the drinking or display is prohibited by law;
      (10)   Cause defacement, destruction or otherwise damage to any premises
or any property located thereon;
      (11)   Strew, scatter, litter, throw, dispose of or deposit any refuse,
garbage or rubbish unto any premises, except into receptacles provided for the
purpose;
      (12)   Enter any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the
owner or operator; or
      (13)   Fail or refuse to vacate or leave any premises after being
requested or ordered, whether orally or in writing, to do so, by the owner, or
person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or official.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply to any person who is owner or tenant of
the premises involved, nor to any law enforcement or other government official
who may be present thereon at that time as part of his or her official duty,
nor shall it include the wife, children, employee or tenant of the owner or
occupier.
(Prior Code, § 10.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 WINDOW PEEPING.
   It is unlawful for any person to go upon the private premises of another,
and in a surreptitious manner, look, gaze, stare or peep into any window, door
or other opening in any building located thereon which is occupied by a person
or persons as a place of abode with intent to intrude upon the privacy of any
member of the household thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10.32) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.07 FURNISHING OBSCENE MATERIAL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FURNISH. To sell, give, rent, loan or otherwise provide.
      MATERIAL. Any printed matter, visual representation or sound recording,
and includes, but is not limited to books, magazines, motion picture films,
pamphlets, newspapers, pictures, photographs, drawings, sculptures and tape or
wire recordings.
      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is
considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
      OBSCENE. Material which is whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity,
sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes
obscenities or explicit descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct.
      OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular
use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts,
sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have no other
meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or
excretory meaning.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who
is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the
part of one so clothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any touching of
the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals or the
breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual
experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to furnish another person
obscene material.
   (C)   Defense. In any prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative
defense, and for the defendant to prove, that the defendant was a bona fide
school, museum or public library, or was acting in the course of his or her
employment as an employee of the organization or of a retail outlet affiliated
with and serving the educational purpose of the organization.
(Prior Code, § 10.55) Penalty, see §
10.99
DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES
§ 130.20 WEAPONS, FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Acts prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or
explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;
      (2)   Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or
killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;
      (3)   Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a
sling-shot or sand club;
      (4)   Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switchblade
knife opening automatically;
      (5)   Possess any other dangerous articles or substance for the purpose
of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another;
      (6)   Sell or have in his or her possession any device designed to
silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm;
      (7)   Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under 14 years of age to
handle or use, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s presence, a firearm or air
gun of any kind or any ammunition or explosive; or
      (8)   Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, air gun,
ammunition or explosive without the written consent of his or her parent or
guardian or of law enforcement officials.
   (B)   Exception. Nothing in division (A) above shall prohibit the possession
of the articles therein mentioned if the purpose of the possession is for
public exhibition by museums or collectors of art.
   (C)   Discharge of firearms and explosives. It is unlawful for any person to
fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm, firecracker, sky
rocket or other fireworks, air gun, air rifle or other similar device commonly
referred to a B-B gun.
   (D)   Exception. Nothing in division (C) above shall apply to a display of
fireworks by an organization or group of organizations authorized in writing by
the Council, to a peace officer in the discharge of his or her lawful duties or
to a person in the lawful defense of his or her person or family. This section
shall not apply to the discharge of firearms in a range authorized in writing
by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 10.10) (Ord. 269, Third Series, effective 12-30-2004) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 130.21 HUNTING AND TRAPPING.
   (A)   Hunting within city limits. It shall be unlawful to hunt in any manner
within the corporate limits of the city. For purposes of this division (A), the
term HUNTING shall mean the taking of birds or mammals by any means including,
but not limited to, firearms, bow and arrow, snare or trap; except, the use of
archery is allowed on the 34.5 acres located in Outlot 31 of the SE 1/4, S11-
T102N-R45W (minus a small parcel described by metes and bounds according to the
survey on file in City Hall) owned and managed by the state’s Department of
Natural Resources, Division of Fish and Wildlife.
   (B)   Trapping within city limits. The City Council may annually issue
permits for the trapping of animals as allowed by law within the corporate
limits of the city. The permits shall be issued by the City Clerk following
approval by the City Council. For purposes of this division (B), the term
TRAPPING shall have the meaning as defined by the state’s Department of Natural
Resources.
(Prior Code, § 10.10) (Ord. 268, Third Series, effective 12-30-2004; Ord. 285,
Third Series, effective 9-7-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.22 FIREWORKS; SALE AND POSSESSION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or have in possession
for the purpose of sale, except as allowed in §
130.20(D) of this chapter, any firecrackers, sky rockets or other fireworks.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section to the contrary,
any retail seller who has obtained a permit from the city for the sale of
fireworks as prescribed in M.S. § 624.20, as it may be amended from time to
time, shall be allowed to display and sell the classes and types of fireworks
permitted under the statutes.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall determine the form of the permit allowing the
display and sale of fireworks by a retail seller operating within the municipal
boundaries of the city. The fee for the permit shall be as provided for under
M.S. § 624.20, as it may be amended from time to time. No retail seller may
display or offer for sale any fireworks until the retail seller has obtained a
permit from the City Clerk and paid the permit fee.
(Prior Code, § 10.10) (Ord. 265, Third Series, effective 7-1-2004) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 130.23 EXPOSURE OF UNUSED CONTAINER.
   It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or in possession or control
thereof, to permit an unused refrigerator, ice box or other container,
sufficiently large to retain any child and with doors which fasten
automatically when closed, to expose the same accessible to children, without
removing the doors, lids, hinges or latches.
(Prior Code, § 10.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.24 BOW AND ARROW.
   It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow, except in the
physical education program in a school supervised by a member of its faculty, a
community-wide supervised class or event specifically authorized by the chief
law enforcement officer, or a bow and arrow range authorized by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 10.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW
Section
   
131.01   Curfew for minors
§ 131.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock or law enforcement.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor.
The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day; provided, however,
that on Friday and Saturday, said hours shall run from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
the following day, official city time.
      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor.
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor.
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of such business trade, profession, or occupation and the minor's
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor's presence at work.
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a
civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor's parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor.
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew.
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's presence.
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian,
or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section apply.
   (H)   Penalties.
      (1)   Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of this section may be
adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to the dispositional alternatives
set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced up to the maximum penalty
authorized by state law for a misdemeanor.
   (I)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city's designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
CHAPTER 132: CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS; CHEMICAL DUMP SITES
Section
   
132.01   Purpose and intent
   
132.02   Interpretation and application
   
132.03   Fees
   
132.04   Definitions
   
132.05   Administration
§ 132.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce public exposure to health
risks where law enforcement officers have determined that hazardous chemicals
from a suspected clandestine drug lab site or associated dump site may exist.
   (B)   The City Council finds the sites are a public health hazard as they
may contain suspended chemicals and residues that place people, particularly
children or adults of child bearing age, at risk when exposed through
inhabiting or visiting the site, now and in the future.
(Prior Code, § 10.58) (Ord. 252, Third Series, effective 5-1-2003)
§ 132.02 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be construed to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are
either more or less restrictive than comparable provisions imposed by any other
law, ordinance, statute or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are
more restrictive or which impose higher standards or regulations shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 10.58) (Ord. 252, Third Series, effective 5-1-2003)
§ 132.03 FEES.
   Fees for the administration of this chapter may be established and amended
periodically by resolution of the City Council and shall be assessable to the
property involved.
(Prior Code, § 10.58) (Ord. 252, Third Series, effective 5-1-2003)
§ 132.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHEMICAL DUMP SITE. Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials used in a clandestine drug lab have been located.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to manufacture
controlled substances.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE. Any place or area where law enforcement has
determined that conditions associated with operation of unlawful clandestine
drug lab exist. A CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE may include dwellings, accessory
buildings, accessory structures, a chemical dump site or any land.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, substance or immediate precursor in Schedules
I through V of M.S. § 152.02, as it may be amended from time to time. The term
shall not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors
or tobacco.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTES. Waste generated from a clandestine drug lab. The
wastes shall be treated, stored, transported or disposed of in a manner
consistent with the state’s Department of Health, the state’s Pollution Control
and Nobles/Rock Public Health Department rules and regulations.
   MANUFACTURE, IN PLACES OTHER THAN A PHARMACY. The production, cultivation,
quality control and standardization, by mechanical, physical, chemical or
pharmaceutical means, packing repacking, tableting, encapsulating, labeling,
relabeling, filling or by other process, of a controlled substance.
   OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation who owns, in whole or in part, the
land, buildings or structures associated with a clandestine drug lab site or
chemical dump site.
   PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE. All dwellings, accessory structures and buildings or
adjacent property associated with a clandestine drug lab site are potentially
unsafe due to health hazards and are considered a PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE.
(Prior Code, § 10.58) (Ord. 252, Third Series, effective 5-1-2003)
§ 132.05 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Law enforcement notice to other authorities. Law enforcement
authorities that identify conditions associated with a clandestine drug lab
site or chemical dump site that places neighbors, visiting public or present
and future occupants of the dwelling at risk for exposure to harmful
contaminants and other associated conditions must promptly notify the
appropriate municipal, child protection and public health authorities of the
property location, property owner, if known, and conditions found.
   (B)   Declaration of property as a public health nuisance. Upon notification
by law enforcement authorities, the city’s Building/Zoning Official shall
promptly issue a declaration of a public health notice for the affected
property and post a copy of the declaration at the probable entrance to the
dwelling or property. The Building/Zoning Official shall also notify the owner
of the property and the following parties by U.S. mail:
      (1)   Occupants of the property;
      (2)   Owners of property within 100 feet of the nuisance property;
      (3)   The County Sheriff’s Department; and
      (4)   Other state and local authorities, such as MPCA and MDH, which are
known to have public and environmental protection responsibilities that are
applicable to the situation.
   (C)   Property owner’s responsibility to act. The Building/Zoning Official
shall also issue an order to abate the public health nuisance, including the
following:
      (1)   Immediately vacate those portions of the property, including
building or structure interiors, which may place the occupants or visitors at
risk;
      (2)   Promptly contract with appropriate environmental testing and
cleaning firms to conduct an on-site assessment, complete clean-up and
remediation testing and follow-up testing, and determine that the property
risks are sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy of the dwelling.
The property owner shall notify the city of actions taken and reach an
agreement with the city on clean-up schedule. The city shall consider practical
limitations and the availability of contractors in approving the schedule for
clean-up; and
      (3)   Provide written documentation of the clean-up process, including a
signed, statement from the contractor that the property is safe for human
occupancy and that the clean-up was conducted in accordance with the state’s
Department of Health guidelines.
   (D)   Property owner’s responsibility for costs. The property owner shall be
responsible for all costs of decontamination or clean-up of the site, including
contractor’s fees and public costs for services that were performed in
association with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site clean-up.
Public costs may include, but not limited to:
      (1)   Posting of the site;
      (2)   Notification of affected parties;
      (3)   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment
process;
      (4)   Laboratory fees;
      (5)   Clean-up services;
      (6)   Administrative fees; and
      (7)   Other associated costs.
   (E)   Recovery of public costs.
      (1)   If, after service of notice of the declaration of public health
nuisance, the property owner fails to arrange appropriate assessment and clean-
up, the city’s Building/Zoning Official is authorized to proceed in a prompt
manner to initiate the on-site assessment and clean-up.
      (2)   If the city is unable to locate the property owner within ten days
of the declaration of public health nuisance, the city is authorized to
immediately proceed to initiate the on-site assessment and clean-up.
      (3)   The city may abate the nuisance by removing the hazardous structure
or building, or otherwise, according to M.S. Ch. 463, as it may be amended from
time to time.
      (4)   If the city abates the public health nuisance, in addition to any
other legal remedy, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs and fees
for administration and enforcement hereof. The city may recover costs and fees
by civil action against the person or persons who own the property or by
assessing the costs and fees as a special tax against the property in the
manner as taxes and special assessments are certified and collected pursuant to
M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (F)   Authority to modify or remove declaration of public health nuisance.
      (1)   The Building/Zoning Official is authorized to modify the
declaration conditions or to remove the declaration of public health nuisance.
      (2)   The modification or removal of the declaration shall only occur
after documentation from a qualified environmental or cleaning firm stating
that the health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and potential
dwelling occupants, are sufficiently abated or corrected to allow safe
occupancy of the dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 10.58) (Ord. 252, Third Series, effective 5-1-2003)
CHAPTER 133: USE OF TOBACCO AND CANNABIS IN PUBLIC
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Prohibition
   
133.03   Permitted private event
   
133.04   Exceptions to prohibitions
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABINOID PRODUCTS. As defined in M.S. § 342.01, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   CITY PARKS. All city parks, including trails and sidewalks in and through
the city park, and parking lots adjacent to city parks and inside all motor
vehicles located or parked in a city park or parking lot adjacent to a city
park.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. A product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic, intended for
human consumption through the inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE includes, but is not limited to, devices
manufactured, marketed or sold as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens,
mods, tank systems, or under any other product name or descriptor.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Includes streets, sidewalks, and private parking lots to
which the public has access.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY. Major structures such as aquatic centers, arenas,
athletic fields and shelters located within lands under the ownership or
control of the City of Luverne.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, vaping or carrying any lighted or
heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated product
containing, made, or derived from nicotine, tobacco, marijuana, cannabis plant,
hemp plant, cannabinoid product or other plant, whether natural or synthetic,
that is intended for inhalation. SMOKING includes carrying or using an
activated electronic delivery device.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that
is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component,
part, or accessory of a tobacco product, including, but not limited to
cigarettes; cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp
cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish;
plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts; refuse
scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms
of tobacco. TOBACCO PRODUCTS includes nicotine solution products.
(Ord. 44, Fourth Series, effective 7-10-2024)
§ 133.02 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   No person shall smoke or vape cannabinoid products or tobacco products
in a city park or at a recreational facility.
   (B)   Unless allowed by permit under § 133.03 below, no person shall use any
form of a cannabinoid product in a city park, public property or at a
recreational facility.
(Ord. 44, Fourth Series, effective 7-10-2024)
§ 133.03 PERMITTED PRIVATE EVENT.
   In addition to all other rules, procedures, and conditions for use of the
public property, facilities or parks, use of cannabinoid products at a private
event, other than smoking which is prohibited in its entirety, may occur at a
city park, public property or recreational facility if the applicant:
   (A)   Completes an application for the rental of the city recreational
facility, public property or park and discloses on the rental application that
cannabinoid products may be used during the private event.
   (B)   The application for rental of a city-owned facility, public property
or park for a private event shall be made by the sponsoring individual or
organization and shall include the following:
      (1)   The name, address, and nature of the sponsoring individual or
organization;
      (2)   A description of the event, including probable number of people in
attendance, dates and hours of the event, and such other information as may be
required;
      (3)   An attestation that the applicant is familiar with all the terms
and provisions of this section and will comply with the same; and
      (4)   An attestation that no smoking of any cannabinoid or tobacco
products will occur, unless otherwise allowed by state law.
   (C)   Applications shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by resolution
of the City Council.
   (D)   Prohibitions. Provision of cannabinoid products shall not be allowed:
      (1)   To any person who is not attending the event (no uninvited guests
at “private events”);
      (2)   To any minor person as defined by M.S. § 342.09, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (3)   To any person attending or participating in a youth amateur
athletic event held on the premises, in which any participant is 21 years of
age or younger; or
      (4)   To any person attending, participating in or in any way being a
part of a Minnesota State High School League (MSHSL)-related or -sponsored
function, which includes students of any age, such as athletic or other
activities, banquets or celebrations.
   (E)   Additional requirements. The City Council may impose additional
requirements or conditions on renting the recreational facility, public
property or city park for a private event as it deems reasonable and
appropriate.
(Ord. 44, Fourth Series, effective 7-10-2024)
§ 133.04 EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The prohibitions herein as set forth in §
133.03 above do not apply to (i) a private event held in a city park, public
property or recreational facility where the city approved use of cannabinoid
products in the rental application as set forth in §
133.03 or (ii) events licensed by the Office of Cannabis Management to permit
on-site consumption of cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products and which otherwise comply with city
ordinances and regulations, including obtaining relevant permits or completing
required rental applications.
   (B)   This chapter does not prohibit smoking by a Native American as part of
a traditional Native American spiritual or cultural ceremony. For purposes of
this section, a Native American is a person who is a member of an Indian tribe
as defined in M.S. § 260.755, subd. 12, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 44, Fourth Series, effective 7-10-2024)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor and is punishable
in accordance with §
10.99 of this code, including, but not limited to a fine in the amount set
forth in the city’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 44, Fourth Series, effective 7-10-2024)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Code
   
150.01   State Building Code adopted
   
150.02   Building Code optional chapters
   
150.03   Unlawful activity
   
150.04   Permit fees
Moving Buildings
   
150.15   Definitions
   
150.16   Application
   
150.17   Permit and fee
   
150.18   Building permit and code compliance
   
150.19   Unlawful acts
Building Demolition
   
150.30   Permit required
   
150.31   Exempt buildings
   
150.32   General provisions
   
150.33   Clean up and disposal of demolition debris
   
150.34   Commencement and completion
Fire Protection Permit Program
   
150.45   Permit required
   
150.46   Permit fees
   
150.47   Permit program
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.01 STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   General. This subchapter provides for the application, administration
and enforcement of the Minnesota State Building Code by regulating the
erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance
of all buildings and/or structures in the city; provides for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees thereof; provides penalties for violation
thereof; repeals all ordinances and parts of ordinances that conflict
therewith. This subchapter shall perpetually include the most current edition
of the Minnesota State Building Code along with the optional appendix chapters
specified in §
150.02 of this chapter.
   (B)   Adoption of code. The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the
Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194,
including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and
published from time to time by the state’s Commissioner of Labor and Industry,
through the Building Codes and Standards Division hereby adopted by reference
with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in
this subchapter. The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in
this subchapter as if fully set out herein.
   (C)   Application. The application, administration and enforcement of the
code shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The Code shall
be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121,
subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time, when so established by this
subchapter.
   (D)   Administration. The code enforcement agency of the city is called the
“City of Luverne”.
   (E)   Enforcement. This Code shall be enforced by the state’s Certified
Building Official designated by the city to administer the code (M.S. §
326B.133, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time).
(Prior Code, § 4.01) (Ord. 251, Third Series, effective 5-2-2003; Ord. 295,
Third Series, effective 4-24-2008)
§ 150.02 BUILDING CODE OPTIONAL CHAPTERS.
   (A)   The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§
326B.101 to 326B.194, as they may be amended from time to time, allows the
municipality to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the
most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code.
   (B)   The following optional provisions identified in the most current
edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part
of the building code for the city:
      (1)   Grading Appendix Minnesota Building Code;
      (2)   Chapter 1335, Flood-Proofing Regulations, parts 1335.0600 to
1335.1200; and
      (3)   Current edition of the International Property Maintenance Code.
(Prior Code, § 4.011) (Ord. 295, Third Series, effective 4-24-2008)
§ 150.03 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY.
   It is unlawful for any contractor, property owner, tenant or other person to
commence or continue any work on any project for which a building permit is
required by the State Building Code or a zoning permit is required by the city
code, and for which no permit has been granted by the city or the permit has
been canceled or a stop order issued. All work permitted under this section
shall be fully completed within the time specified on the permit and, if no
time is specified, within one year from the issuance of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 4.012) (Ord. 171, Third Series, effective 5-4-1995) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 150.04 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Collection of fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of
fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from time
to time. Fees for permits under this subchapter, which may include a surcharge
in accordance with M.S. § 326B.140, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall be determined by the Council and fixed by its resolution, a copy of which
shall be in the office of the administrative authority (Building/Zoning
Official) and uniformly enforced.
      (2)   Fee doubled. If any construction requiring a permit by provision of
the State Building Code or city code is undertaken without first obtaining a
building permit, the permit fee shall be double the amount it would have been
if granted prior to the commencement of construction.
      (3)   Authorization to refund fee. The Building/Zoning Official or
designee may authorize refunding of any fee paid which was erroneously paid or
collected. The Building/Zoning Official or designee may authorize refunding of
not more than 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a
permit issued in accordance with the code. The Building/Zoning Official or
designee may authorize refunding of not more than 80% of the plan review fee
paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid
is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The Building/Zoning
Official or designee shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid, except on
written application filed by the original applicant not later than 180 days
after the date of fee payment.
(Prior Code, § 4.03)
   (B)   Completion time.
      (1)   Cancellation of building permit. Any single-family residence and/or
accessory structure for which a building permit has been issued shall be
completed and ready for occupancy according to the approved plans and
specifications within one year following the issuance of the building permit
and, if not so completed, the building permit shall automatically cancel. All
work must be pursued in a reasonable and timely manner to its ultimate
completion. A building permit shall automatically cancel if for any reason work
is not commenced within 180 days of the date of issuing the building permit or
if work is substantially stopped for a period of 180 days, prior to the
cancellation, an extension may be granted by the Building/Zoning Official upon
good cause shown by the applicant for the extension. If the Building/Zoning
Official believes that work is not being pursued in a reasonable and timely
manner, he or she shall notify the applicant of the deficiency and establish a
reasonable period during which all construction must be completed. If work is
not commenced within 15 days after receipt of the notice or construction is not
completed by the time so established, the Building/Zoning Official may cancel
the building permit and so notify the applicant. Thereafter, no work may be
commenced until a new building permit is applied for and granted conditioned
upon an approved timetable for completion.
      (2)   “Completion” defined. The term COMPLETED, as used in division (B)
(1) above, shall mean and include:
         (a)   Completion of all visible exterior construction;
         (b)   Painting, staining or other exterior finishing;
         (c)   Finishing of driveways and walks;
         (d)   Removal of construction materials, equipment, debris and excess
earth;
         (e)   Placement of top soil, finish grading and sodding or seeding of
all lawn areas; and
         (f)   Finish grading of any swales within established drainage
easements necessary to accommodate natural drainage of adjacent properties.
      (3)   Stop orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the
provisions of the city code or any other valid regulation, the Building/Zoning
Official, Building/Zoning Administrator or City Administrator or his or her
designee, may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons
engaged in the doing or causing the work to be done, and any persons shall
forthwith stop the work until authorized by the Building/Zoning Official to
proceed with the work.
      (4)   Occupancy violations.
         (a)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure, or equipment
therein, or land regulated by this code is being used contrary to the
provisions of the city code, the Building/Zoning Official, Building/Zoning
Administrator or City Administrator, or his or her designee, may order the use
discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on
any person causing the use to be continued. The person shall discontinue the
use within the time prescribed by the city after receipt of the notice.
         (b)   Prior to reuse of the building or structure, or equipment
thereon, or land, the use must comply with the requirements of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 4.031) (Ord. 118, Third Series, effective 12-12-1991; Ord. 295,
Third Series, effective 4-24-2008)
MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 150.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMBINED MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on both a street and a
highway.
   HIGHWAY. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is a state trunk
highway, county state-aid highway or county road.
   HIGHWAY MOVING PERMIT. For which a fee is charged, a permit to move a
building on a highway, which does not include route approval, but does include
regulation of activities which do not involve the use of the highway; which
activities include, but are not limited to, repairs or alterations to a
municipal utility required by reason of the movement.
   MOVING PERMIT. A document allowing the use of a street or highway for the
purpose of moving a building.
   STREET. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is not a state
trunk highway, county state-aid highway or county road.
   STREET MOVING PERMIT. For which a fee is charged, a permit to move a
building on a street, which does include route approval, together with use of
the street and activities including, but not limited to, repairs or alterations
to a municipal utility required by reason of the movement.
(Prior Code, § 4.04) (Ord. 46, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988)
§ 150.16 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for a moving permit shall state the dimensions, weight
and approximate loaded height of the structure or building proposed to be
moved, the places from which and to which it is to be moved, the route to be
followed, the dates and times of moving and parking, the name and address of
the mover and the municipal utility and public property repairs or alterations
that will be required by reason of the movement.
   (B)   In the case of a street moving permit or combined moving permit, the
application shall also state the size and weight of the structure or building
proposed to be moved and the street alterations or repairs that will be
required by reason of the movement.
(Prior Code, § 4.04) (Ord. 46, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988)
§ 150.17 PERMIT AND FEE.
   (A)   (1)   The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours,
routing, movement and parking.
      (2)   Permits shall be issued only for moving buildings by building
movers licensed by the state.
      (3)   No permit shall be required for a person moving his or her own
building which does not exceed 16 feet in width, 24 feet in length and 14 feet
in loaded height.
   (B)   Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the following:
      (1)   A moving permit fee to cover use of streets and route approval; and
      (2)   A fee equal to the anticipated amount required to compensate the
city for any municipal utility and public property (other than streets) repairs
or alterations occasioned by the movement.
   (C)   All permit fees shall be paid in advance of issuance.
(Prior Code, § 4.04) (Ord. 46, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988)
§ 150.18 BUILDING PERMIT AND CODE COMPLIANCE.
   Before any building is moved from one location to another within the city,
or from a point of origin without the city to a destination within the city,
regardless of the route of movement, it shall be inspected and a building
permit shall have been issued for at least work necessary to bring it into full
compliance with the State Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 4.04) (Ord. 46, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988)
§ 150.19 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any street without
a moving permit from the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any highway
without a highway moving permit from the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful to move any building (including a manufactured home) if
the point of origin or destination (or both) is within the city, and regardless
of the route of movement, without having paid in full all real and personal
property taxes, special assessments and municipal utility charges due on the
premises of origin and filing written proof of the payment with the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.04) (Ord. 46, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988) Penalty, see
§
10.99
BUILDING DEMOLITION
§ 150.30 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any building to be demolished,
regardless of reason for the demolition, to secure a permit prior to
commencement of any demolition activities. Applications shall be submitted to
the office of the Building/Zoning Official for review. Following a review and
acceptance of the proposed demolition, the Building/Zoning Official shall issue
a permit and inform the applicant of any special provisions associated with the
demolition activities. If the application is incomplete or denied, the
Building/Zoning Official will inform the applicant as to the reason for denial
and information required to complete the application. A notification of intent
to perform a demolition shall be filed with the state’s Pollution Control
Agency and approval of all plans and required inspections completed (if
required) prior to commencement of any demolition activities for all structures
regulated by the MPCA.
(Prior Code, § 4.09) (Ord. 212, Third Series, effective 12-24-1998)
§ 150.31 EXEMPT BUILDINGS.
   One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool/storage sheds,
playhouses and similar uses; provided, the floor area does not exceed 120
square feet.
(Prior Code, § 4.09) (Ord. 212, Third Series, effective 12-24-1998)
§ 150.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Application for a demolition permit shall include, but not be limited
to:
      (1)   Site address and legal description of subject property;
      (2)   Proof of ownership;
      (3)   Schedule of commencement and completion of work;
      (4)   Copies or original authorization documents as receive from any and
all regulatory agencies as required;
      (5)   Verification of notification to all utility providers serving the
property; and
      (6)   Any additional information as required by the Building/Zoning
Official.
   (B)   No building site or excavation shall be allowed to be unprotected from
the public at any time. Fences or other approved barriers are required to be
erected and secured for unauthorized access during
any time the owner or his or her authorized representative is not on the
demolition site actively involved in the demolition.
(Prior Code, § 4.09) (Ord. 212, Third Series, effective 12-24-1998)
§ 150.33 CLEAN UP AND DISPOSAL OF DEMOLITION DEBRIS.
   All debris and waste materials generated from the demolition of any
structure shall be disposed of in accordance with guidelines established by the
County Land Management Office and State Pollution Control Agency. All plans for
disposal of demolition waste shall be submitted with the application for
permit. No materials will be allowed to be left or buried on the site. This
will include, but not be limited to, any waste materials from the structure as
well as any foundation materials.
(Prior Code, § 4.09) (Ord. 212, Third Series, effective 12-24-1998)
§ 150.34 COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION.
   (A)   All activities authorized by issuance of a demolition permit shall be
commenced within 30 days of permit issuance. Unless approved, all demolition
activities and site work restoration shall be completed in no more than 30 days
from date of commencement. Failure to complete all work authorized by permit
shall constitute a violation of the city code and the violation shall be
punished as for a misdemeanor. Violations shall be deemed continuing in nature
and may be treated as a new and separate offense each day (consisting of a 24-
hour period commencing at 12:00 midnight) during which the violation occurs.
   (B)   If, after a period of not less than 30 days from the date of final
notice and order to complete demolition activities has been issued by the
Building/Zoning Official, the Building/Zoning Official may cause the property
to be sold and building demolished and the materials, rubble and debris
therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such demolition work shall be
accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered as a personal obligation
of the property owner or assess the charges against the property involved.
(Prior Code, § 4.09) (Ord. 212, Third Series, effective 12-24-1998) Penalty,
see §
10.99
FIRE PROTECTION PERMIT PROGRAM
§ 150.45 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit. It shall be the duty of an applicant to secure a permit prior
to commencement of any fire protection related activities described in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Application. The application, administration and enforcement of the
code shall be in the manner provided for in the Minnesota State Building Code,
and shall be enforced within all areas where the City enforces the Minnesota
State Building Code to the fullest extent permitted by law. Applications shall
be submitted to the office of the Building/Zoning Official for review.
Following a review and acceptance of the proposed permit, the Building/Zoning
Official shall issue a permit and inform the applicant of any special
provisions associated with the proposed fire protection related activities. If
the application is incomplete or denied, the Building/Zoning Official will
inform the applicant as to the reason for denial and information required to
complete the application.
(Ord. 35, Fourth Series, effective 6-29-2023)
§ 150.46 PERMIT FEES.
   Collection of fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall
be in the manner authorized in M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from time
to time. Fees for permits under this subchapter, which may include a surcharge
in accordance with M.S. § 326B.153, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall be determined by the Council and fixed by its resolution, a copy of which
shall be in the office of the administrative authority (Building/Zoning
Official) and uniformly enforced.
(Ord. 35, Fourth Series, effective 6-29-2023)
§ 150.47 PERMIT PROGRAM.
   (A)   Pursuant to Minnesota Rule 7512.2800, municipalities may adopt local
ordinances to require a permit to perform fire protection-related work.
   (B)   A person trained in fire protection system plan review shall provide a
competent plan review for all permits granted under this section.
   (C)   Sprinkler plan review and inspection program.
      (1)   No person shall engage in any sprinkler installation, modification,
changing and/or removal of all sprinkler protection systems within the city
without obtaining a permit from the Building/Zoning official.
      (2)   Fire sprinkler systems shall be maintained in accordance with the
Minnesota State Fire Code as such section is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
(Ord. 35, Fourth Series, effective 6-29-2023)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Application
   
151.02   Scope and orders of law enforcement officer
   
151.03   Traffic and parking control
   
151.04   Placing snow or ice in public street or city property
   
151.05   Roadway surfacing, sidewalk, curb and gutter; construction and
reconstruction
   
151.06   Grass, weeds and trees in streets
   
151.07   Driveways and access ways
   
151.08   Curb and gutter, street and sidewalk painting or coloring
   
151.09   Private use of streets and parking lots
   
151.10   Fires, signs, obstructions and refuse in streets
   
151.11   Parades
   
151.12   Curb setback
   
151.13   Load limits
   
151.14   Sewer and water main service lateral installation
Sidewalk Construction, Maintenance, Repair and Removal
   
151.30   Primary responsibility
   
151.31   Construction, reconstruction and repair specifications
   
151.32   Sidewalk construction
   
151.33   City to construct, reconstruct and maintain sidewalks
   
151.34   Failure of owner to reconstruct or make repairs
   
151.35   Sidewalk removal
   
151.36   Duty to inspect
Vacations of Streets or Public Grounds
   
151.50   Petition
   
151.51   Action on petition
   
151.52   Notice of hearing
   
151.53   Council action
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter and Title VII of this code of
ordinances applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets shall apply
to the drivers of all vehicles including, but not limited to, those owned or
operated by the United States, the state or any county, city, town, district or
any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific
exemptions as may be set forth herein.
   (B)   Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal
drawing a vehicle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and Title VII of this code of ordinances applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions which, by their nature, can have no
application. Provisions specifically referring to bicycles shall be in addition
to other provisions of this chapter and Title VII of this code of ordinances
applying to vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 7.01)
§ 151.02 SCOPE AND ORDERS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter and Title VII of this code of
ordinances relate exclusively to the streets, alleys and private roads in the
city, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the
operation and parking of vehicles upon the streets, alleys and private roads.
   (B)   Orders of a law enforcement officer. It is a misdemeanor for any
person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction
of any law enforcement officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic.
(Prior Code, § 7.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.03 TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.
   (A)   Council action. No device, sign or signal shall be erected or
maintained for traffic or parking control unless the Council shall have, by a
resolution, approved and directed the erection and maintenance, except as
otherwise provided in this section.
   (B)   Temporarily restricting or directing traffic and parking; curb
painting.
      (1)   When clearly marked, barricaded or sign-posted, traffic and parking
may be temporarily restricted for any public or private use. All such
restrictions shall be in accordance with the uniform policy promulgated by the
city, acting through the chief law enforcement officer, who shall be ultimately
responsible to the Council for the proper enforcement thereof.
      (2)   Restricted or prohibited use of parking and traffic lanes may be
designated by painting the same upon streets and curbs. The work shall be done
under the direction of the city and in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and Title VII of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary to sign-
posting or marking authorized and described in this section.
      (4)   Experimental restrictions and directions may be placed on traffic
and parking by the city, acting through the chief law enforcement officer, and
it shall be his or her duty to do so when an extra hazardous condition is
observed or arises. It is unlawful to violate any restriction or direction when
the same has been duly marked, barricaded or sign-posted.
(Prior Code, § 7.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.04 PLACING SNOW OR ICE IN PUBLIC STREET OR CITY PROPERTY.
   It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a specific contract
with the city, to remove snow from private property or alleys and place the
same on a public street in such quantity, or in such manner, as to cause a
hazard to travel, without adequate arrangements for the immediate removal
thereof; and it is also a misdemeanor for any person not acting under a
contract with the city to dump snow on other city property.
(Prior Code, § 7.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.05 ROADWAY SURFACING, SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER; CONSTRUCTION AND
RECONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Methods of procedure. Abutting of affected property owners may
contract for, construct or reconstruct roadway surfacing, sidewalk or curb and
gutter:
      (1)   In accordance with this section if advance payment is made therefor
or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the city are completed in
advance; or
      (2)   With or without petition by the methods set forth in the Local
Improvement Code of state statutes, presently beginning with M.S. § 429.011, as
it may from time to time be amended.
   (B)   Permit required. It is a misdemeanor to construct a sidewalk, curb and
gutter, driveway or roadway surfacing in any street or other public property in
the city without a permit in writing from the Council. Application for the
permit shall be made on forms approved and provided by the city and shall
sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of
beginning of work and the length of time required to complete the same;
provided that, no permit shall be required for any such improvements ordered
installed by the Council. All applications shall be referred by the City
Administrator to the City Engineer or Public Works Director and no permit shall
be issued until approval has been received from the City Engineer or Public
Works Director. All such applications shall contain an agreement by the
applicant to be bound by this chapter and plans and specifications consistent
with the provisions of this chapter and good engineering practices shall also
accompany the application. A permit from the city shall not relieve the holder
from damages to the person or property of another caused by the work.
   (C)   Specifications and standards. All construction and reconstruction of
roadway surfacing, sidewalk and curb and gutter improvements, including curb
cuts, shall be strictly in accordance with specifications and standards on file
in the office of the City Administrator and open to inspection and copying
there. The specifications and standards may be amended from time to time by the
city, but shall be uniformly enforced.
   (D)   Inspection. The Council shall designate a suitable and competent
person to perform inspections required herein and such other inspection of such
work as deemed necessary. Any work not done according to the applicable
specifications and standards shall be removed and corrected at the expense of
the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by the Inspector if
found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the specifications and
standards, but this shall not place a continuing burden upon the city to
inspect or supervise the work.
(Prior Code, § 7.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.06 GRASS, WEEDS AND TREES IN STREETS.
   (A)   Trees.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (A), the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to
which the public has free access as a park.
         STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying within the public right-of-way within the city.
      (2)   Creation and establishment of a Forestry Department. There is
hereby created and established a City Forestry Department. The Forestry
Department shall be administered by the Public Works Director of the city.
      (3)   Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the
Forestry Department to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update
annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks,
along streets and in other public areas. Such a plan will be presented annually
to the City Council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the
official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The Forestry Department,
when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make finding,
report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the
scope of its work.
      (4)   Operation. The Forestry Department shall choose its own officers,
make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A
majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
      (5)   Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant, prune,
maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets,
alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to
ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds. The Forestry Department may remove, or cause to order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by
reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric lines or other public
improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
      (6)   Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any
person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree
on public property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to
stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempt
from this division (A) at the determination of the Forestry Department.
      (7)   Pruning, corner clearance. Every owner of any tree on private
property overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the
branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp
or obstruct the view of any street intersection. There shall be maintained a
clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. The
owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed
limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall
have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it
interferes with the proper spread of light or interferes with visibility of any
traffic-control device or sign.
      (8)   Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be
removed below the surface of the ground so the top of the stump shall not
project above the surface of the ground.
      (9)   Review by City Administrator. The City Administrator shall have the
right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Forestry Department. Any
person may appeal from ruling or order of the Forestry Department to the City
Council who may hear the matter and make final decision(s).
   (B)   Permit to plant or remove trees. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
plant or remove any tree upon or overhanging streets without first procuring a
written permit from the city.
   (C)   Duty of property owners to cut grass and weeds. Every owner of
property abutting on any street shall cause the grass and weeds to be cut from
the property line of the property nearest to the street to the center of the
street. If the grass or weeds in the place attain a height in excess of six
inches, it shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to comply with this
division (C).
   (D)   City may order work done. The city may, in cases of failure to comply
with this section, perform the work with employees of the city, keeping an
accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece or parcel of land
abutting upon the street.
   (E)   Assessment. If maintenance work described in the foregoing division
(D) is performed by the city, the City Administrator shall forthwith, upon
completion thereof, ascertain the cost attributable to each lot, piece of
parcel of abutting land. The City Administrator shall, at the next regular
meeting thereof, present the certificate to the Council and obtain its approval
thereof. When the certificate has been approved, it shall be extended as to the
cost therein stated as a special assessment against the abutting land and the
special assessment shall, at the time of certifying taxes to the County
Auditor, be certified for collection as other special assessments are certified
and collected.
(Prior Code, § 7.07) (Ord. 29, Third Series, effective 10-18-1986; Ord. 183,
Third Series, effective 5-2-1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.07 DRIVEWAYS AND ACCESS WAYS.
   (A)   Whenever a private driveway is replaced, improved or substantially
repaired by its owner, all driveway and access ways serving private property
must comply with all provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances relative
thereto. When the city is improving a public street by installation or
replacement of curb and/or gutter, or by complete reconstruction or bituminous
overlay, the following conditions must be met.
      (1)   The number, location and dimension of all driveway accesses serving
private property must comply with the provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances.
      (2)   Abandoned, unimproved or grassed driveway accesses must be improved
and meet all other provisions of Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In the event the above conditions are not met, the driveway access
will be removed and closed and, if applicable, curb (and gutter, if
appropriate) installed. The cost associated with bringing the driveways and
accesses into compliance with this section shall be the responsibility of the
adjoining benefitting property owner and shall be 100% assessable against the
benefitting property.
(Prior Code, § 7.081) (Ord. 126, Third Series, effective 3-5-1992)
§ 151.08 CURB AND GUTTER, STREET AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.
   It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter or color any street, sidewalk
or curb and gutter for advertising purposes, or to paint or color any street,
sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purpose, except as the same may be done by
city employees acting within the course or scope of their employment; provided,
however, that, this provision shall not apply to uniformly coloring concrete or
other surfacing, or uniformly painted house numbers, as such coloring may be
approved by the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 7.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.09 PRIVATE USE OF STREETS AND PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Authority, permission and procedure. Upon an application duly made to
the City Administrator and reviewed and recommended by the chief law
enforcement officer, the Council may, in its discretion, grant special
permission whereby on-street parking or the use of city-owned parking lots or
ramps or public sidewalks may be temporarily or permanently prohibited or
restricted for private reasons and purposes (including, but not limited to,
establishment of private or “leased” parking, “loading zones” or display of
merchandise on sidewalks) at such places, on such terms and for such
compensation as the Council may deem just and equitable. In establishing the
amount of the compensation to be paid to the city, the Council shall consider
the amount of space, location thereof, public inconvenience and hazards to
person or property. Upon complaint of any aggrieved person at any time and by
reason of any specific special permission so granted, the Council shall, at its
next regular meeting after receipt of the complaint, call a hearing thereon to
be held after ten days’ notice in writing to applicant and complainant and
published notice at least ten days prior to the hearing. After the hearing, the
Council shall, by resolution, decide whether to terminate, continue or re-
define the terms of the permission and the decision shall be final and binding
on all persons directly or indirectly interested therein; except that, the
Council may, on its own motion, reconsider the same.
   (B)   Public vehicles. Free and reserved on-street parking shall be limited
to city-owned and operated vehicles.
   (C)   Forbidden practices. It is unlawful for any person to park or
otherwise infringe upon a grant of right under this section, when clearly and
distinctly marked or sign-posted. It is unlawful for any person not granted the
right to assert the same, or for any grantee of the right to exceed the same
under claim thereto.
(Prior Code, § 7.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.10 FIRES, SIGNS, OBSTRUCTIONS AND REFUSE IN STREETS.
   (A)   Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit any
fence or other obstruction upon any street without first having obtained a
written permit to do so from the City Administrator and then only in compliance
in all respects with the terms and conditions of the permit, and taking
precautionary measures for the protection of the public.
   (B)   Fires. It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire upon
a roadway.
   (C)   Dumping in streets.
      (1)   For purposes of this division (C), the term REFUSE means and
includes putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food; putrescible and non-putrescible
solid wastes, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, industrial wastes;
combustible and non-combustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery,
dirt, metal scraps; and liquids such as water containing salt, injurious
chemicals or petroleum products.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any refuse in a
public street, except when specifically authorized by the City Administrator or
the Council.
   (D)   Signs and other structures. It is unlawful for any person to place or
maintain a sign or other structure in the traveled or untraveled portion of any
street or other public property without first having obtained a written permit
from the Council. In a district zoned for commercial or industrial enterprises,
special permission allowing an applicant to erect and maintain signs
overhanging the street may be granted upon such terms and conditions as may be
set forth in the zoning or construction provisions of the city code.
   (E)   Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in violation
of this section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such.
(Prior Code, § 7.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.11 PARADES.
   (A)   Definition. The term PARADE means any movement of vehicle, persons or
animals, or any combination thereof, which either moves together and as a body
so as to in some way impede or affect the free and unobstructed flow of
traffic, or which moves so that some part thereof is in violation of one or
more traffic laws or regulations, if the movement is without a permit
hereunder.
   (B)   Permit required. It is unlawful to sponsor or participate in a parade
for which no permit has been obtained from the city, and it is also unlawful to
obtain a parade permit and not conduct the same in accordance with a permit
granted by the city. Application for the permit shall be made to the City
Administrator and accompanied by a fee adopted by resolution of the Council, at
least 15 days in advance of the date on which it is to occur and shall state
the sponsoring organization or individuals, the route, the length, the
estimated time of commencement and termination, the general composition and the
application shall be executed by the individuals applying therefor or the duly
authorized agent or representative of the sponsoring organization. The
requirement for a permit may be waived by action of the Mayor, City
Administrator and chief law enforcement officer or majority of the persons. All
permittees shall agree to hold the city harmless from any claim, action or
cause of action resulting from injury related to the parade.
   (C)   Procedure and granting. The City Administrator shall forthwith refer
all applications for parades to the chief law enforcement officer for his or
her consideration which shall take no longer than seven days. If any state
truck highways are in the route, the chief law enforcement officer shall make
all necessary arrangements with the state’s Department of Highways for
alternate routes or whatever may be necessary. If the chief law enforcement
officer finds that such a parade will not cause a hazard to persons or
property, and will cause no great inconvenience to the public and, if he or she
is able to make arrangements for necessary direction and control of traffic, he
or she shall endorse his or her acceptance and return the application to the
City Administrator who shall then issue the permit. If the chief law
enforcement officer finds the parade described in the application to be a
hazard, a substantial inconvenience, or if he or she is unable to make adequate
arrangements for direction or control of traffic, he or she shall return the
same to the City Administrator with his or her reasons for denial, and the
permit shall not be granted unless all conditions and objections of the chief
law enforcement officer are met or removed by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 7.24) (Ord. 49, Third Series, effective 3-31-1988) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 151.12 CURB SETBACK.
   (A)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to hereafter remove, or
cause to be removed, any curb from its position abutting upon the roadway to
another position without first making application to the Council and obtaining
a permit therefor.
   (B)   Agreement required.
      (1)   No such permit shall be issued until the applicant, and abutting
landowner if other than applicant, shall enter into a written agreement with
the city agreeing to pay all costs of constructing and maintaining the setback
area in at least as good condition as the abutting roadway, and further
agreeing to demolish and remove the setback and reconstruct the area as was at
the expense of the landowner, his or her heirs or assigns, if the area ever, in
the Council’s opinion, becomes a public hazard.
      (2)   The agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder, and shall run with the adjoining land.
      (3)   The Council may designate the type of parking to be permitted in
the setback area and parking signs or markings shall be placed and maintained
at the expense of the adjoining landowner.
   (C)   Public rights preserved. The setback parking areas shall be kept open
for public parking and the abutting landowner shall, at no time, acquire any
special interest or control of or in such areas.
(Prior Code, § 7.25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.13 LOAD LIMITS.
   The City Administrator, upon the recommendation of the City Engineer or
Public Works Director, may from time to time impose upon vehicular traffic on
any part or all of the streets such load limits as may be necessary or
desirable. The limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are
limited, shall be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful for
any person to operate a vehicle on any street in violation of the limitation so
posted.
(Prior Code, § 7.27) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.14 SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the
improvement of a street shall be considered by the Council if the petition
contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or stabilized base, or
curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have been
made therein, including the installation of service laterals to the curb, if
the area along the street will be served by the utilities installed in the
street.
   (B)   Sewer system service and water main service laterals. No sewer system
shall be hereafter constructed or extended unless service laterals to platted
lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously with
construction of mains.
   (C)   Waiver. The Council may waive the requirements of this section only if
it finds the effects thereof are burdensome and upon such notice and hearing as
the Council may deem necessary or proper.
(Prior Code, § 7.28) Penalty, see §
10.99
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND REMOVAL
§ 151.30 PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the primary responsibility of all owners of land abutting any
street or avenue to construct, reconstruct and maintain in good repair
sidewalks along any street or avenue in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.09)
§ 151.31 CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR SPECIFICATIONS.
   All construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks shall be done in
strict accordance with specifications on file in the office of the City
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 7.09)
§ 151.32 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of a street in all
areas of the city described herein with the exception of the specific
exemptions set forth in division (C) below. All of the sidewalks shall be at
least four feet in width and shall be constructed and located within the right-
of-way so the inside edge of the walk shall be one foot from the abutting
property line.
   (A)   Residential and business districts.
      (1)   Lots that abut on a public street and are located and developed
residential and commercial districts of the city, and upon which sidewalks have
already been constructed shall be required to have missing sidewalks
constructed, and broken, deteriorated or otherwise damaged sidewalks repaired
and reconstructed. For purposes of this section, DEVELOPED shall be defined as
areas in which 50% of the lots in a given block have had structures built upon
and are ready for occupancy. However, the City Council may require that
sidewalks be constructed in those areas that do not meet the 50% development
rule so as to provide access to public buildings or in instances required by
the public need.
      (2)   Lots in newly annexed developed districts of the city that abut on
a public street upon which sidewalks are not already constructed shall be
required to have sidewalks constructed thereon within one year after annexation
unless the City Council determines that early construction is required to
protect the public safety and welfare due to the presence of unusual hazards in
a particular location.
      (3)   Any newly constructed residential or commercial buildings located
in a lot abutting on a public street upon which sidewalks, meeting city
specifications, are not already constructed, shall construct sidewalks within
120 calendar days after completion of the foundation walls; provided, the City
Administrator may grant an extension of up to eight months to allow for poor
weather conditions or other conditions beyond the owner’s control.
   (B)   Arterial and major collector streets. Regardless of the zoning
classification when the City Council deems such construction necessary to
safeguard the safety and welfare of the public, sidewalks shall be constructed
along all arterial and major collector streets. The Council may grant
exceptions to the provisions of this division (B) in the following general
instances; provided, however, that, any such exceptions shall require the
specific finding by the Council that construction of a sidewalk is not
necessary to safeguard the public safety and welfare. Generally, exceptions
would be major and secondary thoroughfares and arterial streets abutting:
      (1)   Agricultural zones;
      (2)   Cemetery;
      (3)   Fairgrounds;
      (4)   Parks larger than one acre;
      (5)   Vacant land extending outward to the city limits and not situated
between developed areas that could be expected to generate pedestrian traffic;
      (6)   Areas where property is located intermittently and the abutting
jurisdiction and the city so as to make impossible the construction of
continuing sidewalks for at least 500 feet; and
      (7)   Industrial zones where workers generally reach their place of
employment by motor vehicle.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   New sidewalks shall not be required to be constructed as follows:
         (a)   On any side of local streets unless sidewalk exists on more than
50% of the block and two or more houses abut and face on that side;
         (b)   On any side of minor collector streets unless sidewalk is
required under this section on 50% or more of that side of the two most
adjacent blocks of the same street;
         (c)   Any area contained in an active and improved sidewalk
improvement district or other compact neighborhood with limited access
specifically exempted by resolution adopted by majority vote of the Council;
         (d)   All properties on dead-end streets and cul-de-sacs shall be
exempt from construction of sidewalks unless two or more of the affected
property owner’s petition for installation of sidewalks; and
         (e)   When sidewalk construction is physically impracticable due to
the following circumstances:
            1.   Nature of terrain;
            2.   Insufficient right-of-way;
            3.   Insurmountable engineering problems;
            4.   Safety hazards that would arise by encouraging pedestrian
traffic in dangerous areas such as along railroad tracks; and
            5.   Specimen healthy trees of three inches and greater in diameter
would be substantially damaged.
      (2)   Upon the request by the property owner, the Council may grant
exemptions to the provisions of this subchapter upon specific finding that
construction of a sidewalk is not necessary to safeguard the public safety and
welfare.
      (3)   The City Administrator is hereby empowered to exempt properties
from the requirement that the sidewalk be constructed with the inside edge one
foot outside the property line when:
         (a)   To avoid taking specimen healthy trees or shrubs that cannot be
moved;
         (b)   Sidewalk alignment within a block would be different from
existing walks within the block;
         (c)   Insufficient right-of-way requires full use of the right-of-way;
and
         (d)   Severe grade problems would result.
      (4)   A lot or lots abut an unimproved (lacking curb and gutter) street
that is expected to be scheduled for improvement at some future date and when a
delay of construction to coincide with street construction would be advisable.
(Prior Code, § 7.09)
§ 151.33 CITY TO CONSTRUCT, RECONSTRUCT AND MAINTAIN SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   General. If required sidewalks are not constructed in accordance with
this subchapter, or whenever the city shall deem it necessary and expedient to
construct, build or repair any sidewalk, the city shall perform the
construction, reconstruction or maintenance and the cost thereof shall be
assessed to the abutting property owner as any other special assessment.
   (B)   Division of cost.
      (1)   In any instance where the city requires that a sidewalk abutting a
residential lot be constructed at a width greater than five feet, the cost of
the additional width shall be paid entirely by the city.
      (2)   In all other cases, the cost of construction, reconstruction or
maintenance of the sidewalk shall be shared and divided between the abutting
property owner and the city in accordance with the provisions of the local
improvement policy for the city set forth in §§
33.30 through
33.39 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7.09) (Ord. 34, Third Series, effective 7-25-1987)
§ 151.34 FAILURE OF OWNER TO RECONSTRUCT OR MAKE REPAIRS.
   If the owner of the abutting property fails to make repairs or accomplish
reconstruction as herein required, the City Administrator shall report the
failure to the Council and the Council may order the work to be done under its
direction and the cost thereof assessed to the abutting property owner as any
other special assessment.
(Prior Code, § 7.09)
§ 151.35 SIDEWALK REMOVAL.
   If application is made to remove a sidewalk, the Council, in its discretion,
may authorize the removal of same if good and sufficient cause is shown.
(Prior Code, § 7.09)
§ 151.36 DUTY TO INSPECT.
   In order to accomplish the purpose of this subchapter, it shall be the duty
of the City Administrator to inspect sidewalks within the city or cause the
same to be inspected under his or her direction.
(Prior Code, § 7.09)
VACATIONS OF STREETS OR PUBLIC GROUNDS
§ 151.50 PETITION.
   No public grounds or streets shall be vacated, except upon the petition
directed to the Council of a majority of the owners of property on the line of
the public grounds or streets residing within the city, payment of the initial
non-refundable filing fee as determined by the Council, and completion of the
procedure hereinafter specified. The petition shall set forth the reasons for
the desired vacation, accompanied by a plat of the public grounds or streets
proposed to be vacated, and the petition shall be verified by the oath of a
majority of the petitioners residing within the city. A petition for a vacation
of a street, alley or other public ground shall not be granted unless all of
the abutting owners and encumbrancers agree to execute utility easement
documents if required by the city.
(Prior Code, § 7.20) (Ord. 320, Third Series, effective 12-8-2011)
§ 151.51 ACTION ON PETITION.
   If, in the discretion of the Council, it is expedient that the matter be
proceeded with, it may order the petition filed for record with the City
Administrator, order a hearing on the petition and fix the time and place of
the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 7.20) (Ord. 320, Third Series, effective 12-8-2011)
§ 151.52 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The City Administrator shall give notice of the hearing by publication once
at least 15 days in advance of the hearing, and by mail to the last known
address of all of the owners of property on the line of the public grounds or
streets proposed to be vacated at least ten days in advance of the hearing, the
last known addresses to be obtained from the office of the County Auditor/
Treasurer. The notice shall state in brief the object of the hearing, the time,
place and purpose thereof, and the fact that the Council, or a board or
commission designated by it shall hear the testimony and examine the evidence
of the parties interested.
(Prior Code, § 7.20) (Ord. 320, Third Series, effective 12-8-2011)
§ 151.53 COUNCIL ACTION.
   The Council, after hearing the same, or upon the report of the Board or
Commission designated to hold the hearing, may, by resolution adopted by
unanimous vote of all members, declare the public grounds or streets vacated or
deny the petition. In granting a petition, the Council may reserve to the city
or to any utility an easement to continue maintaining facilities upon the
premises vacated. The resolution, if granting the petition, shall, upon payment
to the city of all expenses incurred, less the initial non-refundable filing
fee, be certified by the City Administrator and shall be filed for record and
duly recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 7.20) (Ord. 320, Third Series, effective 12-8-2011)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Purpose and intent
   
152.02   Jurisdiction and application
   
152.03   Plat approval required
   
152.04   Restrictions on filing and recording conveyances
   
152.05   Public street grants
   
152.06   Building permits
   
152.07   Plat review and charges
   
152.08   Definitions
   
152.09   Variances
   
152.10   Registered land surveys and conveyance by metes and bounds
   
152.11   Violations
Design Standards
   
152.25   Blocks
   
152.26   Lots
   
152.27   Roads, highways, streets and alleys
   
152.28   Easements
   
152.29   Public sites and open spaces
Plats; Submission Procedure and Data
   
152.40   Preliminary plat
   
152.41   Final plat
Basic Improvements
   
152.55   General
   
152.56   Street improvements
   
152.57   Sanitary sewer and water distribution improvements
   
152.58   Financing improvements
   
152.59   Public utilities
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to safeguard the best
interests of the city; to assist the subdivider in harmonizing his or her
interests with those of the city at large; to prevent piecemeal planning of
subdivisions, undesirable, disconnected patchwork of pattern and the poor
circulation of traffic; to correlate land subdivisions with the City
Comprehensive Plan, which provides a general plan for future community
development; to secure the rights of the public, with respect to public lands
and waters; to improve land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plats; and to discourage inferior development which might adversely affect
property values. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to make certain
regulations and requirements for the platting of land within the city pursuant
to the authority contained in M.S. Ch. 429, 462 and 505, as they may be amended
from time to time, which regulations the Council deems necessary for the
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 12.01) (Ord. 102, Third Series, effective 2-21-1991)
§ 152.02 JURISDICTION AND APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply to all land now lying within, and hereafter annexed
to, the city, and to unincorporated territory located within two miles of its
limits in any direction as provided by law. Except as herein otherwise
provided, this chapter shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land into two or more lots, tracts or other division of land for any
purpose, whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision,
rearrangement or re-platting of land or lots. This chapter shall further apply
to any parcel of land being subdivided, which includes an existing or future
public right-of-way or easement according to the Comprehensive Plan of the city
that has not been previously dedicated. This chapter shall not apply to the
subdivision or allocation of land as open space for common use by owners,
occupants or leaseholders.
(Prior Code, § 12.01) (Ord. 102, Third Series, effective 2-21-1991)
§ 152.03 PLAT APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No plat for a subdivision or part thereof within the application of this
chapter shall be prepared, presented for approval or approved, except as
prescribed herein. No such plat or any deed or other conveyance attempting to
convey land required to be platted shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s
office, nor shall it have any validity until the provisions of this chapter are
complied with.
(Prior Code, § 12.01) (Ord. 102, Third Series, effective 2-21-1991)
§ 152.04 RESTRICTIONS ON FILING AND RECORDING CONVEYANCES.
   (A)   After the effective date of this section, no conveyance of land to
which this chapter is applicable shall be filed or recorded if the land is
described in the conveyance by metes and bounds or by reference to an
unapproved registered land survey made after 4-21-1961, or to any unapproved
plat.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a conveyance of land if the land:
      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record on the date of adoption of this
section;
      (2)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior
to the date of adoption of this section;
      (3)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial zoned land of not
less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots
or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet in
width; or
      (4)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural zoned land of not
less than 20 acres and having a width of not less that 500 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots
or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet in
width.
   (C)   (1)   In any case in which compliance with this section will create an
unnecessary hardship and failure to comply would not interfere with the purpose
of this chapter in that the proposed lot or parcel described in the conveyance
is located in an area that is well established and developed, and no future
planning issues need be addressed or could be effectively dealt with given the
nature of existing land configuration and public improvements, the Council may,
upon written application of the owner thereof or his or her agent, waive the
compliance by adoption of a resolution to that effect, and the conveyance with
the accompanying resolution may then be filed or recorded in the County
Recorder’s office.
      (2)   The waiver may be subject to any reasonable requirements the
Council deems necessary to protect the public interest.
(Prior Code, § 12.01) (Ord. 102, Third Series, effective 2-21-1991) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 152.05 PUBLIC STREET GRANTS.
   No grant of a public street to the city by deed or otherwise shall be filed
without the specific approval of the Council by resolution or otherwise and the
approval accompanying or endorsed on the deed or conveyance.
(Prior Code, § 12.01) (Ord. 102, Third Series, effective 2-21-1991)
§ 152.06 BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building or zoning permits shall be issued by the city or other
governmental authority for the construction of any building, structure or
improvement to the land, or to any lot in a subdivision, as defined herein,
until all requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.
(Prior Code, § 12.01) (Ord. 102, Third Series, effective 2-21-1991)
§ 152.07 PLAT REVIEW AND CHARGES.
   (A)   All subdividers are hereby on notice that the Council will employ
qualified persons to check and verify surveys and plats hereafter filed for
approval, and to determine the suitability of the plat from the standpoint of
community planning. The persons shall make full reports of their findings to
the Planning Commission and Council.
   (B)   The Council may from time to time establish fees and charges for the
filing and reviewing of preliminary plats. In addition, the subdivider shall
reimburse the city for the cost of legal, profession and technical services
which are reasonably used by the city to examine the plat.
(Prior Code, § 12.01) (Ord. 102, Third Series, effective 2-21-1991)
§ 152.08 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The group of maps, charts and texts that make up the
comprehensive, long-range plan of the city.
   DESIGN STANDARDS. The specifications to land owners or subdividers for the
preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things
the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as rights-of-way,
blocks, easements and lots.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the
purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities, including, but not limited
to, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer
or drainage ways and gas lines.
   FINAL PLAT. A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all the requirements
of the city and in such form as required by the county for the purposes of
recording.
   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. Public land and open spaces in the city dedicated or
reserved for recreation purposes.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public or private right-of-way across a block or within a
block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the
installation of utility lines.
   PERCENTAGES OF GRADE. On street centerline, means the distance vertically
(up or down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet
of horizontal distance.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision
meeting requirements herein enumerated.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts made between private parties as to the
manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving
the physical and economic integrity of any given area.
   ROAD WIDTH. The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the road
right-of-way.
   STREET. A public right-of-way affording primary access of pedestrians and
vehicles abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, place or however otherwise
designated.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street used primarily to carry traffic between the
thoroughfare systems and minor residential streets or non-residential or non-
residential streets and designated as a major or minor collector in the
Comprehensive Plan of the city or by other action of the Council.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   STREET, MINOR. A street used primarily for access to abutting property and
designated as a local street in the Comprehensive Plan of the city or by other
action of the Council.
   STREET, THOROUGHFARE. One used for heavy traffic and designated as a major
or minor arterial street in the Comprehensive Plan of the city or by other
action of the Council.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest
in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same under this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION. The separation of an area, parcel or tract of land under single
ownership into two or more parcels, tracts, lots or long-term leasehold
interests of more than 20 years (including options to renew or other provisions
giving similar lessee rights) where the creation of the leasehold interest
necessitates the creation of streets, roads, alleys or other easements or
rights for access or essential
utilities to the leasehold, for residential, commercial, industrial or other
use or combination thereof, except those separations:
      (1)   Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests will be
20 acres or larger in size and 500 feet in width for residential and
agricultural uses, and five acres or larger in size for commercial and
industrial uses;
      (2)   Creating cemetery lots;
      (3)   Resulting from court orders, or the adjustment of an improperly
located lot line by the relocation thereof; and
      (4)   Resulting from the leasing of residential apartments or commercial
space when the same is part of an existing structure or building.
   TANGENT. A straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve
where a tangent meets a curve.
   VERTICAL CURVE. The surface curvature on a road or highway centerline
located between lines of different percentage of grade.
(Prior Code, § 12.02) (Ord. 102, Third Series, effective 2-21-1991; Ord. 103,
Third Series, effective 3-7-1991; Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1995)
§ 152.09 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may recommend a variance from the provisions
of this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict
compliance. In recommending any variance, the Commission shall prescribe any
conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the protection of the
public interest. In making its findings, as required herein below, the Planning
Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and
the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or
work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be
granted unless the Planning Commission finds:
      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner; and
      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which property is
situated.
   (B)   Plats located outside the city limits may be considered for variance
from §§
152.55 through
152.59 of this chapter, when the variance is not in conflict with the city’s
Capital Improvement Program or future utility extensions will not be made to
the site.
(Prior Code, § 12.20) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975; Ord. 180, New
Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 152.10 REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS AND CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.
   (A)   Registered land surveys. It is the intention of this chapter that all
registered land surveys within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be
presented to the Planning Commission in the form of a preliminary plat in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter for preliminary plats
and that the Planning Commission shall first approve the arrangement, sizes and
relationship of proposed tracts in the registered land surveys, and that tracts
to be used as easements or streets should be so dedicated. Unless the approvals
have been obtained from the Planning Commission and Council in accordance with
the standards set forth in this chapter, building permits will be withheld for
buildings on tracts which have been so subdivided by registered land surveys,
and the city may refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads or to improve,
repair or maintain any such tracts unless so approved.
   (B)   Conveyance by metes and bounds. No conveyance may be made of any
parcel or tract in which the land conveyed is described by metes and bounds or
to an unapproved survey or unapproved plat, unless the conveyance of the parcel
is specifically exempted from the provisions of this chapter as noted in §§
152.01 through
152.07 of this chapter or a variance is obtained under §
152.09 of this chapter. Neither the city nor the county or the affected
township, if applicable, shall issue any building permit or zoning permit for
construction of buildings or other improvements on such parcels or tracts which
have been subdivided and conveyed in violation of this chapter and subdivision.
Hereafter, no public utility or governmental entity shall construct an
improvement upon land affected by this chapter unless located within clearly
noted and designated right-of-way or easement on an approved plat, or filed
prior to the effective date of this subdivision, or has otherwise been approved
by the Council. The County Recorder is hereby given notice and instructed to
deny the recording of any such conveyance in violation of the provisions of
this chapter and this section. The prohibitions contained herein are made under
the provisions of M.S. § 462.358, as it may be amended from time to time, and
shall be governed in accordance with the provisions therein.
(Prior Code, § 12.30) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975; Ord. 102,
Third Series, effective 2-21-1991)
§ 152.11 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats. It is unlawful to sell, trade or
offer to sell or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of or in
conformity with any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located
within the jurisdiction of this chapter unless the plan, plat or replat shall
have first been recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   (B)   Receiving and recording unapproved plats. It is unlawful to receive or
record in any public office any plans, plats or replats of land laid out in
building lots and highways, streets, roads, alleys or other portions of the
same intended to be dedicated to public or private use or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto and located within
the jurisdiction of this chapter, unless the same shall bear thereon, by
endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the Council.
   (C)   Misrepresentation as to construction, supervision or inspection of
improvements. It is unlawful for any subdivider, person, firm or corporation
owning an addition or subdivision of land within the city to represent that any
improvement upon any of the highways, streets or alleys of the addition or
subdivision or any sewer in the addition or subdivision has been constructed
according to the plans and specifications approved by the Council or has been
supervised or inspected by the city when the improvements have not been so
constructed, supervised or inspected.
(Prior Code, § 12.40) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975) Penalty, see
§
10.99
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.25 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Block length. In general, intersecting streets and roads, determining
block lengths, shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross-traffic
adequately and to meet existing streets and roads. Where no existing plats
control, the blocks in residential subdivisions shall normally not exceed 1,320
feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justifies a
departure from this maximum. In blocks longer than 800 feet, pedestrian ways
and/or easements through the block may be required near the center of the
block. Blocks for business or industrial use should normally not exceed 600
feet in length.
   (B)   Block width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to
allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or
industrial use shall be of a width as to be considered most suitable for their
respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries.
(Prior Code, § 12.10) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975)
§ 152.26 LOTS.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, lot width and lot depths shall conform to the
requirements of existing zoning districts in which the plat is situated as
required by Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances. Those plats within the two-mile
jurisdiction of this chapter, but governed by the county’s Zoning Ordinance,
shall meet the lot requirements of the county’s Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to permit
appropriate building setback from both roads as required by Ch. 154 of this
code of ordinances.
   (C)   Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to road or
street lines or radial to curved road or street lines.
   (D)   Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except where lots back on a
highway or other arterial road, or where topographic or other conditions render
subdividing otherwise unreasonable. The double frontage lots shall have an
additional depth of at least ten feet in order to allow space for screen
planting along the back lot line.
   (E)   Every lot must have the minimum required frontage on a public
dedicated road or street other than an alley.
   (F)   (1)   Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots intended
for residential use and shall not be less than the setback required by Ch. 154
of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   On those lots which are intended for business or industrial use,
the setback shall not be less than the setback required by Ch. 154 of this code
of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 12.10) (Ord. 180, New Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 152.27 ROADS, HIGHWAYS, STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   The arrangement of highways shall conform as nearly as possible to the
city’s Comprehensive Plan. Except for cul-de-sacs, roads and streets normally
shall connect with roads and streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent
subdivisions, or provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided
tracts, or shall be a reasonable projection of roads in the nearest subdivided
tracts. The arrangement of highways shall be considered in its relation to the
reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to run-off or
storm water, to public convenience and safety and in its appropriate relation
to the proposed use of the area to be served.
   (B)   Local roads and streets should be so planned as to discourage their
use by non-local traffic. Dead-end streets and roads shall be prohibited, but
cul-de-sacs will be permitted where topography or other conditions justify
their use. Cul-de-sacs shall normally not be longer than 500 feet, including a
terminal turn-around which shall be provided at the closed end, with an outside
curb radius of at least 50 feet and a right-of-way radius of not less than 60
feet.
   (C)   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned
or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed
future street and road system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared
and submitted by the subdivider.
   (D)   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or
parcels, the lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical
location and openings of future roads and appropriate resubdivision, with
provision for adequate utility connections for the resubdivision.
   (E)   Under normal conditions, roads shall be laid out as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other conditions
justify variations. Under normal conditions, the minimum angle of intersection
of roads shall be 70 degrees. Road intersection jogs with an offset of less
than 125 feet shall be avoided.
   (F)   Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to the
right-of-way of a highway, provision shall be made for a marginal access street
or road approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of the right-of-
way, or for a road at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land
between the road and right-of-way. The distance shall be determined with due
consideration for the minimum distance required for approach connections to
future grade separations or for lot depths.
   (G)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts;
except that, this requirement may be waived where other definite and assured
provision is made for service access, such as on-site loading, unloading and
parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Except where
justified by special conditions, such as the continuation of an existing alley
in the same block, alleys will not be approved in residential districts.
Alleys, where provided, shall not be less than 20 feet wide. Dead-end alleys
shall be avoided wherever possible, but if unavoidable, the dead-end alleys may
be approved if adequate turn-around facilities are provided at the closed end.
   (H)   Dedication of half streets or roads will not be approved, except where
it is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and in
conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, where it is found
that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided, or where it becomes necessary to acquire the
remaining half by condemnation so that it may be improved in the public
interest.
   (I)   (1)   For all public ways hereafter dedicated and accepted, the
minimum right-of-way widths for streets and thoroughfares shall be as shown in
the city’s Comprehensive Plan, and where not shown therein, the minimum right-
of-way width for streets, roads, highways, alleys or pedestrian ways included
in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for each
classification as follows:
 
Alleys                        20 feet
Collector streets             60 feet
Marginal service access roads 50 feet
Minor streets                 60 feet
Pedestrian ways               10 feet
Thoroughfares                 80 feet
 
      (2)   Where the existing or anticipated traffic on thoroughfares warrants
greater widths of right-of-way, these shall be required.
   (J)   (1)   The grades in all streets, thoroughfares and alleys in any
subdivision shall not be greater than the maximum grades for each
classification as follows:
 
Alleys            8%
Collector streets 8%
Minor streets     8%
Thoroughfares     5%
 
      (2)   In addition, there shall be a minimum grade on all streets of not
less than 0.005%.
   (K)   (1)   The horizontal and vertical alignment standards on all streets
and thoroughfares shall be as follows.
         (a)   Horizontal, radii of centerline. There shall be a tangent
between all reversed curves of a length in relation to the radii of the curves
so as to provide for a smooth flow of traffic:
 
Collector streets 300 feet
Minor streets     100 feet
Thoroughfares     500 feet
 
         (b)   Vertical. All changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical parabolic curves in such length as follows:
 
Collector streets or minor streets 50-foot minimum
Thoroughfares                      150-foot minimum
 
   (L)   All proposed streets or roads shall be offered for dedication as
public rights-of-way. No private streets or roads shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 12.10)
§ 152.28 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   An easement for utilities at least six feet wide shall be provided
along the side line of lots and/or the rear line of lots where necessary to
form a continuous right-of-way, at least 12 feet in width. If necessary for the
extension of main water or sewer lines or similar utilities, easements of
greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots.
   (B)   Utility easements shall connect with easements established in
adjoining properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be
changed without the approval of the Council, by ordinance, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the outside
of turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior
angle so that pole guys will fall along side lot lines.
   (D)   Where a subdivision contains or is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage way, channel, lake or stream, a storm water easement, drainage right-
of-way or park dedication, whichever the Planning Commission may deem the most
adequate, conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse, shall be
provided, together with such further width or construction or both as will be
adequate for the storm water drainage of the area. The width of the easements
shall be determined by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 12.10)
§ 152.29 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   (A)   (1)   In subdividing land or resubdividing an existing plat, due
consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the dedication or reservation
of suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, conservation areas or other
public or semi-public recreational areas or open spaces. Areas so dedicated or
reserved shall conform as nearly as possible to the city’s Comprehensive Plan.
All areas to be reserved for or dedicated to public use shall be indicated on
the preliminary plat in order that it may be determined when and in what manner
the areas will be dedicated to or acquired by the appropriate agency. It shall
be required that the subdivider of residential areas dedicate to the city the
following land for use as the city shall see fit; except that, the city may not
sell the lands for building sites to any private party:
 
Subdivisions of up to 50 acres   5% of the platted area
Additional acreage over 50 acres 2% of the platted area
 
      (2)   The dedicated area may be taken in one or more parcels at the
discretion of the city and must be acceptable to the city in respect to
dimension, location and topography.
   (B)   (1)   If, in the judgment of the Council, the area proposed to be
dedicated is not suitable or desirable for park/playground purposes, because of
the location, size or other reason, the Council may require, in lieu of land
dedication, a payment to the city of a sum equal to the percentage listed above
of the average value of the land to be subdivided. The aforementioned value
shall be the value of the land upon approval of the preliminary plat, yet prior
to the installation of improvements, and shall be determined jointly by the
Council or its agent and the subdivider-developer.
      (2)   If the Council and subdivider-developer cannot agree on the land
value, then the land values shall be established on the basis of the average of
two independent appraisals by professional appraisers, one chosen by the
Council and one by the subdivider-developer.
   (C)   Those areas under the jurisdiction of this chapter, but not under the
direct governing authority of the city, shall be required to allow for adequate
open space areas also. All dedications shall be made to the county or adequate
provisions made to ensure maintenance of any park areas. The dedications shall
be in accordance with the above listed percentages.
(Prior Code, § 12.10) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975; Ord. 180, New
Series, effective 1-19-1979)
PLATS; SUBMISSION PROCEDURE AND DATA
§ 152.40 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   Approval of the Planning Commission.
         (a)   The subdivider-developer shall engage a qualified land planner,
registered land surveyor or engineer to prepare a preliminary plat of the area
to be subdivided.
         (b)   The subdivider-developer shall review proposed utility easements
with utility companies and submit letters thereof from each company.
         (c)   The subdivider-developer shall submit ten or more copies of the
preliminary plat to the City Administrator, at least seven days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting for initial consideration. The subdivider-developer
shall include a written statement along with the preliminary plat describing
the proposed subdivision. The written statement shall include the anticipated
development schedule, a table showing total number of lots and sizes,
utilization of existing natural features and vegetation and the like.
         (d)   The City Administrator shall submit one copy of the preliminary
plat to the Planning Commission, one copy to the Engineer, one copy to the
County Engineer if the plat borders a county road, one copy to the District
Engineer of the state’s Highway Department if the plat borders a federal, state
or state-aid highway and one copy to the county’s Zoning Administrator.
         (e)   All agencies receiving copies of the preliminary plat shall
transmit a report of their reaction together with any supporting material to
the Planning Commission prior to the meeting at which such plat is to be
considered. The subdivider-developer shall be required to pay the cost of the
services.
         (f)   The Planning Commission may require qualified technical and
staff review of the preliminary plat regarding general planning; conformity
with the plans of other private and public organizations and agencies; adequacy
of proposed water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and flood control; special
assessment procedures and other features. The subdivider-developer shall be
required to pay the cost of the services.
         (g)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
preliminary plat within 45 days of its filing date, and the City Administrator
will public notice of the time and place thereof in the official newspaper and
send notice to property owners abutting the exterior boundary of the proposed
plat. Notices will be made at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing. A
Planning Commission meeting may serve as a public hearing provided the legal
requirements pertaining to the same are met.
         (h)   At the public hearing, the subdivider-developer and all
interested persons shall have the opportunity to be heard. The Commission shall
then prepare a report recommending approval, disapproval or approval with
conditions and submit it to the Council along with a copy being sent to the
subdivider-developer within 15 days of the public hearing. In case the plat is
disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified of the reason for such action and
what requirements will be necessary to meet the approval of the Planning
Commission.
      (2)   Approval of the Council. After review and approval of the
preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, the preliminary plat, together
with the recommendations of the Planning Commission, shall be submitted to the
Council for consideration. Approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat will
be conveyed to the subdivider in writing within ten days after the meeting of
the Council at which the plat was considered. In case the plat is disapproved,
the subdivider shall be notified of the reason for the action and what
requirements will be necessary to meet the approval of the Council. The
approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute an acceptance of the
subdivision, but is deemed to be an authorization to proceed with the final
plat. This approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of
two years, unless an extension is granted by the Council. The subdivider may
file a final plat limited to the portion of the preliminary plat which he or
she proposes to record and develop at the time; provided that, the portion must
conform to all requirements of this chapter. If some portion of the final plat
has not been submitted for approval within this period, a preliminary plat must
again be submitted to the Planning Commission and the Council for approval.
   (B)   Data required. The subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary
plat as follows, together with any necessary supplementary information:
      (1)   Filing. Ten copies of a preliminary plat of any proposed
subdivision shall be filed with the Planning Commission;
      (2)   Contents. The preliminary plat shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   Proposed name of subdivision; names shall not duplicate or too
closely resemble names of existing subdivisions;
         (b)   Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section,
quarter section or quarter-quarter section lines comprising a legal description
of the property;
         (c)   Names and addresses of the subdivider and the designer making
the plat;
         (d)   Graphic scale of plat, not less than one inch to 100 feet;
         (e)   Date and north point; and
         (f)   Existing conditions:
            1.   Location, width and name of each existing or platted street or
other public way, railroad, utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open
spaces, and permanent buildings, within or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision;
            2.   All existing sewers, water mains, gas mains, culverts, power
or communication cables or other underground installations within the proposed
subdivision or immediately adjacent thereto; and
            3.   All drainage ways, floodplain areas and zoning in relation to
the plat shall be indicated on the preliminary plat or in a narrative
statement.
         (g)   Proposed development.
            1.   The location and width of proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian
ways and easements;
            2.   The location and character of all proposed public utility
lines, including sewers (storm and sanitary), water, gas and power lines;
            3.   Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots and blocks;
            4.   Location and size of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches or
school sites, or other special uses of land to be considered for dedication to
public use or to be reserved by deed of covenant for the use of all property
owners in the subdivision and any conditions of the dedication or reservation;
            5.   Building setback lines with dimensions;
            6.   Indication of any lots on which a use other than residential
is proposed by the subdivider;
            7.   The zoning districts, if any, on and adjacent to the tract;
            8.   Existing topography, with contour intervals of not more than
five feet, related to United States Geological Survey datum; also, the location
of watercourses, ravines, bridges, lakes, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcroppings, approximate acreage and other such features as may be pertinent
to the subdivision;
            9.   Vicinity sketch, at a legible scale, to show the relation of
the plat to its surroundings; and
            10.   Two copies of profiles for each proposed street and road,
showing existing grades and proposed approximate grades and gradients on the
centerline. The location of proposed culverts and bridges shall also be shown.
      (3)   Supplementary requirements. Upon request of the Planning
Commission, supplementary information shall be submitted; the supplementary
information may include the following:
         (a)   Two copies of profiles for each proposed street and road,
showing existing grades and proposed approximate grades and gradients on the
centerline. The location of proposed culverts and bridges shall also be known;
         (b)   Proposed surface drainage diagrams for lots in the form of
arrows, proposed contours or other appropriate method; and
         (c)   Soil tests and reports, as specified by the City Engineer, by an
approved soils laboratory.
(Prior Code, § 12.15) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975; Ord. 180, New
Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 152.41 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Procedure. After the preliminary plat has been approved, the final
plat may be submitted for approval as follows.
      (1)   Approval of the Planning Commission.
         (a)   The final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Commission at
least seven days prior to a Planning Commission meeting at which consideration
is requested.
         (b)   Approval or disapproval of the final plat will be conveyed to
the subdivider in writing within ten days after the meeting of the Planning
Commission at which the plat was considered.
         (c)   In case the plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall be
notified of the reason for the action and what requirements shall be necessary
to meet the approval of the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Approval of the Council. After review and approval of the final
plat by the Planning Commission, the final plat, together with the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, shall be submitted to the Council
for approval. If accepted, the final plat shall be approved by resolution,
which resolution shall provide for the acceptance of all streets, alleys,
easement or other public ways, and parks, or other open spaces dedicated to
public purposes. If disapproved, the ground for any refusal to approve a plat
shall be set forth in the proceedings of the Council and reported to the
subdivider applying for the approval.
   (B)   Data required. The subdivider shall submit a final plat together with
any necessary supplementary information:
      (1)   Filing. Ten copies of a final plat shall be filed with the Planning
Commission;
      (2)   Contents. The final plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall be
prepared in accordance with provisions of state statutes and shall be uniform
in size, measuring 20 inches by 30 inches from outer edge to outer edge and as
required below:
         (a)   Names of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too
closely approximate the name of any existing subdivision;
         (b)   Location by section, township, range, county and state, and
including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate
traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must mathematically close.
The allowable error of closure on any portion of a final plat shall be one foot
in 7,500;
         (c)   The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the
final plat. Locations of the monuments shall be shown in reference to existing
official monuments or the nearest established road lines, including true angles
and distances to the reference points or monuments. Permanent markers shall be
placed at each corner of every block or portion or a block, points of curvature
and points of tangency on road lines and at each angle point on the boundary of
the subdivision. A permanent marker shall be deemed to be a steel rod or pipe,
one-half inch or larger in diameter extending at least three feet below the
finished grade. In situations where conditions prohibit the placing of markers
in the locations prescribed above, offset markers will be permitted. The exact
location of all markers shall be shown on the final plat, together with
accurate interior angles, bearings and distances. Permanent monuments shall be
placed at all quarter section points within the subdivision or on its
perimeter;
         (d)   Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and
other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the
length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information
necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown. Dimensions shall
be shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines;
         (e)   Lots shall be numbered clearly. If blocks are to be numbered or
lettered, these shall be shown clearly in the center of the block;
         (f)   The exact locations, widths and names of all streets to be
dedicated;
         (g)   Location and width of all easements to be dedicated;
         (h)   Building setback lines on front and side streets with
dimensions;
         (i)   Name and address of subdivider and surveyor making the plat;
         (j)   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically and in feet per
inch), date and north point;
         (k)   Statement dedicating all easements as follows: easements for
installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved
over, under and along the strips marked “utility easements”;
         (l)   Statement dedicating all highways, streets, alleys and other
public areas not previously dedicated as follows: streets, alleys and other
public areas shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use are
hereby so dedicated; and
         (m)   Statement establishing building setback lines as follows:
building setback lines are hereby established as shown on the accompanying
plat, and no building or portion thereof shall be built between this line and
the street line.
      (3)   Filing fee. The final plat shall be accompanied by a fee as
established by the Council. The fees to be used for the expense of the city in
connection with the review, inspection, approval or disapproval of the plat
which may thereafter be submitted;
      (4)   Certifications required.
         (a)   Notarized certification by owner and by any mortgage holder of
record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets, roads and
other public areas;
         (b)   Notarized certification by a registered land surveyor to the
effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or her and that monuments
and markers shown therein exist as located and that all dimensional and
geodetic details are correct;
         (c)   Certification showing that all taxes and special assessments due
on the property have been paid in full, if requested by the Council; and
         (d)   Space for certification of approval to be filled in by the
signatures of the Chairperson of the Planning Commission and the Mayor.
            1.   The form of approval by the Planning Commission is as follows:
 
Approved by the Luverne City Planning Commission this                    day of                             , 20        .
 
Signed:                                                                                   
Chairperson
 
Attest:                                                                                     
Secretary
 
 
            2.   The form of approval of the city is as follows:
 
Approved by the City of Luverne, Minnesota, this                       day of                                  , 20        .
 
Signed:                                                                                   
Mayor
 
Attest:                                                                                     
City Administrator
 
 
      (5)   Supplementary. Supplementary documents and information may be
required as follows:
         (a)   A complete set of street profiles showing grade lines as
constructed; and
         (b)   Copies of any private restrictions affecting the subdivision or
any part thereof.
      (6)   County/city recording and filing. Recording and filing of final
plat with the county and the city shall be as follows.
         (a)   Upon completion of the requirements above and notation to the
effect upon the final plat, it shall be deemed to have final approval and shall
be properly signed by the appropriate officials as required by state statutes
and may be filed by the applicant in the County Recorder’s office. A final plat
not so filed and recorded within 90 days of the date upon which the plat is
approved shall become null and void, unless the particular circumstances of the
applicant warrants the Council to grant an extension which all not exceed 180
days.
         (b)   The subdivider shall furnish the City Administrator with one
Mylar copy and five prints of the recorded final plat showing evidence of the
recording.
(Prior Code, § 12.15) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975; Ord. 180, New
Series, effective 1-19-1979)
BASIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 152.55 GENERAL.
   (A)   Before a final plat is approved by the Council, the subdivider of the
land covered by the plat shall execute and submit to the Council an agreement,
which shall be binding on his, her or their heirs, personal representatives and
assigns, that he or she will cause no private construction to be made on the
plat or file or cause to be filed any application for building permits for the
construction until all improvements required under this chapter have been made
or arranged for in the manner following as respects the highways, roads or
streets to which the lots sought to be constructed have access.
   (B)   No final plat shall be approved by the Council without first receiving
a report from the City Engineer or other engineer retained by the Council
certifying that the improvements described herein, together with the agreements
and documents herein, meet the minimum requirements of applicable city code
provisions.
   (C)   Steel monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points,
points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shown on the final
plat. All United States, state, county or other official benchmarks, monuments
or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position.
   (D)   No plat shall be approved for any subdivision which covers an area
within the floodplain unless the subdivider:
      (1)   Agrees to meet all floodplain zoning provisions and other
floodplain regulations;
      (2)   Makes improvements which will assure that each lot contains a
flood-free site for location of a dwelling;
      (3)   Designs roads so that the finished surface is not more than two
feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (4)   Locates or designs public utilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems to provide protection to the regulatory flood protection
elevation; and
      (5)   Files restrictive deed covenants to provide that the floodplain
areas be left essentially in the state shown on the plat and that no
improvements be made in the floodplain areas in violation of §§
153.075 through
153.089 of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   All the required improvements to be installed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be inspected during the course of their construction by the
City Engineer or other engineer retained by the Council. All the inspection
costs pursuant thereto shall be paid by the subdivider or individual lot or
tract owners.
(Prior Code, § 12.25) (Ord. 180, New Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 152.56 STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded, including the
subgrade of the areas to be paved, in accordance with standards and
specifications for road construction as approved by the Council.
   (B)   All streets to be improved with pavement in accordance with the
standards and specifications for street construction as approved by the
Council.
   (C)   All streets to be paved shall be of an overall width in accordance
with the standards and specifications for street construction as approved by
the Council.
   (D)   Curb and gutter shall be constructed as required by the standards and
specifications for street construction as approved by the Council.
   (E)   Trees shall be planted in conformance with the standards and
specifications as approved by the Council.
   (F)   Street signs of the standard design approved by the Council shall be
installed at each street intersection.
   (G)   Sidewalks, as required by city code.
(Prior Code, § 12.25) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975; Ord. 117,
Third Series, effective 12-12-1991)
§ 152.57 SANITARY SEWER AND WATER DISTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Sanitary sewers shall be installed as required by standards and
specifications as approved by the Council. Where city sanitary sewer is not
available for extension into the proposed subdivision, the Council may, by
ordinance, grant a franchise for the sewers to serve all properties in the
subdivision where a complete and adequate community sanitary sewer system and
plant are designed in conjunction with the subdivision, and complete plans for
the system and plant are submitted to and approved by the Council, the state’s
Pollution Control Agency and the state’s Board of Health before construction.
   (B)   Public water facilities, including pipe fittings, hydrants and the
like, shall be installed as required by standards and specifications as
approved by the Council. Where city water facilities are not available for
extension into the proposed subdivision, the Council may, by ordinance, grant a
franchise for the water facilities, to serve all properties within a
subdivision where a complete and adequate community water distribution system
is designed in conjunction with the subdivision, and complete plans for the
system are submitted to and approved by the Council and the state’s Board of
Health before construction.
   (C)   Storm sewers, culverts, storm water inlets and other drainage
facilities will be required where they are necessary to ensure adequate storm
water drainage for the subdivision. Where required, the drainage facilities
shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications for
street construction as approved by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 12.25) (Ord. 149, New Series, effective 1-17-1975; Ord. 180, New
Series, effective 1-19-1979)
§ 152.58 FINANCING IMPROVEMENTS.
   Improvements required in §§
152.56 and
152.57 of this chapter and any other costs as determined by the city that are
associated with or required by the development shall be paid for and financed
by any one or any combination of the following:
   (A)   Directly and completely by the developer;
   (B)   By petition for special assessment by the city and under such terms
and conditions as the city may require to assure payment of the assessment when
due. When the Council makes a specific determination and finding that a need
exists for development of certain types of lots and further that the
development would not likely occur under existing market conditions, the
Council may enter into a written contract with a developer under the terms and
conditions as the Council deems appropriate to protect the public interest
including, but not limited to, the deferment of assessments and interest
thereon but in no event for a period exceeding five years; and
   (C)   Furnish a bond to the city for an amount equivalent to 150% of the
cost of the improvements as determined by the City Engineer or an Engineer
retained by the Council, which bond shall comply with the following.
      (1)   The term of the bond shall be six years. In the event the
improvements specified in §§
152.56 and
152.57 of this chapter are not completed within five years from the date of the
bond, then, at that time, the bond shall be forfeited and the Council shall be
authorized to place the improvements in the entire subdivision and to pay for
these improvements from the bond proceeds.
      (2)   The bond shall be non-cancelable unless the Council formally
accepts all improvements upon installation as required and authorizes bond
cancellation.
      (3)   The petition and special assessment procedure detailed above shall
not apply to improvements in the subject subdivision, when this bonding
provision is utilized.
      (4)   This procedure shall not apply to subdivisions of less than 25
lots.
      (5)   Lots may be sold prior to the installation of all improvements
throughout the subdivision provided that the approval of the Council is
received prior to the sale of each lot. Approval of the sale by the Council may
be given only if all improvements required in §
152.57 of this chapter have been made to the lots being sold. A contract
secured by a cash deposit, certified check or a bond in an amount and with
surety and conditions satisfactory to the Council shall be filed and accepted
by the Council to guarantee that the improvements required in §
152.56 of this chapter are made to the lots being sold within one year of the
sale of those lots.
(Prior Code, § 12.25) (Ord. 117, Third Series, effective 12-12-1991)
§ 152.59 PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   (A)   All utility lines for telephone and electric service shall be placed
in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles. To serve these lines,
connections may be made on lot lines, providing an easement covering same is
filed.
   (B)   Where telephone, electric and/or gas service lines are to be placed
underground entirely, conduits or cables shall be placed within easements or
dedicated public ways in such a manner so as not to conflict with other
underground services. All drainage and other underground utility installations
which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements.
(Prior Code, § 12.25) (Ord. 149, Third Series, effective 1-17-1975; Ord. 102,
Third Series, effective 2-21-1991)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Purpose and intent
   
153.002   Scope, jurisdiction and interpretation
   
153.003   Code Official; powers and duties
   
153.004   Permits
   
153.005   Reviews and approvals
   
153.006   Enforcement
   
153.007   Certificate of occupancy
   
153.008   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement Generally
   
153.020   Variances and appeals
   
153.021   Amendments
   
153.022   Zoning Map
   
153.023   District boundaries
   
153.024   Annexations
Conditional Use Permits
   
153.035   Application
   
153.036   Public hearing
   
153.037   Report to Council
   
153.038   Findings
   
153.039   Fees
   
153.040   Compliance
   
153.041   Conditional use expiration
Districts and Uses
   
153.055   Residential uses
   
153.056   Commercial uses
   
153.057   Downtown
   
153.058   Allowable projections into yards
   
153.059   Landscaping requirements
   
153.060   Limited industrial
   
153.061   Special industry district
   
153.062   Industrial reserve
   
153.063   Public district
   
153.064   Agricultural district
Floodplain District
   
153.075   Purpose and intent
   
153.076   Statutory authorization
   
153.077   Application
   
153.078   Official Zoning Map
   
153.079   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
153.080   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.081   Definitions
   
153.082   Floodplain District establishment
   
153.083   Floodplain District (FP)
   
153.084   Floodplain evaluations in areas without detailed study
   
153.085   Land subdivisions
   
153.086   Public utilities, railroads, roads and bridges
   
153.087   Manufactured (mobile) homes, manufactured home parks and recreational
vehicles
   
153.088   Administration
   
153.089   Non-conforming uses
Planned Unit Development District
   
153.100   Purpose
   
153.101   Requirements
   
153.102   Procedure
Off-Street Parking
   
153.115   General
   
153.116   Parking space requirements
   
153.117   Parking stall dimensions
   
153.118   Design of parking facilities
Loading and Unloading Areas
   
153.130   Loading and unloading
   
153.131   Central Business District special requirements
   
153.132   Payment in lieu of private on-site parking
Sign Regulations
   
153.145   Purpose
   
153.146   Definitions
   
153.147   General provisions
   
153.148   Exempt signs
   
153.149   Prohibited signs
   
153.150   Permits
   
153.151   Specific identification sign requirements
   
153.152   Temporary signs
   
153.153   Specific sign types
   
153.154   Signs in development complexes
   
153.155   Sign images
Supplementary Regulations
   
153.170   Sewer and water systems
   
153.171   Extraction of materials and minerals; open pits and impounding of
waters
   
153.172   Performance standards
   
153.173   Grading and excavation regulations
   
153.174   Additional requirements, exceptions and modifications
   
153.175   Fences
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses and Structures
   
153.190   Intent
   
153.191   Non-conforming lots of record
   
153.192   Non-conforming uses of land
   
153.193   Non-conforming uses of structures
   
153.194   Non-conforming structures
Cannabis Businesses
   
153.200   Cannabis business minimum buffer requirements
   
153.201   Zoning and land use for cannabis businesses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the health, property and public
welfare by controlling the design, location, use or occupancy of all buildings
and structures through the regulated and orderly development of land and land
uses within the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 153.002 SCOPE, JURISDICTION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction,
addition, alteration, moving, repair and use of any building, structure, parcel
of land or sign within a jurisdiction, except work located primarily in a
public way, public utility towers and poles, and public utilities unless
specifically mentioned in this chapter.
      (2)   Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter
specify different requirements, the more restrictive shall govern. Where there
is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the
specific requirement shall be applicable.
      (3)   In fulfilling these purposes, this chapter is intended to benefit
the public as a whole and not a specific person or class of persons. Although,
through the implementation, administration and enforcement of this chapter,
benefits and detriments will be enjoyed or suffered by specific individuals,
such is merely a byproduct of the overall benefit to the whole community.
Therefore, unintentional breaches of the obligations of administration and
enforcement imposed on the jurisdiction hereby shall not be enforceable in
tort.
      (4)   If any portion of this chapter is held invalid for any reason, the
remaining herein shall not be effected.
   (B)   Existing buildings and uses. Lawfully established buildings and uses
in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to
have their existing use or occupancy continued; provided, the continued use is
not dangerous to life.
   (C)   Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs
shall be permitted to be made to any building or use without requiring the
existing building or use to comply with the requirements of this chapter;
provided, the addition, alteration or repair conforms to that required for a
new building or use.
   (D)   Maintenance. All buildings or uses, both existing and new, and all
parts thereof, shall be maintained. The owner or designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the buildings and parcels of land. To
determine compliance with this section, the Code Official shall be permitted to
cause any structure or use to be inspected.
   (E)   Moved or temporary buildings, structures and uses.
      (1)   Buildings or structures moved into or within the city shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter for new buildings and structures.
      (2)   Temporary buildings, structures and uses such as reviewing stands
and other miscellaneous structures, sheds, canopies or fences used for
protection of the public shall be permitted to be erected; provided, a special
approval is received from the Code Official for a limited period of time.
Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely removed upon the
expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.
   (F)   Illegal uses. Uses that were illegally established prior to adoption
of this chapter shall remain illegal.
   (G)   Interpretations.
      (1)   The interpretation and application of the provisions of this
chapter shall be by the Code Official. An appeal of an interpretation by the
Code Official shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustments and Appeals,
which, unless otherwise provided, are authorized to interpret the code and such
interpretation, shall be considered final.
      (2)   Uses are permitted within the various zones as described in this
chapter and as otherwise provided herein.
      (3)   It is recognized that all possible uses and variations of uses that
might arise cannot reasonably be listed or categorized. Mixed uses/sites or any
use not specifically mentioned or about which there is any question shall be
administratively classified by comparison with other uses identified in the
zones described in this chapter. If the proposed use resembles identified uses
in terms of intensity and character, and is consistent with the purpose of this
chapter and the individual zone’s classification, it shall be considered as a
permitted/non-permitted use within a general zone classification, subject to
the regulations for the use it most nearly resembles. If a use does not
resemble other identified allowable uses within the zone, it may be permitted
as determined by the hearing body in a public hearing as an amendment to this
chapter pursuant to §
153.020 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
§ 153.003 CODE OFFICIAL; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   General. This section establishes the duties and responsibilities for
the Zoning Code Official and other officials and agencies, with respect to the
administration of this chapter. The Zoning Code Official and/or designee shall
be referred to hereafter as “the Code Official”.
   (B)   Deputies. The Code Official may appoint such number of technical
officers and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. The Code
Official shall be permitted to deputize such employees as may be necessary to
carry out the function of this chapter.
   (C)   Liability.
      (1)   The Code Official, or designee, charged with enforcement of this
chapter, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
described in this chapter, shall not be personally liable for any damage that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act
or omission in the discharge of the duties. A suit brought against the Code
Official or employee because the act or omission performed by the Code Official
or employee in the enforcement of any provision of the codes or other pertinent
laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement agency shall be defended
by the city until final termination of the proceedings, and any judgments
resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the city.
      (2)   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or
parcel of land for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor
shall the enforcement agency or its jurisdiction be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of the reviews or permits issued under this chapter.
   (D)   Cooperation of other officials and officers. The Code Official shall
be authorized to request, and shall receive so far as required in the discharge
of the duties described in this chapter, the assistance and cooperation of
other officials of the city.
   (E)   Comprehensive Plan. The Code Official shall assist the Planning
Commission in the development and implementation of the Comprehensive Plan.
(Prior Code, § 11.03)
§ 153.004 PERMITS.
   It is unlawful for any person to hereafter erect, alter, wreck or move any
building or structure, or portions thereof, without first securing a building
and/or zoning permit as required.
   (A)   Penalties. It shall be a misdemeanor for any contractor, property
owner, tenant or other person to commence or constitute any work on any project
for which a zoning permit is required and for which no permit has been granted
by the city or the permit has been cancelled or a stop work order issued.
   (B)   Required permits. A zoning permit shall be required prior to
construction, repair, or alteration of structures regulated by the Minnesota
State Building Code, driveways, sidewalks, patio slabs, fences, decks, steps,
porches and storage sheds. A zoning permit shall not be required for
construction, repair, or alteration of swing sets, play equipment or structures
used exclusively for providing shelter for pets.
   (C)   Fees. A fee for service shall be charged. All fees shall be set by the
City Council and a schedule shall be made available at the office of the Code
Official.
(Prior Code, § 11.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.005 REVIEWS AND APPROVALS.
   The Code Official shall be authorized to undertake reviews, make
recommendations and grant approvals as set forth in this chapter.
   (A)   Administrative reviews and permits. All departments, officials and
employees who are charged with the duty or authority to issue permits or
approvals shall issue no permit or approval for uses or purposes where the same
would be in conflict with this chapter. Any permit or approval, if issued in
conflict with this chapter, shall be null and void.
      (1)   Review of building permits. All applications for building permits
and amendments thereto shall be submitted to the Code Official for review and
approval prior to permit issuance. Each application shall include two sets of
building plans and all data necessary to show that the requirements of this
chapter are met.
      (2)   Site plan reviews. The Code Official shall receive all applications
for site plan review for completeness and prepare submittals for review by the
appropriate body.
      (3)   Conditional use permits. The Code Official shall receive all
applications for conditional uses and variances as required by this chapter,
review for completeness and prepare submittals for review by the appropriate
body.
      (4)   Amendments. All requests for amendments or changes to the
Comprehensive Plan, this chapter or zoning map shall be submitted to the Code
Official for processing.
   (B)   Fees. A fee for service shall be charged. All fees shall be set by the
City Council and a schedule shall be made available at the office of the Code
Official.
   (C)   Expiration. Each license, permit or approval issued shall expire after
180 days if no work is undertaken or such use or activity is not established,
unless a different time of issuance of the license or permit is allowed in this
chapter, or unless an extension is granted by the issuing agency prior to
expiration. Any work for which a zoning permit has been issued shall be
completed according to the approved plans and specifications within one year
following the issuance of the zoning permit, and if not so completed, the
zoning permit shall automatically cancel.
   (D)   Validity of licenses, permits and approvals.
      (1)   For the issuance of any license, permit or approval for which the
Commission or Board is responsible, the Code Official shall require that the
development or use in question proceed only in accordance with the terms of the
license, permit or approval, including any requirements or conditions
established as a condition of issuance.
      (2)   Except as specifically provided for in this chapter and conditions
of approval, the securing of one required review or approval shall not exempt
the recipient from the necessity of securing any other required review or
approval.
      (3)   Failure to comply fully with the terms of any permit, license or
approval shall be permitted to be grounds for cancellation or revocation.
Action to cancel any license, permit or approval shall be permitted to be taken
on proper grounds by the Code Official. Cancellation of a permit or approval by
the Commission or Board shall be permitted to be appealed in the same manner as
its original action.
   (E)   Violations; unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, construct, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish,
equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or land or cause or permit the same
to be done in violation of this chapter. When any building or parcel of land
regulated by this chapter is being used contrary to this chapter, the Code
Official shall be permitted to order the use discontinued and the structure,
parcel of land, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person
causing the use to be continued. The person shall discontinue the use within
the time prescribed by the Code Official after receipt of the notice to make
the structure, parcel of land or portion thereof, comply with requirements of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.006 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the City Administrator through
appropriate staff and subordinates to enforce this chapter through proper legal
channels.
      (2)   When any work shall have been stopped by the city for any reason
whatsoever, it shall not again be resumed until the reason for the work
stoppage has been completely removed.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney, when called upon by the
City Administrator, to perform such duties as may be necessary to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.06)
§ 153.007 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before occupying or using any
building or portion thereof if the building is hereafter erected or
structurally altered, or the occupancy/use of any building or portion thereof
is altered or changed.
   (A)   Sale of rental property. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained
when a residential rental property is sold and prior to the transaction
closing. A fee, as set by resolution, shall apply to certificate of occupancies
issued.
   (B)   Fees, inspections and reinspections. An inspection of a property will
be performed as part of the initial fee, a reinspection fee, as set by
resolution, shall apply to a second and subsequent reinspections if required.
   (C)   Owner contractors. An occupancy deposit, as set by resolution, shall
be assessed with the building permit for all new residential construction when
an owner (own contractor) is not using a state licensed contractor. This
deposit will be forfeited if occupancy occurs prior to the certificate being
issued.
   (D)   Temporary use permits. A temporary use permit may be requested for a
period of 30 days with one 30-day extension possible if deemed appropriate by
the Code Official. A deposit and fee will be set by resolution. The deposit
will be forfeited if the certificate of occupancy is not obtained when the
temporary use permit has expired.
   (E)   Enforcement. Loss of any deposit does not relieve the permit holder of
legal enforcement provisions as set out in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.07)
§ 153.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. An incidental subordinate building customarily
incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main use or building,
such as a detached garage.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the
structure to which it is related; a use that is clearly incidental to, and
customarily found in connection with, the primary use.
   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, raising crops, farm animals,
livestock, horticulture, gardening, beekeeping and aquaculture.
   ALLEY. Any public way or thoroughfare more than ten feet, but less than 16
feet, in width, which has been dedicated to the public for private use.
   ALTERATION. Any change, addition or modification in construction, occupancy
or use.
   AMUSEMENT CENTER. An establishment offering five or more amusement devices,
including, but not limited to, coin-operated electronic games, shooting
galleries, table games and similar recreational diversions within an enclosed
building.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof which contains three or
more dwelling units and, for the purpose of this chapter, includes residential
condominiums.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. An establishment primarily engaged in the repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical
equipment, including paint, body and fender, major engine and engine part
overhaul, which is conducted within a completely enclosed building.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. An establishment primarily engaged in the repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar mechanical equipment,
including brakes, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change,
lubrication, tune ups, transmission work, which is conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
   AUTOMOBILE SELF-SERVICE MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING FACILITY. The portion of
property where flammable or combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are
stored and dispensed from fixed equipment into fuel tanks of motor vehicles by
persons other than a service station attendant. Such an establishment shall be
permitted to offer for sale at retail other convenience items as clearly
secondary activity and shall be permitted also to include a free-standing
automatic car wash.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING. See JUNK YARDS.
   BASEMENT. Any floor level below the first story in a building; except that,
a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as
a BASEMENT unless the floor level qualifies as a first story, as defined
herein.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging
rooms and meals are provided. The operator of the inn shall live on the
premises or in adjacent premises.
   BOARD. The Board of Appeals and Adjustments.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more
than ten guestrooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or
without meals, for compensation for more than one week.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING CODE. The Minnesota State Building Code and supporting codes as
adopted by the city.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance above the average existing grade
measured to the highest point of the building. The height of a stepped or
terraced building shall be the maximum height of any segment of the building.
   BUILDING LINE. The perimeter of that portion of a building or structure
nearest a property line, but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices and other
ornamental features projecting from the walls of the building or structure.
   BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which the principal use of the site is
conducted.
   BUILDING, TEMPORARY. A building used temporarily for the storage of
construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to on-site
permitted construction of utilities, or other community facilities, or used
temporarily in conjunction with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction.
   BUSINESS OR FINANCIAL SERVICES. An establishment intended for the conduct or
service or administration by a commercial enterprise, or offices for the
conduct of professional or business service.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any of the following businesses licensed by the Office of
Cannabis Management pursuant to M.S. Ch. 342:
      (1)   Cannabis microbusiness;
      (2)   Cannabis mezzobusiness;
      (3)   Cannabis cultivator;
      (4)   Cannabis manufacturer;
      (5)   Cannabis retailer;
      (6)   Cannabis wholesaler;
      (7)   Cannabis transporter;
      (8)   Cannabis testing facility;
      (9)   Cannabis event organizer;
      (10)   Cannabis delivery service; and
      (11)   Medical cannabis combination business.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A cannabis business with a cannabis cultivator license
or cultivation endorsement from the Office of Cannabis Management. This
includes cannabis mezzobusinesses and microbusinesses with a cultivation
endorsement from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS DELIVERY. A cannabis business with a cannabis delivery service
license or delivery service endorsement from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURER. A cannabis business with a cannabis manufacturer
license or manufacturing endorsement from the Office of Cannabis Management.
This includes cannabis mezzobusinesses and microbusinesses with a manufacturing
endorsement from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESS. A cannabis retailer location and the retail
location(s) of a mezzobusiness with a retail operations endorsement, a
microbusiness with a retail operations endorsement, and medical combination
businesses operating a retail location, all as defined under M.S. Ch. 342.
CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES do not include lower-potency hemp edible retailers
for the purpose of this chapter.
   CANNABIS RETAILER. A cannabis business licensed by the Office of Cannabis
Management to sell cannabis product to a consumer and not for the purpose of
resale in any form.
   CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY. A cannabis business with a cannabis testing
facility license or testing endorsement from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTATION. A cannabis business with a cannabis transporter
license or transportation endorsement from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS WHOLESALER. A cannabis business with a cannabis wholesaler license
or wholesaling endorsement from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   COMMERCIAL, HEAVY. An establishment or business that generally uses open
sales yards, outside equipment storage or outside activities that generate
noise or other impacts considered incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical
businesses in this definition are lumber yards, construction specialty
services, heavy equipment suppliers or building contractors.
   COMMERCIAL, LIGHT. An establishment or business that generally has retail or
wholesale sales, office uses, or services, which does not generate noise or
other impacts considered incompatible with less intense uses. Typical
businesses in this definition are retail stores, offices, catering services or
restaurants.
   COMMERCIAL RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES. Establishments that engage in the sale
of general retail goods and accessory services. Businesses within this
definition include those that conduct sales and storage entirely within an
enclosed structure (with the exception of occasional outdoor “sidewalk”
promotions); businesses specializing in the sale of either general merchandise
or convenience goods.
   COMMUNITY WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM. Utilities systems serving a group of
building, lots or an area of the city or more than 25 persons, with the design
and construction of the utilities systems as approved by the city and the
state.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The declaration of purposes, policies and programs for
the development of the city.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that would become harmonious or compatible with
neighboring uses through the application and maintenance of qualifying
conditions.
   CONDOMINIUM. A single-dwelling unit in a multi-unit dwelling or structure,
that is separately owned and may be combined with an individual interest in the
common areas and facilities of the property.
   CONFORMING USE. A use which is permitted by ordinance in the district within
which located, but excluding a legal non-conforming use.
   CONGREGATE RESIDENCE. Any building or portion thereof which contains
facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation, as required by this chapter,
and may include facilities for eating and cooking, for occupancy by other than
a family. A CONGREGATE RESIDENCE may be a shelter, convent, monastery,
dormitory and fraternity or sorority house, but does not include jails,
hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.
   CORNER LOT. A lot situated at the junction of and fronting on two or more
streets.
   COURT. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade
level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building.
   CREMATORY. A furnace or establishment for the cremation of corpses.
   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of such front. Where no CURB LEVEL has been established,
the city’s Public Works Department shall establish the curb level or its
equivalent for the purpose of this chapter.
   DAY CARE, GROUP. Any residence or portion of a residence licensed by the
Department of Human Services under Ch. 9502 for no more than 14 children at any
time, and must meet Building Code requirements.
   DAY CARE HOME, FAMILY. A residence or portion of a residence licensed by the
Department of Human Services under Ch. 9502 for no more than ten children at
one time of which no more than six are under school age, and must meet Building
Code requirements.
   DISTRICT. A section of the city for which the regulations governing height,
area, use of buildings and premises are the same.
   DRIVEWAY. A private access road, the use of that is limited to persons
residing, employed or otherwise using or visiting the parcel in which it is
located.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE UNIT. A building or portion thereof designed for
occupancy by three or more families living independently in which they may or
may not share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units
may be owned as condominiums or offered for rent.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping
facilities, designed for occupancy by one family.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of
three or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation to
roof with open space on at least two sides.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two
families living independently, with the structure having only two dwelling
units.
   EASEMENT. The portion of land or property reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The
EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above the lot or lots.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or
a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants) who need not be
related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
   FARM ANIMALS. Animals other than household pets that shall be permitted to,
where permitted, be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale and/
or family food production, education or recreation. FARM ANIMALS are identified
by three categories: large animals (e.g., horses and cattle); medium animals
(e.g., sheep and goats); or small animals (e.g., rabbits, chinchillas,
chickens, turkeys, pheasants, geese, ducks and pigeons).
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal areas of floors of a building
measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or, if appropriate, from the
centerline of dividing walls; this includes courts and decks or porches when
covered by a roof.
   FLOOR AREA, NET. The gross floor area exclusive of vents, shafts, courts,
elevators, stairways, exterior walls and similar facilities.
   FRONTAGE. The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public right-of way
measured at the front property line.
   FUNERAL HOME/MORTUARY. An establishment where the dead are prepared for
burial, kept before burial or cremation and where wakes and funerals may be
held.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building or portion of a building not more than 1,200
square feet in area, in which only private or pleasure-type motor vehicles used
by tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any premises, except those described as a private garage,
used for storage or care of power driven or towed vehicles, or where any such
vehicles are equipped for operation, repair or are kept for remuneration, hire
or sale.
   GRADE. (Adjacent ground elevation.) The lowest point of elevation of the
existing surface of the ground, within the area between the building and a line
five feet from the building.
   HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM). Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility
space, and similar areas, are not considered HABITABLE SPACE.
   HEMP MANUFACTURER. A hemp business licensed by the Office of Cannabis
Management to manufacture artificially derived cannabinoids as well as lower-
potency hemp edibles for public consumption and package such lower-potency hemp
edibles for sale to consumer.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation of a service character which is clearly
secondary to the main use of the premises as a dwelling and does not change the
character thereof or have any exterior evidence of the secondary use.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS. Dogs, cats, rabbits, birds and the like for family use only
(non-commercial) with cages, pens and the like.
   JUNK YARD. Any building, structure, premises or place within the city at,
upon or within which there is kept, stored or piled in quantities, whether
temporarily, irregularly or continually, old, used or second hand material of
any kind, including, but not limited to, the following: clothing; paper;
bottles; vehicles not currently licensed; parts of motor vehicles; agricultural
or construction equipment or parts thereof; building materials; or any other
article which from its worn condition renders it practically useless for the
purpose for which it was intended and which is commonly classed and referred to
as junk.
   KITCHEN. Any room or portion of a room within a building designed and
intended to be used for cooking or preparation of food.
   LANDSCAPING. The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas. Materials
and treatment generally include naturally growing elements such as grass,
trees, shrubs and flowers, this treatment shall be permitted also to include
the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water features and contouring of the earth.
   LIVESTOCK. Includes, but is not limited to, horses, bovine animals, sheep,
goats, swine, reindeer, donkeys, mules and any hoofed animals.
   LODGING HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof containing not more than five
guest rooms where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise.
   LOT. One unit of a recorded plat or subdivision occupied or to be occupied
by a building and its accessory buildings and including, as a minimum, such
open spaces as are required under this chapter and having frontage on a public
right-of-way.
   LOT AREA. The land area within the lot lines.
   LOT AREA PER FAMILY. The lot area required by this chapter to be provided
for each family in a dwelling.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the mean front right-of-way
and the mean rear lot line. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its depth,
and its lesser frontage is its width.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on two streets.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot, as defined herein.
   LOT WIDTH. The width of a lot is its own mean width measured at the building
setback line.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE RETAILER. A person or entity licensed or
authorized to acquire, possess, transfer, sell, dispense, or distribute lower-
potency hemp edible products and related supplies and products as a hemp
business pursuant to M.S. Ch. 342.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE WHOLESALER. A person or entity licensed or
endorsed by the Office of Cannabis Management to buy, sell, import, and store
lower-potency hemp edibles from and to various licensed cannabis and hemp
businesses, as well as conduct certain out-of-state sales, and to conduct other
activities approved by the Office of Cannabis Management pursuant to M.S. Ch.
342.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
in the traveling mode is eight feet or more in body width, or 40 feet or more
in body length, or when erected on site, 320 or more square feet, and which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein.
   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. All other types of manufacturing not included in the
definitions of light and medium manufacturing.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembly,
packaging or testing of goods or equipment, including research activities,
conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, with no outside storage,
serviced by a modest volume of trucks or vans and imposing a negligible impact
on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke, dust or pollutants.
   MANUFACTURING, MEDIUM. The manufacturing, compounding, processing,
assembling, packaging or testing of goods or equipment within an enclosed
structure or an open yard that is capable of being screened from neighboring
properties, serviced by a modest volume of trucks or other vehicles.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS COMBINATION BUSINESS. A cannabis business with a medical
cannabis combination business license from the Office of Cannabis Management.
   MOTEL, HOTEL. Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or
designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or
which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
   NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot whose width, area or other dimension did not
conform to the regulations when this chapter became effective.
   NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A building or structure or portion thereof
lawfully existing at the time this chapter became effective, which was
designed, erected or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to
the zoning regulations of the zone in which it is located.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A use that lawfully occupied a building or land at the
time this chapter became effective, which has been lawfully contained and which
does not now conform to the use regulation.
   OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. The State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management.
   OPEN SPACE. Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures,
parking areas, streets, alleys or required yards. OPEN SPACE shall be permitted
to be devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features, patios,
recreational areas and facilities.
   PARK. A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended
for outdoor active or passive recreational uses.
   PARKING LOT. An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of
automobiles.
   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. A space within a building or private or public
parking lot, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work areas, for
the parking of an automobile.
   PERSON. A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and
includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A residential or commercial development
guided by a total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision
regulations, other than use regulations, shall be permitted to be waived or
varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and
location, in accordance with general guidelines.
   PLOT PLAN. A plot of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual measurements,
the size and location of any existing buildings or buildings to be erected, the
location of the lot in relation to abutting streets and other such information.
   POOLS (SWIMMIMG), HOT TUBS AND SPAS.
      (1)   BARRIER. A fence, a wall, a building wall of an above-ground
swimming pool or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the swimming
pool and obstruct access to the swimming pool.
      (2)   POWER SAFETY COVER. A pool cover that is placed over the water
area, and is opened and closed with a motorized mechanism activated by a
control switch.
      (3)   PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. Any structure that contains water over 24
inches in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or
recreational bathing in connection with a residential occupancy and which is
available only to the family and guests of the householder. This includes
above-ground/on-ground pool, hot tub, in-ground pool or spas.
      (4)   PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. Any private swimming pool that is
totally contained within a private structure and surrounded on all four sided
by walls of the structure.
      (5)   PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL, OUTSIDE. Any private swimming pool that is
not an indoor pool.
   PRACTICAL DIFFICULTY. As used in connection with granting of a variance, the
property owner (or applicant) proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by this chapter; the plight of the owner (or applicant) is
due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the owner (or
applicant); and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood.  Economic considerations alone shall not
constitute a PRACTICAL DIFFICULTY if reasonable use for the property exists
under the terms of this chapter. PRACTICAL DIFFICULTY also includes, but is not
limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
Special consideration shall be given for earth sheltered construction as
defined in M.S. § 216C.06, subd. 14, as it may be amended from time to time,
when the construction is in harmony with the provisions of this chapter.
   PREMISES. A lot or plot with the required front, side and rear yards for a
dwelling or other use as allowed under this chapter.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, storm sewer or drainage facility,
sanitary sewer, water main, roadway, parking, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree,
lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the
local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation, or for which the local government responsibility is established.
   PUBLIC SERVICES. Uses operated by a unit of government to serve public
needs, such as police (with or without jail), fire service, ambulance, judicial
court or government offices, but not including public utility stations or
maintenance facilities.
   PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL. Any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool.
   PUBLIC UTILITY STATION. A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-
public utility agency to store, distribute, generate electricity, gas,
telecommunications and related equipment, or to pump or chemically treated
water. This does not include storage or treatment of sewage, solid waste or
hazardous waste.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   RECREATION, INDOOR.
      (1)   An establishment providing completely enclosed recreation
activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the preparation and
serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses.
      (2)   Included in this definition shall be bowling, roller skating or ice
skating, billiards, pool, motion picture theaters and related amusements.
   RECREATION, OUTDOOR. An area free of buildings, except for restrooms,
dressing rooms, equipment storage, maintenance buildings, open-air pavilions
and similar structures used primarily for recreational activities.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. Any location whose primary use is where waste or scrap
materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged,
disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper,
rags, tires and bottles, and other such materials.
   REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An architect or engineer registered or
licensed to practice professional architecture or engineering as defined by
statutory requirements of the professional registration laws of the state.
   RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL AND FRATERNAL ACTIVITY. A use or building owned or
maintained by organized religious organizations or non-profit associations for
social, civic or philanthropic purposes, or the purpose for which persons
regularly assemble for worship.
   RENOVATION. Interior or exterior remodeling of a structure, other than
ordinary repair.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment that sells prepared food for consumption.
RESTAURANTS shall be classified as follows.
      (1)   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. An establishment that sells food already
prepared for consumption, packaged in paper, Styrofoam or similar materials,
and may include drive-in or drive-up facilities for ordering.
      (2)   RESTAURANT, GENERAL. An establishment that sells food for
consumption on or off the premises.
      (3)   RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT. An establishment that sells food only for
consumption off the premises.
   SETBACK. The minimum required distance between the property line and the
building line.
   SITE PLAN. A plan that outlines the use and development of any tract of
land.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above; except that, the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above
grade, as defined herein, for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade, as defined herein, at any point, the usable or unused
under-floor space shall be considered as a STORY.
   STREET. Any thoroughfare or public way or easement in private ownership, not
dedicated or maintained as a public street, which affords the principal means
of access to two or more sites.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, and edifice or building of
any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract, lot or parcel of land into two or more
lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land.
   USE. The activity occurring on a lot or parcel, for which land or a building
is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be
occupied, including all accessory uses.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use clearly incidental or accessory to the principal use
of a lot or a building located on the same lot as the primary use.
   USE, CHANGE OF. The change within a classified use of a structure or
premises.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon
showing that the use in a specified location will comply with all standards of
this chapter for the location or operation of such use.
   USE, NON-CONFORMING. A use that lawfully occupied a building or land at the
time this chapter became effective, which has been lawfully continued and which
does not now conform to the use regulations.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. A use that fulfills a primary function of a household,
establishment, institution or other activity.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A use that is authorized by this chapter to be conducted for
a fixed period of time. TEMPORARY USES are characterized by such activities as
the sale of agricultural products, contractors’ offices and equipment sheds,
fireworks, carnivals, flea markets and garage sales.
   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter, as
applied to a specific piece of property; except that, modification in the
allowable uses within a district shall not be considered a VARIANCE.
   YARD. Any space in the same lot with a building open and unobstructed from
the ground to the sky.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot
lines and lying between the rear property line and the nearest point of the
building.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot
lines and lying between the rear property line and the nearest point of the
building.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along the side of a lot between he front and
rear lot lines and lying between the side property line and the nearest point
of the building.
(Prior Code, § 11.08) (Ord. 47, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025; Ord. 55,
Fourth Series, effective 8-7-2025)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY
§ 153.020 VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Application. Any person aggrieved by any order or decision of the
Building/Zoning Administrator or other city staff enforcing the provisions of
this chapter or desiring a variance from the literal provisions of this
chapter, except those which relate to the use of a property other than the
temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling, may apply
therefor and have the matter heard by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments in
accordance with the provisions of state law and the city code.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Application for any variance or appeal permissible under the
provisions of this section shall be made to the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments in the form of a written application on such forms as required by
the city. Upon receipt of any application, the Board of Appeals and Adjustments
shall set a time and place for a public hearing before the Board on the
application. At least ten days before the date of the hearing, a notice of the
hearing shall be published once in the official newspaper.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall, thereupon, make its
decision upon the application within 30 days of the public hearing, unless the
Board specifically finds that additional time is needed to make its decision,
but in any event the decision must be made within 60 days of the public
hearing.
   (C)   Conditions for a variance.
      (1)   A variance shall be permitted only if it is established that it is
in keeping with the spirit and intent of the general purpose of this chapter
and that the strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would cause
an undue hardship because of the circumstances unique to the individual
property under consideration. In its consideration of the standards of
practical difficulties or particular hardship and unique situation, the Board
of Zoning Appeals and Adjustments shall require the presentation of evidence
that:
         (a)   The property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located;
         (b)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property that are not normally applicable to landholdings within the same
district and that were not created by the landowner; and
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood and locality. Economic considerations alone shall not
constitute an undue hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under
the terms of this chapter. Undue hardship also includes, but is not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. Special
consideration shall be given for earth sheltered construction, as defined in
M.S. § 216C.06, subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time, when the
construction is in harmony with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   A variance shall be granted only if the evidence, in the judgment
of the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, sustains the conditions enumerated in
division (C)(1) above. Variances from the provisions of this chapter shall be
granted by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments only in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
      (3)   Specific conditions and safeguards may be imposed upon the premises
benefitted by the variance as considered necessary to prevent injurious effects
upon other property in the neighborhood or upon public facilities and services.
Violations of such conditions and safeguards shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
      (4)   No variance permitting the erection or alteration of a building
shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless a building permit for
the erection or alteration is issued and construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
(Prior Code, § 11.24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.021 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   This chapter may be amended whenever the public necessity and the
general welfare require such amendment by following the procedure specified in
this section.
      (2)   Proceedings for amendment of this chapter shall be initiated by:
         (a)   A petition of the owner or owners of the actual property;
         (b)   A recommendation of the Planning Commission; or
         (c)   By action of the Council.
      (3)   An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. All applications for changes in the boundaries of any zoning
district which are initiated by the petition of the owner or owners of
property, the zoning of which is proposed to be changed, shall be accompanied
by a map or plat showing the lands proposed to be changed and all lands within
350 feet of the boundaries of the property proposed to be rezoned, together
with the names and addresses of the owners of the lands in such area as the
same appears on the records of the County Treasurer.
   (B)   Public hearing. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and
other requested material, if required, the Planning Commission shall, in all
cases, hold at least one public hearing in a location to be prescribed by the
Planning Commission. At least ten days in advance of the hearing, notice of the
time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given in accordance with M.S.
§ 462.357, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, or other applicable
law.
   (C)   Authorization.
      (1)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a
report of its findings and recommendations on the proposed amendment and shall
file a copy with the Council and the Zoning Administrator within 60 days after
the hearing. If no report or recommendation is transmitted by the Planning
Commission within 60 days after the hearing, the Council may take action
without awaiting the recommendation.
      (2)   Upon the filing of the report or recommendation, the Council may
hold public hearings upon the amendment as it deems advisable. After the
conclusion of the hearings, if any, the Council may adopt the amendment or any
part thereof in such form as it deems advisable. The amendment shall be
effective only if two-thirds of all the members of the Council concur in its
passage.
   (D)   Fees. To defray the administrative costs of processing of requests for
an amendment to this chapter, a fee shall be paid by the petitioner. The fee
shall be determined by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 11.25)
§ 153.022 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The location and boundaries of the districts established by this
chapter are hereby set forth on the zoning map, and the map is hereby made a
part of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   The map shall be known as the “City of Luverne Zoning Map”.
      (2)   The map and all notations, references and date shown thereon are
hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall be made a part of
it as if all were fully described herein.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Official to
maintain the map, and amendments thereto shall be recorded in the zoning map
within 30 days after official publication of amendments. The official zoning
map shall be kept on file in the City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 11.26)
§ 153.023 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, the
centerlines of streets, alleys or railroads rights-of-way or the lines extended
or lines parallel or perpendicular thereto; or plot or lot lines; or fractional
section lines of the United States public land surveys, as established by law.
   (B)   Where figures are shown on the zoning map between a street and a
district boundary line, they indicate that the district boundary line runs
parallel to the street centerline at a distance there from equivalent to the
number of feet so indicated, unless otherwise indicated.
(Prior Code, § 11.27) (Ord. 272, Third Series, effective 3-10-2005)
§ 153.024 ANNEXATIONS.
   Any land annexed in the future into the city limits shall be placed in the
R-R Residential-Reserve District, until placed in another district by action of
the Council after recommendation of the Planning Commission unless otherwise
specified in an annexation agreement and/or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 11.28) (Ord. 312, Third Series, effective 12-10-2009)
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
§ 153.035 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Conditional use permits may be issued for any and only the uses or
purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator on a form prescribed by the Council. The application shall
be accompanied by such plans and elevations and site plans as prescribed by the
Planning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on any
application and substantiating data within 60 days after receipt of same.
(Prior Code, § 11.22)
§ 153.036 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Upon receipt in proper form of the application and other required
material, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing in a
location to be prescribed by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   At least ten days in advance of each hearing, notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be published in the official paper of the city.
   (C)   All property owners within 200 feet of the property for which a
conditional use application has been filed shall be notified by U.S. mail as to
the time and place of the public hearing.
   (D)   The applicant shall provide an abstract of all property owners within
200 feet.
(Prior Code, § 11.22)
§ 153.037 REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   For each application for a conditional use permit, the Planning
Commission shall report (within 30 days) to the Council its findings and
recommendations, including the stipulation of additional conditions and
guarantees that the conditions will be complied with when they are deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest. Upon receipt of the report
of the Planning Commission, the Council shall hold whatever public hearings it
deems advisable and shall make a decision upon the proposal to grant or deny a
conditional use permit.
   (B)   The applicant shall be notified in writing within 30 days of the
Council’s decision to either grant or deny the conditional use permit.
(Prior Code, § 11.22)
§ 153.038 FINDINGS.
   No conditional use shall be recommended by the Planning Commission unless
the Commission shall find:
   (A)   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the immediate
vicinity;
   (B)   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property for uses
predominant in the area;
   (C)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
   (D)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide sufficient
off-street parking and loading space to serve the proposed use; and
   (E)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control
offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration, so that none of these will
constitute a nuisance, and to control lighted signs and other lights in a
manner that no disturbance to neighboring properties will result.
(Prior Code, § 11.22)
§ 153.039 FEES.
   To defray administrative costs of processing requests for conditional use
permits, a fee shall be paid by the applicant. The fee shall be established by
the Council.
(Prior Code, § 11.22)
§ 153.040 COMPLIANCE.
   Any use permitted under the terms of any conditional use permit shall be
established and conducted in conformity with the terms of the permit and of any
conditions designated in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 11.22)
§ 153.041 CONDITIONAL USE EXPIRATION.
   Unless otherwise specified by the Council at the time it is authorized, a
conditional use permit shall expire if the applicant fails to utilize the
conditional use permit within one year from the date of its authorization.
(Prior Code, § 11.22)
DISTRICTS AND USES
§ 153.055 RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (A)   Residential uses.
      (1)   R-A: Residential/Agricultural District. This district is to
accommodate existing agricultural uses until such time as this land is ready to
be used in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, and new housing developments
that are intended to be restricted to low density single-family units.
      (2)   R-1: Single-Family Residential. Single-family detached dwellings
are the primary land use in this district with twin homes and town homes
permitted at a rate of no more than seven units per acre, and up to four units
per town home. Attached housing shall be arranged horizontally.
      (3)   R-2: Multiple-Family Residential. Allowing the addition of a higher
density housing to the R-1 District with eight to 16 units per acre density and
up to eight units in a building and may be arranged horizontally or vertically.
      (4)   R-3: High Density Residential. Intended to accommodate multi-family
densities exceeding 16 units per acre. Care shall be taken to allow for
adequate traffic flow with increased densities and the impact on existing
neighborhoods and streets.
         (a)   Permitted uses.
Residential Uses R/A R-1 R-2 R-3
Residential Uses            R/A R-1 R-2 R-3
Agriculture limited         X
Family day care             X   X   X   X
Group day-care                          X
Multi-family, limit 8 units         X   X
Multi-family, over 8 units              X
Public parks/recreation         X   X   X
Railroad R.O.W.             X   X   X   X
Single family               X   X   X   X
Town homes                      X*  X   X
Twin homes                      X   X   X
NOTES TO TABLE:
* Limited to 4 units per lot
 
         (b)   Accessory uses.
 
Accessory use              R-A R-1 R-2 R-3
Garages, limited           X   X   X   X
Living unit for help       X   X   X   X
Storage buildings, limited X   X   X   X
Swimming pools/private     X   X   X   X
 
         (c)   Conditional uses.
 
Conditional use   R-A R-1 R-2 R-3
Bed and breakfast     X   X   X
Churches              X   X   X
Home occupation   X   X   X   X
 
      (5)   R-R Residential Reserve. This area is identified to be used for
future residential development.
   (B)   Home occupations.
      (1)   General. Home occupations shall be permitted in all residential
zones as a conditional use; provided, the home occupation is clearly and
obviously subordinate to the main use of the dwelling unit for residential
purposes. Home occupations shall be conducted wholly within the primary
structure on the premises.
      (2)   Conditions.
         (a)   The home occupation shall not exceed 15% of the floor area of
the primary structure.
         (b)   Other than those related by blood, marriage or adoption, no more
than one person may be employed in the home occupation.
         (c)   Inventory and supplies shall not occupy more than 50% of the
area permitted to be used as a home occupation.
         (d)   There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods on the
premises.
         (e)   Home occupations involving beauty shops or barber shops shall
require all Health Department and Plumbing Code approvals.
         (f)   Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment
and scheduled so that not more than one patron vehicle is on the premises at
the same time.
         (g)   Two additional parking spaces shall be provided on the premises,
except only one need be provided if the home occupation does not have an
employee. The parking shall comply with the parking requirements in this
chapter.
   (C)   Residential; dimensional requirements, setbacks.
      (1)   Dimensional requirements.
 
Dimensional Requirements R/A  R-1  R-2  R-3
Accessory, height        22’18’18’18’*
Accessory, stories       1.5  1.5  1.5  1.5
Maximum height, feet     30’30’45’56’
Maximum height, stories  2.5  2.5  2.5  4
 
NOTES TO TABLE:
* For every foot or part thereof over 13’ in height the required setbacks
shall be increased by 1 foot.
For this table, an accessory building is considered a storage shed or
detached garage. This does not apply to structures attached to the
principal building.
 
      (2)   Lot area requirements.
Lot Area Requirements R/A R-1 R-2 R-3
Lot Area Requirements         R/A    R-1   R-2     R-3
Allowable coverage *2         40%    40%   40%     40%
Area, over 2 units (per unit) N/A    6,000 16,000* 16,000*
Area, single-family           22,000 7,000 7,000   7,000
Area, twin homes (per unit)   N/A    5,000 5,000   5,000
Lot depth                     150’ 100’100’  100’
Minimum lot frontage          100’ 70’ 70’   70’
NOTES TO TABLE:
* For 3 unit dwelling plus 2,500 for additional dwellings
*2 Coverage includes hard surfaced parking areas
 
      (3)   Yard setbacks.
 
Principal Buildings
Yard Setbacks         R/A  R-1  R-2  R-3
Front arterial street 35’35’35’35’
Other streets *1      25’25’25’25’*
Side *2               15’5’ 5’ 5’*
Rear *3               50’25’25’25’*
NOTES TO TABLE:
*1 If 75% or more of the frontage on the same side of the street between 2
intersecting streets is improved with buildings that have observed greater or
lesser setbacks, then no new building or structure shall project beyond a
straight line drawn between the closest front corners of the 2 nearest
adjacent buildings. For corner lots, the principal building setback shall not
be less than the average setback of 75% of the principal buildings that have
the least amount of setback within the block; provided, the average setback
does not vary more than 20% from the setback observed for the adjacent
structure in the event the setback shall not be less than 80% of the adjacent
principal building setback.
*2 Three or more units on the same lot the side yard requirements shall be
10% lot frontage. Note: side setback measured from property line or from any
duly recorded easement line.
*3 In R-1, R-2 and R-3 the rear yard requirement is 20% of lot depth or 25’
whichever is greater.
 
   (D)   Residential; accessory structures and uses.
      (1)   Opt-out. Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, subd. 9,
as it may be amended from time to time, the city opts out of the requirements
of M.S. § 462.3593, as it may be amended from time to time, which defines and
regulates temporary family health care dwellings.
      (2)   Attached/detached accessory structures and uses.
         (a)   1.   Private garages and storage sheds provided that all garage
and storage space, attached and detached, excluding storage space which is a
part of the interior of the principal main building or structure including the
basement and attic thereof, shall not exceed 1,200* square feet of floor space;
provided also that any accessory building more than 120 square feet must have a
minimum three-foot rise over a 12-foot distance pitched roof and a minimum six-
inch eave and it must rest on a permanent foundation of wood or concrete
material and is erected in its entirety in accordance with the state's Building
Code and finished with comparable materials as the principal structure.
            2.   *Note to division (D)(2)(a)1., above: Allows up to 5% of lot
square footage, with a maximum of 1,200 square foot attached and detached
accessory structures not to exceed finished, above grade square footage of
principal structure.
         (b)   All detached accessory structures shall be a minimum of ten feet
from the principal building and three feet from all side yards and no closer
than the back building line of the principal structure from the street.
         (c)   Maximum coverage of accessory structures in the rear yard shall
be 30%.
         (d)   If the vehicle door faces an alley in an accessory structure it
shall be set back 24 feet from the center of the alley.
         (e)   All R zones, both frontages on a corner lot, shall comply with
front yard setback.
         (f)   Private swimming pools, when completely enclosed within a chain
link or similar fence, having openings so that a one-half-inch sphere cannot
pass through. The bottom of the fence shall be no higher than four inches above
the ground. The fence must be six feet high and located at least four feet from
the edge of the pool. Fence openings or points of entry to the pool area shall
be equipped with self-closing and self-latching lockable gates.
(Prior Code, § 11.09) (Ord. 280, Third Series, effective 1-12-2006; Ord. 338,
Third Series, effective 3-12-2015; Ord. 348, Third Series, effective 9-1-2016;
Ord. 27, Fourth Series, effective 4-28-2022)
§ 153.056 COMMERCIAL USES.
   (A)   Commercial uses.
      (1)   H-C: Highway Commercial. Located along main traffic routes to
accommodate larger volumes of traffic. Intended for service type uses such as
automobile sales and service, drive-up establishments including restaurants and
banks, commercial retail/service uses, such as insurance and real estate sales
and lodging facilities.
      (2)   C-C: Community Commercial. Local service type uses such as
insurance and banks, grocery and convenience stores and other uses that
merchandise for sale or service. Care shall be taken to allow for traffic and
parking required for these types of uses.
      (3)   N-C: Neighborhood Commercial. This district would accommodate low
volume traffic uses that would have lesser impact on adjacent residential
areas. These uses would tend to be non-retail low volume service uses.
      (4)   C-R: Commercial Reserve. This area is identified to be used for
future commercial development.
      (5)   B: Business Park. Business Park Areas are planned land use to a
higher standard to protect both the businesses and adjoining zones. Uses
intended may be medical and related offices and support services. Wholesale,
light manufacturing and processing, warehouses and offices. Limited commercial
which supports the business park would require a conditional use permit. All
storage is intended to be completely enclosed within a building.
Allowed Uses H-C C-C B N-C
Allowed Uses                        H-C C-C B  N-C
Auto-fueling                        X   X
Auto repair, major                  X
Auto repair, minor                  X   X
Business/financial services-offices X   X   X  X
Commercial, light *                 X   X   CU CU
Lodging/hotel-motel                 X   X      CU
Manufacturing, light                        X
Medical/health services             X   X   X  CU
Public service/administration       X   X   X  X
R & D laboratories                          X
Recreation, indoor/outdoor          X   X
 
Allowed Uses             H-C C-C B  N-C
Residential              CU  CU  CU CU
Restaurant               X   X      CU
Retail sales and service X   X      CU
 
   (B)   Commercial; dimensional requirements, setbacks.
      (1)   Dimensional requirements.
 
Dimensional Requirements 1 H-C C-C B   N-C
Accessory, height        15’ 15�15�15’
Accessory, stories       1     1   1   1
Maximum height, feet     40’ 40�48�24’
Maximum height, stories  3     3   4   2
Notes to table:
1: Observance of a greater height in stories and/or feet allowable through
approval of a conditional use permit
 
      (2)   Lot area requirements.
 
Lot Area Requirements                     H-C    C-C    B      N-C
Allowable lot coverage
   Buildings                           50%    50%    40%    60%
   Hard surfaced area (building + pavin80%    80%    60%    80%
Minimum frontage                          100’ 100’ 100’ 70’
Minimum lot area                          10,000 10,000 10,000 7,000
Minimum lot depth                         100’ 100’ 100’ 100’
 
      (3)   Yard setbacks.
 
Yard setbacks          H-C C-C B   N-C
Front arterial street* 60�60�60�35’
Other streets*         25�25�25�25’
Rear                   25�25�35�25’
Side                   15�15�15�10%
 
(Prior Code, § 11.09) (Ord. 346, Third Series, effective 5-26-2016)
§ 153.057 DOWNTOWN.
   (A)   This zone reflects the unique mixture of uses in and around the
downtown. A variety of uses fit including, community-scale retail, professional
services, public/civic uses, parks, offices, dining and entertainment, banking,
lodging and housing.
   (B)   All new buildings or substantially remodeled buildings shall require a
conditional use. It must be shown that this use is compatible with the
character and scale of the downtown area.
   (C)   Dimensional, lot area and setback requirements shall be judged on an
individual basis as part of the conditional use application.
(Prior Code, § 11.09)
§ 153.058 ALLOWABLE PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.
   (A)   General. Eaves, cornices or other similar architectural features shall
be permitted to project into required yard no more than 12 inches. Chimneys or
other cantilevered projections shall be permitted to project no more than two
feet; provided, the width of any side yard is not reduced to less than three
feet.
   (B)   Front yards. Open, unenclosed ramps, porches, platforms or landings,
not covered by a roof, shall be permitted to extend no more than six feet into
the required front yard; provided, the porch does not extend above the first
level and is no more than six feet above grade at any point.
   (C)   Rear yards. Windows shall be permitted to project into a required rear
yard no more than 12 inches.
(Prior Code, § 11.09)
§ 153.059 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. Landscaping is required for all new buildings and additions
over 500 square feet as defined in this section. The landscaping shall be
completed within one year from the date of occupancy of the building.
   (B)   Front yards. Front yards required by this or other applicable codes
shall be completely landscaped, except for those areas occupied by access
driveways, walls and structures.
   (C)   Street-side side yards. All flanking street-side yards shall be
completely landscaped, except for those areas occupied by utilities, access
driveways, paved walks, walls and structures.
   (D)   Maintenance. All live landscaping required by this or other applicable
codes shall be properly maintained. All dead or dying landscaping shall be
replaced immediately and all sodded area mowed, fertilized and irrigated on a
regular basis.
(Prior Code, § 11.09) (Ord. 272, Third Series, effective 3-10-2005)
§ 153.060 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   I-1: Limited Industrial. The purpose of this district is to designate
sufficient land for industrial development, to provide for expansion of the
city’s tax base and accommodate needed employment. Only industrial developments
which do not adversely affect adjacent business or residential districts are
intended to be allowed. Industrial establishments should be either:
      (1)   Ones whose operations are relatively free from objectionable
influences; or
      (2)   One whose objectionable features will be obviated by design or
appropriate devices. In the interest of general health and welfare, residential
and certain institutional uses are not intended to be permitted within this
district.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the I-
1 Limited Industry District:
      (1)   Manufacturing. Any light manufacturing use or process including
repairs, assembling, fabricating, altering, converting, finishing, processing,
treating, testing, packaging or bottling; except any use or process hereinafter
specifically excluded or which would not be in keeping with the purpose of the
district as stated above. The determination shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator upon review of the building permit application; and
      (2)   Warehousing, storage and wholesaling. The storage, handling,
assembly and distribution of goods and materials for retail, wholesale or on-
site use.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the I-1 Limited
Industry District, subject to the provisions of §§
153.035 through
153.041 of this chapter:
      (1)   General. Any permitted use in the I-2 District; provided that, any
objectionable features normally associated with these uses, such as those
deemed to be hazardous, offensive or objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
cinders, gas fumes, noise, vibration, radiation, refuse matter or water-carried
waste, shall be treated, controlled or eliminated through design, mechanical
devices, screen planting or walls or other measures as specified by the
Planning Commission; and, provided that, the use and its day to day activity
will not be hazardous, noxious or offensive;
      (2)   Heavy commercial/industrial. Other heavy commercial or industrial
uses as determined appropriate by the City Planning Commission; and
      (3)   Residential. Dwellings for business owners and their families and
such sleeping and boarding accommodations as are customarily incidental and
necessary to a permitted use. Additions to existing buildings may be authorized
where the number of families or the number of lodging accommodations is not
increased.
   (D)   Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary
to a principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in
their own stead:
      (1)   Any accessory use, building or structure customarily incidental to
a principal use permitted above, and located on the same lot therewith;
      (2)   Specialized freight and yard equipment, private utility structures,
secondary processing structures and similar specialized structures;
      (3)   Parking and loading facilities as regulated herein; and
      (4)   Signs as regulated herein.
   (E)   Special district provisions.
      (1)   Landscaping. All open areas of any site, lot, tract or parcel shall
be graded to provide proper drainage, and except for areas used for parking,
drives or storage, shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs or planted ground
cover. It shall be the owner’s responsibility to see that this landscaping is
maintained in an attractive and well-kept condition. All adjacent vacant lots,
tracts or parcels under the same ownership shall also be properly maintained.
      (2)   Storage. All raw materials, supplies, finished or semifinished
products and equipment shall be stored in an orderly manner with all materials
stored in neat and well organized stacks, piles or other orderly method
appropriate for the material. In no event shall junk, rubbish, debris, weeds or
tall grass, by-products, salvage and inoperable equipment or any other material
or matter not used in the normal course of business be allowed to accumulate,
or become offensive in any manner, to any measurable degree whatsoever. The
Council may require all raw materials, supplies, finished or semi-finished
products and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building or
within the confines of a 100% opaque wall or fence not less than five feet
high; provided, however, that, motor vehicles necessary to the operation of the
principal use and of not more than three-quarter ton capacity may be stored
within the permitted parking lot areas.
      (3)   Screening. All principal, accessory and conditional uses, except
business signs, which are situated within 50 feet of a residential district,
shall be screened and buffered from such district by a separation of open space
which shall have a minimum depth of 30 feet and shall include a required fence
or vegetation screening of not less than 90% opacity and not less than five
feet nor more than seven feet in height above the level of the residential
district property at the district boundary. Walls or fences of less heights or
planting screens may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment, if there is a
finding that the nature of extent of the use being screened is such that a
lesser degree of screening will as adequately promote and protect the use and
enjoyment of the properties within the adjacent residential district, or there
is a finding that a screening of the type required by this chapter would
interfere with provisions of adequate amounts of light and air to same
properties. Loading docks in the I-1 District shall be screened so as not to be
visible from any public street right-of-way within a residential district. All
required screening devices shall be designed so that they are architecturally
harmonious with the principal structures on the site and they shall be properly
maintained so as not to become unsightly, hazardous or less opaque than when
originally constructed.
   (F)   General regulations. Additional requirements for dimensional, signs,
parking and other regulations in the I-1 Limited Industry District are set
forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.09)
§ 153.061 SPECIAL INDUSTRY DISTRICT.
   (A)   I-2: Special Industrial. The purpose of this district is to designate
sufficient land for industrial development and to provide attractive land for
the purpose of expanding the city’s tax base and providing needed employment.
This district shall accommodate a wide variety of industrial establishments
which may operate to their maximum advantage without adversely affecting other
nearby similar or dissimilar uses and activities.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the I-
2 General Industry District:
      (1)   General. Any industrial use which is not specifically prohibited
herein or any industrial use not listed as a conditional use herein may be
permitted; and
      (2)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted in a I-
2 General Industry District, subject to the provisions of §§
153.035 through
153.041 of this chapter:
         (a)   Wrecking and salvage yards. Junk yard, including automobile
wrecking and industrial metal and waste salvage, but not including refuse or
garbage disposal, if located at least 200 feet from any residential district;
provided, all operations are conducted within an area enclosed with a solid
wall or uniform tight board fence, including gates, at least eight feet in
height and the enclosure shall be properly maintained;
         (b)   Crematory. If located not less than 200 feet from any residence
district;
         (c)   Railroad sidings. If located not less than 200 feet from any
residence district; and
         (d)   Other uses. The following uses may only be authorized as a
conditional use by the Council if located at least 400 feet from any residence
district, and if the location of such use has been recommended by the Planning
Commission after receiving reports from the Chief of the Fire Department and
the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
            1.   Acid manufacture;
            2.   Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture;
            3.   Distillation of bones, coal or wood;
            4.   Explosive manufacture or storage;
            5.   Fat rendering;
            6.   Fertilizer manufacture;
            7.   Garbage, offal or dead animals, reduction or dumping;
            8.   Gas manufacture;
            9.   Glue or gelatin manufacture;
            10.   Petroleum refining (including bulk storage);
            11.   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores;
            12.   Manufacture of paint products, paper pulp, pyrexylin, inks,
soap, tars, vinegars, salts;
            13.   Meat packing or processing plant;
            14.   Elevators or other grain storage facilities; and
            15.   Any other uses which, in the opinion of the Commission, is of
similar character to those therein before described.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary
to a principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses:
accessory uses as listed in the I-1 District.
   (D)   Special district provisions.
      (1)   Landscaping. All open areas of any site, lot, tract or parcel shall
be graded to provide proper drainage, and except for areas used for parking,
drives or storage, shall be landscaped with appropriate dust-free and
attractive material. The landscaping shall conform with the development plan
approved at the time the building permit was issued. It shall be the owner’s
responsibility to see that the lot area is maintained in a well-kept condition.
All vacant lots, tracts or parcels abutting and under the same ownership shall
be properly maintained.
      (2)   Storage. All raw materials, supplies finished or semifinished
products and equipment shall be stored in an orderly manner with all materials
stored in neat and well organized stacks, piles or other orderly method
appropriate for the material. In no event shall junk, rubbish, debris, weeds or
tall grass, by-products, salvage and inoperable equipment or any other material
or matter not used in the normal course of business be allowed to accumulate,
or become offensive in any manner, to any measurable degree whatsoever. The
Council may require all raw materials, supplies, finished or semi-finished
products and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building,
or within the confines of a 100% opaque wall or fence not less than five feet
high; provided, however, that, motor vehicles necessary to the operation of the
principal use may be stored within the permitted parking lot areas.
      (3)   General regulations. Additional requirements for dimensional,
signs, parking and other regulations in the I-2 General Industry District are
set forth in other section of this chapter. Side yard setback requirements of
20 feet in industrial zones may be waived to a minimum of five feet (while
meeting State Building Code requirements) with approval of the City
Administrator and city’s Building/Zoning Official when a building is proved to
require access to a rail spur for regular business operation. A RAIL SPUR is
defined as a branch of railroad track extending from the main line. Additional
requirements for dimensional, signs, parking and other regulations in the I-
2 General Industry District are set forth in other sections of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.09) (Ord. 280, Third Series, effective 1-12-2006; Ord. 298,
Third Series, effective 8-21-2008)
§ 153.062 INDUSTRIAL RESERVE.
   This area is identified to be used for future industrial development.
§ 153.063 PUBLIC DISTRICT.
   (A)   P: Public. This district is intended to provide a procedure for the
orderly establishment of public and institutional facilities, expansion of
their operations or changes in the use of lands and facilities owned by
governmental agencies.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the P Public
District:
      (1)   Cemeteries;
      (2)   Governmental buildings, community center buildings, public
libraries, institutional buildings, and other municipal service buildings,
except those customarily considered industrial in use; and, provided that, no
buildings shall be located within 25 feet of any lot line or an abutting lot in
any residence district;
      (3)   Parks and recreational areas owned or operated by governmental
agencies;
      (4)   Publicly owned housing;
      (5)   Public schools; and
      (6)   Public utilities and public uses.
   (C)   Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses
within the P Public District:
      (1)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in
division (B) above; and
      (2)   Automobile parking lot or storage or parking garages.
   (D)   General regulations. Additional requirements for dimensional, signs,
parking and other regulations in the P Public District are set forth in other
sections of this chapter.
      (1)   Dimensional requirements.
 
Dimensional requirements I-1 I-2 P
Accessory, height        25�25�25’
Accessory, stories       1   1   1
 
      (2)   Lot area requirements.
 
Lot Area Requirements   I-1 I-2  P
Maximum height, feet    30�75’30’
Maximum height, stories 2   N/A  2
Minimum frontage        50�100�50’
Minimum lot area        N/A N/A  N/A
Minimum lot depth       N/A N/A  N/A
 
      (3)   Yard setbacks.
 
Yard Setbacks          I-1 I-2 P
From R District line   30�75�30’
Front arterial street* 35�35�35’
Other streets*         25�25�25’
Rear                   25�25�25’
Side                   20�20�30’
NOTES TO TABLE:
* If 75% or more of frontage on the same side of the street between 2
intersecting streets is improved with buildings that have observed greater
or lesser setbacks, then no new building or structure shall project beyond a
straight line drawn between the closest front corners of the 2 nearest
adjacent principal buildings. For corner lots, the principal building
setback shall not be less than the average setback of 75% of the principal
buildings that have the least amount of setback within the block; provided,
the average setback does not vary more than 20% from setback observed for
the adjacent principal structure in which event the setback shall not be
less than 80% of the adjacent principal building setback.
 
(Prior Code, § 11.09) (Ord. 280, Third Series, effective 1-12-2006)
§ 153.064 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   AG: Agricultural. This district shall only be used for aquacultural products
for sale and consumption as defined by M.S. § 273.13, subd. 23, i(2).
(Ord. 6, Fourth Series, effective 12-27-2018)
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
§ 153.075 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This subchapter is enacted to minimize losses in those areas subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare. This subchapter is based upon a reasonable method
of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established
by the state’s Department of Natural Resources.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.076 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in M.S. Ch. 103F and 462, as they may be
amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local government
units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the
Council of the city does ordain as follows.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.077 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city
shown on the official zoning maps as being located within the boundaries of the
Floodplain District.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.078 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The Official Zoning Map together with all explanatory materials
thereon, and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this subchapter. The explanatory material shall include the Flood
Insurance Study for the city prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration
dated 11-17-1981 and the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and Flood Insurance
Rate Map dated 5-17-1982. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the
office of the City Administrator.
   (B)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments shall make the necessary interpretation based on elevations on the
regional (100-year) flood profile and other available technical data. The
person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present his or her case to the Board and to submit
technical evidence if he or she so desires.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.079 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This subchapter does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain District or
land uses permitted within this district will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This subchapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this subchapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.080 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this subchapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easement, covenants or deed restriction. However, where this
subchapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of the subchapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances of the city or provisions of the city code
inconsistent with this subchapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.081 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot, parcel or
premises with, and of a nature customarily and clearly incidental and
subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
   BASEMENT. For the purposes of this subchapter, means any area of a
structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below
ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below
ground level.
   COMMISSIONER. The state’s Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FLOOD. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation
of the areas adjacent to the channel.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The average frequency, statistically determined, for which
it is expected that a specific flood state or discharge may be equaled or
exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. FLOOD
FRINGE is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the Flood Insurance
Study.
   FLOODPLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter
may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional
flood.
   HARDSHIP. The property in question cannot be put to any reasonable use under
the conditions allowed by the official controls; the plight of the landowner is
due to circumstances unique to his property, not created by the landowner; and
the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a HARDSHIP if a
reasonable use for the property exists under terms of the official controls.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home, as defined in M.S. § 327.31, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A manufactured home park, as defined in M.S. §
327.14, as it may be amended from time to time.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel, modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by the water, or that is placed where the
flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or
property.
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a REACH.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term BASE FLOOD used
in the Flood Insurance Study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The regulatory flood protection
elevation within the Floodplain District shall be established by adding one
foot to the base flood water surface elevations with floodway listed in the
Floodway Data Table contained in the Flood Insurance Study. REGULATORY FLOOD
PROTECTION ELEVATIONS between cross-sections shall be interpolated. The
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION within the Floodplain District shall be
calculated by a qualified registered professional engineer or by the state’s
Department of Natural Resources, in accordance with procedures in §
153.088 of this chapter.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, the buildings, factories, sheds,
detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel trailers, travel vehicles
and recreational vehicles not specifically exempted from the provisions of this
subchapter, and other similar items.
   TRAVEL TRAILER, TRAVEL VEHICLE or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. The same as
“recreational equipment”, defined in M.S. § 168.002, as it may be amended from
time to time, and “recreational camping vehicles”, defined in M.S. § 327.14, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.082 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The floodplain area within the jurisdiction of this subchapter are
hereby established as the Floodplain District. The district shall include those
areas designated as numbered and unnumbered A Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (or all areas mapped as 100-year floodplain on the FIRM and FHBM). Within
the Floodplain District, the flood fringe shall include those areas designated
as floodway fringe on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.
   (B)   The boundaries of the Floodplain District shall be shown on the
Official Zoning Map. Within the district, all uses not allowed as permitted
uses or permissible as conditional uses shall be prohibited. No new structure
or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this subchapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the
jurisdiction of this chapter. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
      (1)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provision of
this subchapter and specifically §
153.087 of this chapter;
      (2)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after
damage to existing non-conforming structures and non-conforming uses of
structures or land area regulated by the general provisions of this subchapter
and specifically §
153.088 of this chapter; and
      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood-proofed structures must
be certified by ground surveys and flood-proofing techniques must be designed
and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified
in the general provisions of this subchapter and specifically §
153.088 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.083 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (FP).
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming and wild crop harvesting;
      (2)   Industrial - commercial loading and/or parking areas, and/or
airport landing strips adjacent to industrial or commercial property not in the
Floodplain District;
      (3)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, parks, wildlife and nature preserves,
fishing areas and single or multiple purpose recreational trails; and
      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
   (B)   Standards for FP permitted uses.
      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
      (2)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Accessory structures located within the flood fringe;
      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel and other materials;
      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharfs and water control
structures;
      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines;
      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials;
      (6)   Placement of fill;
      (7)   Travel trailers, travel vehicles and recreational vehicles on
individual lots of record in existing or new subdivisions, subject to the
exemptions and provisions of §
153.087(C) of this chapter;
      (8)   Structural works for flood control including, but not limited to,
levees, dikes and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to
protect individual structures, and levees or dikes where the intent is to
protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than
the ten-year frequency;
      (9)   General crop farming, pasture, grazing;
      (10)   Archery ranges, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting areas; and
      (11)   Swimming areas.
   (D)   Standards for floodplain conditional uses.
      (1)   All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including
fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause
any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
      (2)   Standards and procedures. All floodplain conditional uses shall be
subject to the procedures and standards contained in §
153.088(D) of this chapter.
      (3)   Fill.
         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable methods.
         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodplain unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with division (D)(3)(b) above,
dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-
site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to
the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the Council has
received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the material from the
floodplain based upon the flood warning time available.
      (4)   Accessory structures.
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
         (b)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of flood waters:
            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
            2.   As far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry flood-proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood-proofing
classification in the State Building Code; provided, the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size and,
for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of
vehicles and limited storage. All flood-proofed accessory structures must meet
the following additional standards, as appropriate:
            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and
            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
flood-proofed.
      (5)   Storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the Council.
      (6)   Changing course, current and the like. Structural works for flood
control that will change the course, current or cross-section of protected
wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provision of M.S. Ch. 105, as
it may be amended from time to time. Community-wide structural works for flood
control intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be
allowed in the floodplain.
      (7)   Increase in flood. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the
floodplain shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and
the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both
sides of a stream.
   (E)   Standards for permitted and conditional uses in the flood fringe.
      (1)   General. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at
or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board
of Appeals and Adjustments must specify limitations on the period of use or
occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining
that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures
exist.
      (2)   Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad
tracks and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to flood velocities
greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the regional flood.
      (3)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
division (E)(2) above. In considering permit applications, due consideration
shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be
located in floodplain areas.
      (4)   Fill. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria
for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      (5)   Hydraulic capacity. Floodplain developments shall not adversely
affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment
limit has not been specified on the Official Zoning Map.
      (6)   Travel trailers and the like. Standards for travel trailers and
travel vehicles are contained in §
153.087(C) of this chapter.
      (7)   Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to
be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.084 FLOODPLAIN EVALUATIONS IN AREAS WITHOUT DETAILED STUDY.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for a use
within the Floodplain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish such
of the following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator
for the determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether
the proposed use is within the floodplain:
      (1)   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional
areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high water information;
      (2)   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial
arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and
elevations of streets; photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation
upstream and downstream; and soil type; and
      (3)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line
of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
   (B)   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the purposed use is in the
Floodplain District and to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Procedures consistent with Minnesota Rules, latest supplement, (currently
codified in the 1990 Supplement, Number 1, as Minn. Rules parts 6120.5000
through 6120.6200) shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated
engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical
evaluation methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources area
hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert
shall:
      (1)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood;
      (2)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas; and
      (3)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage
increase than one-half foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional
stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in
computing floodway boundaries.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the Council. The Council must
formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended floodplain
boundary or deny the permit application. The Council, prior to official action,
may submit the application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the
Planning Commission for review and comment. Once the floodplain boundary has
been determined, the Council shall refer the matter back to the Zoning
Administrator who shall process the permit application consistent with
applicable provisions of §
153.083 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.085 LAND SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Review criteria.
      (1)   No land shall be subdivided for building construction which is held
unsuitable by the Planning Commission and Council for reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage or inadequate water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
All lots within the Floodplain District shall contain a building site at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All residential lots
contiguous to a stream and served by municipal sewer shall contain at least
15,000 square feet and shall be at least 75 feet wide at the building line. All
other residential lots served by municipal sewer shall contain 10,000 square
feet and shall be at least 100 feet wide at the building line. All subdivisions
shall have water and sewage disposal facilities that comply with the provisions
of this subchapter and have road access no lower than two feet below the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The following setbacks from the ordinary
high water mark shall apply to all structures:
         (a)   Fifty feet for lots served by public sewer; and
         (b)   Seventy-five feet for lots not served by public sewer.
      (2)   For all subdivisions in the Floodplain District, the regulatory
flood protection elevation, the required elevation of all access roads and
required setbacks shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings
and platting documents.
   (B)   Floodplain determination. When no detailed study has been performed,
applicants shall provide the information required in §
153.084 of this chapter to determine the 100-year or regional flood elevation,
and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.
   (C)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated
on fill above the 100-year or regional flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for
multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special
flood hazard area designation will be requested.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.086 PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   All public utilities and facilities including, but not limited to,
gas, electrical, sewer and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain
shall be flood-proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated
to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Railroad tracks, roads and bridges to be located within the Floodplain
District shall comply with §
153.083 of this chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where the
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of service would not endanger the public health or
safety.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.087 MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES.
   (A)   New manufactured home parks and expansion to existing mobile home
parks shall be subject to the provisions for land subdivisions contained in §
153.085 of this chapter.
   (B)   Manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks that are
located in the Floodplain District may be replaced only if in compliance with
the following conditions:
      (1)   The manufactured home lies in the flood fringe;
      (2)   The manufactured home is constructed, anchored, stabilized, and
utilities connected in compliance with requirements of Minnesota Rules, latest
supplement, (currently codified in the 1990 Supplement, Number 1, as Minn.
Rules parts 1350.0400 through 1350.3800);
      (3)   The manufactured home owner or renter is notified that the
manufactured home site lies in the floodplain and may be subject to flooding;
and
      (4)   The manufactured home park owner develops a flood emergency plan
consistent with the time available after a flood warning.
   (C)   Travel trailers, travel vehicles and recreational vehicles that do not
meet the exemption criteria specified below shall be subject to the provisions
of this subchapter and as specifically detailed below.
      (1)   Travel trailers, travel vehicles and recreational vehicles are
exempt from the provisions of this section if they are placed in any of the
areas listed in division (C)(2) below and further they meet the following
criteria:
         (a)   Have current licenses required for highway use; and
         (b)   Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking
system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
commonly used in campgrounds and travel trailer parks, and the travel trailer/
travel vehicle/recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions
attached to it.
      (2)   The following areas are exempted from placement of travel trailers,
travel vehicles and recreational vehicles:
         (a)   Individual lots or parcels of record;
         (b)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds;
and
         (c)   Existing condominium type associations.
      (3)   Travel trailers, travel vehicles and recreational vehicles exempted
in division (C)(1) above lose this exemption when development occurs on the
parcel exceeding $1,000 for a structural addition to the travel trailer, travel
vehicle or recreational vehicle; or an accessory structure including but not
limited to a garage or storage building. The travel trailer, travel vehicle and
recreational vehicle; all additions and accessory structures will then be
treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood-proofing
requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §
153.082 of this chapter.
      (4)   New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds, and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium campgrounds, and new residential
type subdivisions and condominium associations, and the expansion of any
existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be subject to
the following.
         (a)   Any new or replacement travel trailer, travel vehicle or
recreational vehicle will be allowed in the flood fringe; provided, the trailer
or vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood
protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in
accordance with §
153.082 of this chapter. No fill placed in the floodplain district to meet the
requirements of this subchapter shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or
regional flood.
         (b)   All new or replacement travel trailers, travel vehicles or
recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria in division (C)(4)(a) above may,
as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the
following provisions and the provisions of §
153.088(D) of this chapter. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the
safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. The plan
shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual and
shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
travel trailers, travel vehicles or other recreational vehicles must be
protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times
of flooding.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.088 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Code Official designated in §
153.003 of this chapter shall administer and enforce this subchapter. If the
Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this subchapter, he
or she shall notify the person responsible for the violation, indicating the
nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct it, as
further specified in §
153.004(E) of this chapter.
   (B)   All uses shall obtain a use permit in accordance with the following
standards:
      (1)   A use permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with
the provisions of this subchapter shall be secured prior to the erection,
addition or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof; prior to
the change or extension of a non-conforming use; and prior to the placement of
fill or excavation of materials within the floodplain;
      (2)   Application for a use permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator simultaneous to applying for a building permit on forms furnished
by him or her and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation of the channel;
      (3)   Prior to granting a use permit or processing an application for a
conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits;
      (4)   Use permits, conditional use permits or certificates of occupancy
issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications,
and no other use, arrangements or construction. Any use, arrangement or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter, and punishable as provided by §
153.006 of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. Flood-
proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
registered architect;
      (5)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered or non-
conforming use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged in its use of structure until
a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this subchapter. Where a non-conforming use or structure is
extended or substantially altered, the certificate of zoning compliance shall
specifically state the manner in which the non-conforming structure or use
differs from the provision of this chapter; and
      (6)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alteration
or additions to existing structures in the floodplain districts. He or she
shall also maintain a record of the elevations to which structures and
alterations or additions to structures are flood-proofed.
   (C)   Variances shall be heard and handled by the Board of Appeals and
Adjustment as provided in §
153.020 of this chapter. The following items shall also be provided in all
variance requests in the Floodplain Zoning District.
      (1)   No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses
prohibited in that district; permit a lower degree of flood protection than the
regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular areas, or permit
standards lower than those required by state law. In granting a variance, the
Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards including, but not
limited to, those specified in division (D)(4) below, which are in conformity
with the purposes of this subchapter. Violations of the conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable under §
153.006 of this chapter.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall submit to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at
least ten days’ notice of the hearing. A copy of all decisions granting
variances shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within
ten days of the action.
      (3)   (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a
variance that:
            1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
            2.   The construction below the 100-year or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property.
         (b)   The notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in
its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
      (4)   A certified copy of all variances granted shall be recorded in the
office of the County Recorder.
   (D)   Applications for conditional uses permissible under this subchapter
shall be subject to the general procedures set forth in §§
153.035 through
153.041 of this chapter and to the following requirements.
      (1)   A copy of the conditional use request shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources sufficiently in advance so as to allow
adequate review which in all cases shall be at least ten days prior to the
scheduled hearing. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits
shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of
the action.
      (2)   Procedures for evaluating proposed conditional uses within the
Floodplain (FP) District.
         (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for
a use within the General Floodplain District, the applicant shall be required
to furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the
Council and Planning Commission for the determination of the regulatory flood
protection elevation, and whether the proposed use is located in the floodway
or the flood fringe:
            1.   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-
sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high water
information;
            2.   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground, pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations, size, location; and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site;
location and elevations of streets; photographs showing existing land uses and
vegetation upstream and downstream; and soil type;
            3.   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development;
            4.   Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, flood-proofing measures and the relationship of the above to the
location of the channel; and
            5.   Specifications for building construction and materials, flood-
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
         (b)   One copy of the above information shall be transmitted to a
designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance
in determining whether the proposed use is in the floodway or flood fringe, the
regulatory flood protection elevation, project effects on flood velocities, the
seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for
protection and other technical matters. Procedures consistent with Minnesota
Rules, latest supplement, (currently codified in the 1990 Supplement, Number 1,
as Minn. Rules parts 6120.5600 and 6120.5700) shall be followed in this expert
evaluation. The designated engineer or expert shall:
            1.   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood;
            2.   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood
based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and over bank areas; and
            3.   Compute the floodway necessary to convey the regional flood
without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed.
         (c)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer
or expert, the Council and Planning Commission shall determine whether the
proposed use is in the floodway or flood fringe and the regulatory flood
protection elevation at the site.
      (3)   In passing upon conditional use permit applications, the Council
and Planning Commission shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments;
         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (e)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use;
         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for the area;
         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
         (l)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
subchapter.
      (4)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of
this chapter, the Council may attach such conditions to the granting of
conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
         (b)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation;
         (c)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed
restrictions;
         (d)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees and other protective measures; and
         (e)   Flood-proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing measures are
consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood
factors for the particular area.
      (5)   A certified copy of all conditional use permits shall be recorded
in the office of the County Recorder.
   (E)   The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be
removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in
error or that the area has been filled to, at or above the elevation of the
regional flood and is continuous to land outside the floodplain. Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources if he or she determines that, through other measures, lands are
adequately protected for the intended use. All amendments to this subchapter
including amendments to the Official Zoning Map as it relates to floodplain
areas must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (F)   When violation of the floodplain provisions are either discovered by
or brought to the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning
Administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document the
nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as is
reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate
Department of Natural Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency
Regional Office along with the community’s plan of action to correct the
violation to the degree possible.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 153.089 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the initial adoption or amendment to floodplain controls contained in this
subchapter or similar to those contained herein but which now is not in
conformity with the provisions of this subchapter may be continued subject to
the provisions of §
153.002 of this chapter and the following conditions.
   (A)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its non-conformity.
   (B)   Any alteration or addition to a non-conforming structure or non-
conforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential of
that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection
elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood-proofing
techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 flood-proofing classifications) allowable
in the State Building Code, except as further restricted below.
   (C)   The current cost of all structural alterations or additions to any
non-conforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of
the current market value of the structure on the date it became a non-
conforming use unless the conditions of this subchapter are satisfied. The cost
of all structural alterations and additions constructed since the adoption of
the city’s initial floodplain controls must be calculated into today’s current
cost which will include all costs such as construction materials and a
reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the current cost of all
previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50% of the current
market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of §
153.082 of this chapter for new structures. It is the intent of this provision
that all values be adjusted to present day values for an as equal a comparison
as possible.
   (D)   If any non-conforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this subchapter. The
real estate tax assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of
instances of non-conforming uses which have been discontinued for such a
period.
   (E)   If any non-conforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its market value at the time
of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new
uses or new structures in §
153.083 of this chapter will apply.
   (F)   The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a list of those non-conforming
uses which have been flood-proofed or otherwise adequately protected in
conformity with §
153.088(D)(4) of this chapter. He or she shall present the list to the Council
which may issue a certificate to the owner stating that the uses, as a result
of these corrective measures, are in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.10)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 153.100 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is recognized that this subchapter is structured to regulate land
use and development patterns of a conventional or traditional nature; however,
there are situations where innovative proposals for use of land may be
submitted which do not relate to ordinance controls and would have to be
rejected even though feasible and beneficial to the community. It is to
accommodate the innovative proposals, even those that may “mix” land uses
within a development, exceed stipulated residential densities or depart from
traditional lot sizes, that the PUD District is established. The technology of
land development is constantly changing, and creative, but practical approaches
to the use of land should be encouraged. The provisions of this subchapter are
intended to do so in a manner which is in the best interests of both the
developer and the community.
   (B)   The PUD District when finally established under the provision of this
subchapter shall be applied to and superimposed upon the underlying zoning
districts established in §§
153.055 through
153.062 of this chapter as the same now exist or are amended in the future. It
being the intent of the Council that no provision or regulation of the
underlying zoning district may be varied, modified or set aside unless
specifically allowed in the accepted PUD District final development plan.
(Prior Code, § 11.11)
§ 153.101 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Ownership. The tract shall be a development of land under unified
control at the time of application, planned and scheduled to be developed as a
whole. However, no authorizations or permits shall be granted for the
development unless the applicant has acquired actual ownership of or executed a
binding sales contract for all of the property comprising the tract. For
purposes of this subchapter, ownership shall include a lease of not less than
50 years’ duration. The term “single ownership” shall include a single owner,
or a group of land owners, acting through a corporation, where each owner
agrees in advance to be bound by the conditions and regulations which will be
effective within the district and to record the covenants, easements and other
provisions with the County Recorder at the appropriate time.
   (B)   Minimum size. No planned unit development shall consist of less than
one-half acre of contiguous land; provided that, a public street, public
highway or easements for drainage or utility purposes shall not prevent the
land from being considered “contiguous”.
   (C)   Comprehensive Plan. The development shall be planned so that it is
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the community.
   (D)   Harmony. The planned unit development shall be planned and developed
to harmonize with any existing or imminent development in the area surrounding
the project site.
   (E)   Financing. The financing for the project shall be proven to be
available to the applicant on conditions and in amounts which are sufficient to
assure completion of the planned unit development.
   (F)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   These may include and shall be limited to:
         (a)   Dwelling units in detached, semi-detached, attached groups of
attached, clustered or multi-storied structures, or any combination thereof;
         (b)   Any non-residential use, to the extent the non-residential use
is designed and intended to serve the residents of the planned unit
development, and other uses as exist or may reasonably be expected to exist in
the future; and
         (c)   Public and private education facilities.
      (2)   In a planned unit development designed primarily for other than
uses permitted above, the uses shall be limited to those permitted in the
zoning district in which the use is located.
   (G)   Recreational space. A minimum of 5% of the total area of a planned
unit development shall be set aside for recreational use. The use should be
effectively separated from automobile traffic and parking and be readily
accessible; the term “recreational use” shall not include space devoted to
streets and parking.
   (H)   Density. For planned residential developments proposed in existing
residential zones, an increase in density may be allowed based on Planning
Commission and staff evaluation of design excellence, landscaping and
distinctiveness in site work. The actual amount of density increase shall be a
matter of negotiation between the city and landowner, following review of the
preliminary plan in which an initial density is proposed. In recognizing that
the planned unit development process is designed to encourage flexibility and
innovative planning and design exercises, it becomes a matter of benefit to
both landowner and community to agree upon an appropriate density having
economic, aesthetic and practical value. It is intended that the city be the
arbiter in all cases where density increase is proposed.
(Prior Code, § 11.11)
§ 153.102 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Preliminary development plan; filing.
      (1)   An applicant for a planned unit development shall submit a
preliminary development plan to the Planning Commission, with a written
statement and payment of a fee, for costs incurred by the city in checking and
processing the plans. The application shall be signed by the owner(s) of every
property within the boundaries of the proposed planned unit development.
      (2)   The drawings which are part of the preliminary development plan may
be in general, schematic form and must contain the following information:
         (a)   Location and size of the site and nature of the landowner’s
interest in the land to be developed;
         (b)   The density of the land use to be allocated to the several parts
of the site to be developed;
         (c)   The location and size of any common open space and the form of
organization proposed to own and maintain the space;
         (d)   The use and approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures;
         (e)   Proposals for collection of sanitary wastes, distribution of
water and disposal of surface run-off;
         (f)   Provisions for parking of vehicles and location and width of
proposed streets and public ways;
         (g)   In the case of plans which call for development over a period of
years, a schedule showing the proposed times within which applications for
final approval of all sections of the planned unit development are intended to
be filed; and
         (h)   A topographic map of the subject property or properties,
prepared by a registered civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor, covering
the entire tract proposed for development and indicating existing conditions.
Development for an additional area must include at least 350 feet, unless the
city requires a lesser amount, from tract boundaries. The map shall be drawn at
a scale no smaller than 100 feet equal one inch, shall indicate topography at
two-foot contour intervals and show in accurate detail the topography, all
planned and existing buildings and all planned and existing land features and
trees. The Planning Commission may make an exception to this requirement if the
subject property is in a well-developed area with existing public utilities and
improved streets and storm sewers installed.
      (3)   The written statement which is a part of the application shall
include:
         (a)   A description of the character of the planned unit development
and the manner in which it has been planned to comply with the planned unit
development regulations;
         (b)   A statement of proposed financing;
         (c)   Economic feasibility analysis of any business uses if the
property is not zoned for similar business uses at the time of submittal of the
preliminary development plans;
         (d)   A statement of provisions for ultimate ownership and maintenance
of all parts of the development, including streets, structures and open spaces;
and
         (e)   Total estimated population to occupy the planned unit
development, with breakdowns as to the number of school-age children, adults
and families.
   (B)   Preliminary development plan/approval.
      (1)   Within 45 days after receipt of the application by the Planning
Commission, a public hearing upon the application shall be held by the Planning
Commission. The Commission may continue the hearing from time to time and refer
the matter back to the planning staff of the city for a further report;
provided, however, the public hearing or hearings shall be concluded within 45
days of the date of the first public hearing, unless the landowner shall
consent in writing to an extension of time within which the hearings shall be
concluded.
      (2)   Within 15 days after the conclusion of public hearings, the
Planning Commission shall forward the plan to the Council with a written report
recommending to the Council that the plan be disapproved, approved or approved
with modifications, and giving the reasons for these recommendations.
      (3)   The Council shall within 30 days of receipt thereof reject,
tentatively accept or modify the Planning Commission report. Failure to act
shall be deemed a rejection.
      (4)   In the event tentative approval is granted subject to conditions,
the landowner shall, within 45 days after receiving a copy of the conditions of
the Council, notify the Council in writing of the acceptance or refusal to
accept all conditions. Refusal by landowners shall constitute denial of the
plans by the Council. Failure of the landowner to notify the Council of his or
her acceptance or denial of the conditions to the plan constitutes acceptance
of the conditions.
      (5)   The acceptance, rejection or modification shall be based on
findings as set forth below and shall state in full in what respects the plan
would or would not be in the public interest, including, but not limited to,
findings of facts and conclusions based on the following:
         (a)   The plan is consistent with the stated objectives of planned
unit developments and the city’s Comprehensive Plan;
         (b)   The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned
unit development to the area in which it is proposed to be developed;
         (c)   That authorized distribution of buildings, streets and open
space will permit better site planning and thus benefit both the residents of
the development and community as a whole; and
         (d)   That such distribution or location will not unduly increase the
bulk of buildings, density of population or intensity of use to the detriment
of areas outside the development by restricting access to light and air or by
creating traffic congestion.
   (C)   Final development plan; approval.
      (1)   Within six months following the approval of the preliminary
development plan, the applicant shall file with the Planning Commission a final
development plan containing in its final form the information required in the
preliminary plan. In its discretion, and for good cause, the Planning
Commission may extend for six months the period for filing of the final
development plan. A public hearing on an application for a final approval of
the plan or part thereof, shall not be required, providing the plan, or the
part thereof submitted for final approval, is in substantial compliance with
the plan given tentative approval.
      (2)   (a)   In the event the plan as submitted for final approval is not
in substantial compliance with the preliminary plan, the Planning Commission
shall, within 45 days of the date the application for final approval is filed,
so notify the landowner, setting forth the particular ways in which the plan is
not in substantial compliance.
         (b)   The landowner may:
            1.   Treat the notification as denial of the final approval;
            2.   Re-file his or her plan so that it does substantially comply
with the preliminary plan; and
            3.   File a written request with the Planning Commission that it
hold a public hearing on its application for final approval.
         (c)   Any such hearing shall be held within 30 days after request for
such hearings is made. Within 45 days of either the hearing or re-filing, the
Planning Commission shall recommend and the Council shall, by resolution,
either grant final approval of the plan or deny final approval of the plan.
      (3)   Should approval of a planned unit development necessitate a change
in this chapter, the change shall be facilitated by amendment of the ordinance
following notice and public hearing(s) as required by the city ordinance. The
Zoning Administrator shall then change the zoning classification on the
Official Zoning Map if a zoning change was made. The planned unit development
area shall be designated on the Official Zoning Map as an overlying PUD
District whether or not a zoning change was made. The final plan and all
supporting documents shall be filed with the preliminary plan and together they
will form the terms and conditions establishing and governing the PUD District.
      (4)   Building permits shall not be issued for any of the structures, nor
shall land alterations be made until the following conditions are met, waived
or altered upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of the
City Council:
         (a)   Public open space has been dedicated and officially recorded;
         (b)   A cash payment in lieu of land donation has been made to
coincide with construction of each building according to the negotiated
agreement;
         (c)   The design and construction specifications for all utilities,
street improvements and mass grading have been approved by the City Engineer;
         (d)   Any private by-laws, covenants and deed restrictions have been
approved by the City Attorney;
         (e)   The construction plans for proposed structures have been
approved by the Building Inspector;
         (f)   The final plat (if necessary) has been approved by the city and
recorded with appropriate governmental agencies as required by law; and/or
         (g)   The detailed site development plans have been approved by all
appropriate city staff members and the Council and the signatures appear on the
plans.
   (D)   Non-compliance; inspection.
      (1)   In the event that a plan, or a section thereof, is given final
approval and thereafter the landowner shall abandon the plan or the section
thereof that has been finally approved, the landowner shall, within 30 days, so
notify the Council in writing. In the event the landowner shall fail to
commence the planned development within 12 months after final approval has been
granted, the final approval shall terminate and be deemed null and void unless
the time period is extended by the Council upon written application of the
landowner.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review each planned development at
least once each year until completed and shall make a report (through the
Planning Commission) to the Council on the status of the development in each
PUD District. If development is not progressing according to schedule, the
owner shall be required to submit a written statement to the Zoning
Administrator setting forth the reasons for the lack of progress.
      (3)   Within 30 days of the notice, the Council shall either revoke the
approval of the PUD provisions, and the land shall thereafter be governed by
the regulations applicable in the district in which it is located, or it shall
take such steps as it shall deem necessary to compel compliance with the plans
as approved, or it shall require the owner to seek an amendment of his or her
plan as provided below.
      (4)   After final approval, no planned unit development plan shall be
amended, except by the Council after a public hearing before the Planning
Commission; provided, however, that, the approved development schedule of the
plan may be extended for no more than one year by the Council without any
hearing or Planning Commission action.
(Prior Code, § 11.11)
OFF-STREET PARKING
§ 153.115 GENERAL.
   There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main building or at
the time such buildings are altered, enlarged, converted or increased in
capacity minimum off-street parking spaces with adequate provisions for ingress
and egress by standard sized vehicles in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter. All parking areas, access drives and driveways shall be covered
with a dust-free, all weather surface, such as concrete or asphalt, with proper
surface drainage.
(Prior Code, § 11.12)
§ 153.116 PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   Parking spaces shall be in accordance with divisions (B) through (D) below.
   (A)   Number.
      (1)   Required number. The off-street parking spaces required for each
use permitted by this chapter shall not be less than that found herein;
provided that, any fractional parking space is computed as a whole space.
      (2)   Less than the required number. Fewer than the required number of
off-street parking spaces found in the following table may be allowed with the
written approval of the Building/Zoning Official when operational and/or
statistical data supports the need for fewer parking spaces. An application
requesting fewer than required spaces must be completed on a form provided by
the Building/Zoning Official and must include supporting data.
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Use Numbers of Parking Spaces Required
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Use               Numbers of Parking Spaces Required
Assembly/churches 1 per 300 gross square feet
Dwelling unit     2 per dwelling unit
Club/restaurant   1 per 100 gross square feet
Hotel/motel       1 per guest room, plus 1 per 500 square feet of common area
Industrial        1 per 500 square feet
Medical           1 per 200 square feet
Offices/hospitals  
Office            1 per 300 square feet
Retail            1 per 200 square feet
School            1 per 3.5 seats in assembly rooms, plus 1 per faculty member
Warehouse         1 per 500 gross square feet
NOTES TO TABLE:
 
On-site parking facilities existing at the effective date of this chapter
shall not subsequently be reduced to an amount less than required under this
chapter for a similar new building or use. On-site parking facilities provided
to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not subsequently be
reduced below the requirements of this chapter. The required parking or
loading space shall not be used for storage of goods.
 
   (B)   Combination of uses. Where there is a combination of uses on a lot,
the required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of that found for each
use.
   (C)   Location of lot. The parking spaces required by this chapter shall be
provided on the same lot as the use or where the exclusive use of such is
provided on another lot not more than 500 feet radially from the subject lot
within the same or less restrictive zoning district.
   (D)   Accessible spaces. Accessible parking spaces and passenger loading
zones shall be provided in accordance with the state’s Building and
Accessibility Codes.
(Prior Code, § 11.12)
§ 153.117 PARKING STALL DIMENSIONS.
   Parking stall dimensions shall be in accordance with this section.
   (A)   (1)   Width. A minimum width of nine feet shall be provided for each
parking stall.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   Compact parking stalls shall be permitted to be eight feet.
         (b)   Parallel parking stalls shall be permitted to be eight feet
wide.
         (c)   The width of a parking stall shall be increased ten inches for
obstructions located on either side of the stall within 14 feet of the aisle or
front of the stall.
         (d)   Accessible parking spaces shall be designed in accordance with
the state’s Building and Accessibility Codes.
   (B)   (1)   Length. A minimum length of 20 feet shall be provided for each
parking stall.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   Compact parking stalls shall be permitted to be 18 feet in
length.
         (b)   Parallel parking stalls shall be a minimum 22 feet in length.
(Prior Code, § 11.12)
§ 153.118 DESIGN OF PARKING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Driveway width. Every parking facility shall be provided with one or
more access driveways, the width of which shall be the following:
      (1)   Private driveways at least nine feet. The maximum width for a
residential property shall be 22 feet or 35% of lot frontage which ever is the
greatest; and
      (2)   Commercial driveways:
         (a)   Twelve feet for a one-way enter/exit;
         (b)   Twenty-four feet for two-way enter/exit; and
         (c)   Thirty-two feet for state highway entrances with MnDot required
approvals and permits.
   (B)   Driveway and ramp slopes. The maximum slope of any driveway or ramp
shall not exceed 20%. Transition slopes in driveways and ramps shall be
provided in accordance with the standards set by the Code Official and Street
Department or other governing body.
   (C)   Stall access. Each required parking stall shall be individually and
easily accessed. No automobile shall be require to back onto any public street
on sidewalk to leave any parking stall when such stall serves more than two
dwelling units or other than residential uses. All portions of a public lot or
garage shall be accessible to other portions thereof without requiring the use
of any public street.
   (D)   Compact-to-standard stall ratio. The maximum ratio of compact stalls
to standard stalls in any parking area shall not exceed one to three (1:3).
   (E)   Screening, buffer fences and planting screens. Off-street parking,
loading and other allowed vehicle storage areas near or abutting residence
districts shall be screened by a buffer fence of adequate design or a planting
buffer screen; plans of the screen or fence shall be submitted for approval as
a part of the required site or plot plan, and the fence or landscaping shall be
installed as a part of the initial construction.
   (F)   Striping. All parking stalls shall be striped. Exception: a private
garage or parking area for the exclusive use of a single-family dwelling.
   (G)   Lighting. All lights illuminating a parking area shall be designed and
located so as to reflect away from any street and adjacent property.
   (H)   Surfacing. All parking stalls shall be hard surfaced (i.e., concrete/
asphalt).
(Prior Code, § 11.12)
LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS
§ 153.130 LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   Loading and unloading areas for goods, supplies and services shall be
sufficient to meet the requirements for each use. In any event, at least one
off-street loading space must be provided for any business with more than 1,000
square feet of gross floor area, unless otherwise determined by the Planning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 11.13)
§ 153.131 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   None of the on-site or off-street parking or loading area requirements of
this section shall apply within the old B-1 Central Business District zone to
existing improved tracts or parcels provided there is not more than a 10%
increase in the improved area or coverage of the tract or parcel existing on
the effective date of this chapter. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to unimproved tracts or parcels, nor when existing structures are
substantially demolished and a major development or redevelopment of the
property occurs.
(Prior Code, § 11.13)
§ 153.132 PAYMENT IN LIEU OF PRIVATE ON-SITE PARKING.
   If, in the sole judgment of the Council, it is physically and economically
impractical to comply with the on-site parking requirements for the Central
Business District contained in this subchapter, the Council may in lieu of
private on-site parking, require a payment to the city. The payment shall be
based on a per stall amount set from time to time by resolution of the Council.
The per stall amount shall be based upon the rate of 300 square feet per stall
and the approximate current value of unimproved land in the Central Business
District, plus the current estimated cost of improvements for base work, four-
inch blacktop mat and striping. The total amount of the in lieu payment shall
equal the number of on-site parking stalls required by the provisions of this
section less the number of on-site parking stalls existing after improvement,
multiplied by the per stall amount. All payments received by the city for this
purpose shall be held in a separate account and used exclusively for the
benefit of public parking in the Central Business District.
(Prior Code, § 11.13)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 153.145 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the safety and orderly
development of the community through the regulation of signs and sign
structures.
(Prior Code, § 11.14)
§ 153.146 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign structure that has ceased to be used and the owners
intend no longer to have used, for the display of sign copy or as otherwise
defined by state law.
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion.
ANIMATED SIGNS, which are differentiated from changeable signs, as defined and
regulated by this subchapter, include the following types.
      (1)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical or electro-mechanical input and/or
illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below.
         (a)   FLASHING. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of
illumination is either the same as or less than the period of no illumination.
For the purposes of this subchapter, FLASHING will not be defined as occurring
if the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds four
seconds.
         (b)   PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT. Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement
through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for
the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some
form of constant motion.
      (2)   ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs or devices motivated by
wind, thermal changes or other natural environmental input. Includes spinners,
pinwheels, pennant strings and/or other devices or displays that respond to
naturally occurring external motivation.
      (3)   MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric
motors or other mechanically induced means.
   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. Any projection that is not intended for occupancy
and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but that
does not include signs, as defined herein. See also AWNING; BACKLIT AWNING; and
CANOPY, ATTACHED AND FREE-STANDING.
   AWNING. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported
by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or non-
rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either
permanent or retractable, including such structures that are internally
illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
   AWNING SIGN. A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also WALL OR FASCIA SIGN.
   BACKLIT AWNING. An awning with a translucent covering material and a source
of illumination contained within its framework.
   BANNER. A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
   BANNER SIGN. A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
   BILLBOARD. See OFF-PREMISES SIGN and OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN.
   BUILDING ELEVATION. The entire side of a building, from ground level to the
roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building.
   CANOPY (ATTACHED).
      (1)   A multi-sided overhead structure or architectural projection
supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides and either
cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at additional
points.
      (2)   The surface(s) and/or soffits of an ATTACHED CANOPY may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. See also
MARQUEE.
   CANOPY (FREE-STANDING). A multi-sided overhead structure supported by
columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and or soffits of a free-
standing canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources or
light.
   CANOPY SIGN. A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
free-standing canopy. For reference, see §
153.147 of this chapter.
   CHANGEABLE SIGN. A sign with the capability of content change by means of
manual or remote input, including signs which are as follows.
      (1)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. A sign with whose message copy or content
can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching
combinations of alphabetical or pictographic components arranged on a display
surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized
by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an external light
source designed to reflect off the changeable component display. See also
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER.
      (2)   MANUALLY ACTIVATED. Changeable sign whose message copy or content
can be changed manually.
   CITY. The governing authority for the City of Luverne.
   CODE OFFICIAL. Person designated by the governing authority to enforce this
subchapter.
   COMBINATION SIGN. A sign that is supported partly by a pole and partly by a
building structure.
   COPY. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic elements
comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals identifying a
street address only.
   DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGN. A free-standing sign identifying a multiple-
occupancy development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial park,
which is controlled by a single owner or landlord, approved in accordance with
§
153.154 of this chapter.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign with two faces, back to back.
   ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER. An electrically activated changeable sign
whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed.
   EXTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed outside a building.
   FASCIA SIGN. See WALL OR FASCIA SIGN.
   FLASHING SIGN. See ANIMATED SIGN, ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED.
   FREE-STANDING SIGN. A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to
the ground, and not supported by a building, including signs supported by one
or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground. For visual
reference, see §
153.155 of this chapter.
   FRONTAGE (BUILDING). The length of an exterior building wall or structure of
a single premises orientated to the public way or other properties that it
faces.
   FRONTAGE (PROPERTY). The length of the property line(s) of any single
premises along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
   GROUND SIGN. See FREE-STANDING SIGN.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or
reflecting off its surface(s) (externally illuminated); or reflecting off its
surface(s) (externally illuminated).
   INTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed within a building, but not including “window
signs” as defined by this chapter. INTERIOR SIGNS, with the exception of window
signs as defined, are not regulated by this chapter.
   MANSARD. An inclined decorative roof-like projection that is attached to an
exterior building facade.
   MARQUEE. See CANOPY (ATTACHED).
   MARQUEE SIGN. See CANOPY SIGN.
   MENU BOARD. A free-standing sign orientated to the drive-through lane for a
restaurant that advertises the menu items available from the drive-through
window, and which has no more than 20% of the total area for the sign utilized
for business identification.
   MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN. Sign containing three or more faces.
   OFF-PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign that is not located upon the
premises of the business to which it refers and directs traffic to that
business location.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. See OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN.
   ON-PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on the lot where the business is located. ON-PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGNS
shall include signs marking entrances, exits, parking areas, drive throughs,
loading areas or other operational features of the premises.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages belonging to the use of,
products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN. A permanent sign erected, maintained or used in
the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or non-
commercial messages not belonging to the use of, products sold on, or the sale
or lease of, the property on which it is displayed.
   PARAPET. The extension of a building facade above the line of the structural
roof.
   POLE SIGN. See FREE-STANDING SIGN.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement,
cause or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor advertising sign
shall not be considered to be a POLITICAL SIGN.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a
building or building surface.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or
projects more than 18 inches from a building face or wall or from a structure
whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of
the property or premises upon which it is located.
   REVOLVING SIGN. A sign that revolves 360 degrees about an axis. See also
ANIMATED SIGN, MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED.
   ROOF LINE. The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the uppermost point of the facade or parapet.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign mounted on, and supported by, the main roof portion of a
building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which
is wholly or partially supported by such a building. Signs mounted on mansard
facades, pent eaves and architectural projections, such as canopies or
marquees, shall not be considered to be ROOF SIGNS.
   SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS. A freestanding temporary sign, with no moving parts or
lights, displayed outside a business during business hours, to advertise the
business, hours of operation, an event, a promotion, etc. (excluding real
estate signage). It is not intended as permanent business signage.
   SIGN. Any device visible from a public place that displays either commercial
or non-commercial messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or
pictorial symbols or representations. Non-commercial flags or any flags
displayed from staffs will not be considered to be SIGNS.
   SIGN AREA. The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the
combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face. The
area of any double-sided or “V” shaped sign shall be the area of the largest
single face only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a
circle. The area of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as 50% of
the sum of the area of all faces of the sign.
   SIGN COPY. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of numerals
identifying a street address only.
   SIGN FACE. The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is
displayed or illuminated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or sign structure, non-structural or
decorative trim, or any areas that are separated from the background surface
upon which the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a
reveal or border.
      (1)   In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the SIGN FACE shall
include the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon which
the sign copy is displayed or illuminated, but not open space between separate
panels or cabinets.
      (2)   In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the
SIGN FACE shall include the entire area of the surface that is routed, except
where interrupted by a reveal, border or a contrasting surface or color.
      (3)   In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters
or graphic elements affixed to a building or structure, the SIGN FACE shall
comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combinations of regular geometric
figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or separate graphic elements
comprising the sign copy, but not the open space between separate groupings of
sign copy on the same building or structure.
      (4)   In the case of sign copy enclosed within painted or illuminated
border, or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the
building or structure, the SIGN FACE shall comprise the area within the
contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure supporting a sign.
   TEMPORARY SIGN.
      (1)   A sign intended to display either commercial or non-commercial
messages of a transitory or temporary nature.
      (2)   Portable signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground,
or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is permanently
embedded in the ground, are considered TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   UNDER CANOPY SIGN or UNDER MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to the underside of
a canopy or marquee.
   V SIGN. Signs containing two faces of approximately equal size, erected upon
common or separate structures, positioned in a “V” shape with an interior angle
between faces of not more than 90 degrees with the distance between the sign
faces not exceeding five feet at the closest point.
   WALL OR FASCIA SIGN. A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior
wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than 18 inches from
the building or structure wall, including signs affixed to architectural
projections from the building; provided, the copy area of the signs remains on
a parallel plane to the face of the building facade or to the face or faces of
the architectural projection to which it is affixed.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to and readable from the public way or from adjacent
property.
(Prior Code, § 11.14) (Ord. 336, Third Series, effective 8-7-2014)
§ 153.147 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conformance to codes. Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to the
provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of the Minnesota Building Code
and any other ordinance or regulation within the city.
   (B)   Signs in the rights-of-way. No sign other than an official traffic
sign or similar sign shall be erected within two feet of the lines of any
street, or within any public way, unless specifically authorized by other
ordinances or regulations of the city or by specific authorization of the Code
Official.
   (C)   Projections over public ways. Signs projecting over public walkways
shall be permitted to do so only subject to the projection and clearance limit
either defined herein or, if not so defined, at a minimum height of eight feet
from grade level to the bottom of the sign. Signs, architectural projections or
sign structures projecting over a vehicular access area must conform to the
minimum height clearance limitations imposed by the city for the structures.
   (D)   Traffic visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the
intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct either free or clear
vision, nor at any location where by its position, shape or color, may
interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device.
   (E)   Computation of frontage. If a premises contains walls facing more than
one property line or encompasses property frontage bounded by more than one
street or other property usages, the sign area(s) for each building wall or
property frontage will be computed separately for each building wall or
property line facing a different frontage. The sign area(s) thus calculated
shall be permitted to then be applied to permitted signs placed on each
separate wall or property line frontage.
   (F)   Animation and changeable messages. Animated signs, except as
prohibited in §
153.149 of this chapter, are permitted in all non-residential zones as a
conditional use approved by the city’s Planning Commission. Changeable signs,
manually activated, are permitted in all non-residential zones. Changeable
signs, electrically activated, are permitted in all non-residential zones. Area
(s) shall apply to allowable signage square footage.
   (G)   Maintenance, repair and removal. Every sign permitted by this
subchapter shall be kept in good condition and repair. When any sign becomes
insecure, in danger of falling or is otherwise deemed unsafe by the Code
Official, or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained
in violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter, the owner thereof or
the person or firm using same shall, upon written notice by the Code Official
forthwith in the case of immediate danger and, in any case, within ten days,
make such sign conform to the provisions of this subchapter, or shall remove
it.
If within ten days the order is not complied with, the Code Official shall be
permitted to remove or cause such sign to be removed at the expense of the
owner and/or the user of the sign, or an administrative citation may be issued
as set forth in another section of this chapter.
   (H)   Obsolete sign copy. Any sign copy that no longer advertises or
identifies a use conducted on the property on which the sign is erected must
have the sign removed within 30 days after written notification of the Code
Official; and, upon failure to comply with the notice, the Code Official is
hereby authorized to cause removal of the sign, and any expense incident
thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or ground on
which the sign is located, or an administrative citation may be issued as set
forth in another section of this chapter.
   (I)   Non-conforming signs. Any sign legally existing at the time of the
passage of this subchapter that does not conform in use, location, height or
size with the regulations of the zone in which it is located, shall be
considered a legal non-conforming use structure and shall be permitted to
continue in such status until such time as it is either abandoned or removed by
its owner, subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   Structural alterations, enlargement or re-erection are permissible
only where the alterations will not increase the degree of non-conformity of
the signs.
      (2)   Any legal non-conforming sign may be removed or rebuilt without
increasing the existing height or area if it is damaged, or removed if allowed
to deteriorate to the extent that the cost of repair or restoration exceeds 50%
of the replacement cost of the sign as determined by the Code Official.
      (3)   Signs that comply with either divisions (I)(1) or (I)(2) above
require permits.
(Prior Code, § 11.14)
§ 153.148 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   (A)   The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   No sign shall be exempt from §
153.149 of this chapter:
      (1)   Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public
safety official;
      (2)   Directional, warning or informational signs authorized by federal,
state and/or the city;
      (3)   Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made of non-
combustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure;
      (4)   The flag of a government or non-commercial institution, such as a
school;
      (5)   Religious symbols decorations within the appropriate public holiday
season;
      (6)   Works of fine art displayed in conjunction with a commercial
enterprise where the enterprise does not receive direct commercial gain; and
      (7)   Street address signs that contain no advertising copy and which do
not exceed two and one-half square feet in area.
(Prior Code, § 11.14)
§ 153.149 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following devices and locations shall be specifically prohibited:
   (A)   Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere
with an official traffic sign, signal or device, or obstruct or interfere with
a driver’s view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic;
   (B)   Except as provided for elsewhere in this chapter, signs encroaching
upon or overhanging public right-of-way. No sign shall be attached to any
utility pole, light standard, street tree or any other public facility located
within the public right-of-way. The Code Official may approve the installation
of “special event” signs on utility property, such as for holidays or community
events;
   (C)   Signs which blink, flash or are animated by lighting in any fashion
that would cause such signs to have the appearance of traffic safety signs and
lights, or municipal vehicle warnings from a distance;
   (D)   Portable signs, except as allowed for temporary signs; and
   (E)   Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on
public or private property, except for signs meeting the following conditions:
      (1)   The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the display
of signs;
      (2)   The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part of
the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and do not
break the silhouette of the vehicle;
      (3)   The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently
registered and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and
actively used or available for use in the daily function of the business to
which the sign relate;
      (4)   Vehicles and trailers are not used primarily as static displays,
advertising a product or service, nor utilized as storage, shelter or
distribution points for commercial products or services for the general public;
and
      (5)   Balloons, streamers or pinwheels, except those temporarily
displayed as part of a special sale, promotion or community event. For the
purpose of this division (E)(5), TEMPORARILY means no more than 20 days in any
calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 11.14)
§ 153.150 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required. Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be
obtained from the Code Official for the erection, alteration and maintenance of
all signs erected or maintained within the city. Exemptions from the necessity
of securing a permit, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of
the sign involved from the responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a
safe manner and in a manner in accordance with all other provisions of the
code.
   (B)   Construction documents. Before any permit is granted for the erection
of a sign or sign structure requiring the permit, construction documents shall
be filed with the Code Official showing dimensions, materials and required
details of construction, including loads, stresses, anchorage and any other
pertinent data. The permit application shall be accompanied by the written
consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be
erected and by engineering calculations signed and sealed by a registered
design professional where required by the Minnesota Building Code.
   (C)   Changes to signs. No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged or
relocated, except in conformity to the provisions herein, nor until proper
permit, if required, has been secured. The changing or maintenance of moveable
parts or components of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or
the changing of copy, business names, lettering, sign faces, colors, display
and/or graphic matter, or content of any sign shall not be deemed a structural
alteration.
   (D)   Permit fees. Permit fees to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall be
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted from time to time by the City
Council. The Code Official may double the fee for any sign, which requires a
permit, if it is not obtained prior to the start of the work.
(Prior Code, § 11.15)
§ 153.151 SPECIFIC IDENTIFICATION SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Wall signs. In single-family residential no wall signs shall be
allowed, except hereunder. Multiple-family residential complex, commercial or
industrial buildings, may display wall signs per street frontage subject to the
limiting standards set forth in division (D)(8) below. For shopping centers,
planned industrial parks or other multiple occupancy non-residential buildings,
the building face or wall shall be calculated separately for each separate
occupancy, but in no event will the allowed area for any separate occupancy be
less than 12 square feet.
      (1)   Wall signs shall not extend beyond the ends or over the top of the
walls to which attached and shall not extend above the level of the second
floor of the building.
      (2)   Wall signs shall not extend more than 15 inches from the face of
the buildings to which attached.
      (3)   Any part of a sign extending over pedestrian traffic areas shall
have a minimum clearance of eight feet. If under eight feet, they must be
considered flush with the wall.
   (B)   Free-standing signs.
      (1)   In addition to any allowable wall signs, every single-family
residential subdivision, multiple-family residential complex, commercial or
industrial building shall be permitted to display free-standing or combination
of signs per street frontage subject to the standards set forth in division (D)
(8) below. A free-standing sign or bulletin board customarily incident to
places of worship, libraries, museums, social clubs, schools or societies may
be erected on the premises of such institutions. One such sign or bulletin
board, not exceeding 32 square feet, may be erected for each entrance on a
different street or highway.
      (2)   The area of this sign shall be deducted from the total area allowed
of all allowable signage.
         (a)   No free-standing sign shall be located within the right-of-way,
less than 15 feet from a side property line, nor be located less than 50 feet
from any other free-standing sign. The total number or permitted signs on any
lot in all districts shall not exceed two, of which only one may be pole sign
and only one of which may be a free-standing ground or low profile sign. Any
additional advertising signs must be on property owned by the business, company
or individual.
         (b)   If, for any reason, the property line is changed at some future
date, any free-standing sign made non-conforming thereby must be relocated
within 90 days to conform to minimum setback requirements.
         (c)   No free-standing sign shall be more than 30 feet in height above
highway grade. The height shall be measured vertically from the established
average grade directly below the sign or entry level of the building or
structure, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the sign, including
supporting structures. No sign shall project above the permitted principal
building height, except for any businesses abutting Highway 75 located within
the C-C Community Commercial Service Business District measured two-tenths mile
either north or south from the intersection of Highway 75 and Interstate 90,
would be allowed to install one sign on the property to a height of 100 feet.
The 100-foot height requirement would be measured from the Interstate 90 road
bed. This sign regulation would not supersede any existing height limitations
dictated by this chapter in any other area.
         (d)   No free-standing sign shall extend over or into public right-of-
way, nor shall it overhang the property lines.
         (e)   Free-standing signs under which a pedestrian walkway or driveway
passes must have a minimum vertical clearance of ten feet.
         (f)   Masonry/stone type signs or monuments shall not exceed six feet
in height and shall not be placed so as to impair visibility for motorists, or
be placed in the “clear view” triangle formed by a line 25 feet along each
property line from the corner and connected to form the triangle.
   (C)   On-premises directional signs.
      (1)   No more than two directional signs (one back to back sign) shall be
permitted per street entrance to any lot.
      (2)   There shall be no limit to the number of directional signs
providing directional information interior to a lot.
      (3)   In residential zones, the maximum area for directional signs shall
be one and one-half square feet.
      (4)   For all other zones, the maximum area for any directional sign
visible from adjacent property or rights-of-way shall be six square feet.
      (5)   Not more than 25% of the area of any directional sign shall be
permitted to be devoted to business identification or logo, which area shall
not be assessed as identification sign area.
   (D)   Off-premises directional signs. In addition to any free-standing sign
allowed in division (B) above, an off-premises directional sign may be allowed
pursuant to the following requirements on any parcel abutting Highway 75, with
permission of the owner of the parcel, unless zoned R-1 (one- and two-family
residences) where they shall not be allowed.
      (1)   Off-premises directional signs shall be a sign with a maximum area
of 32 square feet on a single-faced sign or 64 square feet on a double-faced
sign.
      (2)   On a parcel where no permitted free-standing signs exist, one off-
premises directional sign (pole or ground sign) shall be allowed subject to the
setback and height requirements of division (B)(2)(f) above.
      (3)   On a parcel with one free-standing sign on a pole and no free-
standing ground sign, one off-premises directional sign may be installed under
the business sign on the pole or may be installed as a ground sign and the
ground sign shall conform to the requirements in division (B)(2)(f) above.
      (4)   On a parcel with one free-standing ground sign and no free-standing
sign on a pole, one off-premises directional sign may be installed on a pole or
may be installed as a ground sign and the ground sign shall conform to the
requirements in division (B)(2)(f) above.
      (5)   On a parcel with one free-standing sign on a pole and one free-
standing ground sign, an off-premises directional sign may be installed under
the business sign on the pole.
      (6)   Off-premises directional signs shall display only a business name
or logo and directional information.
      (7)   No business shall have more than one off-premises directional sign.
      (8)   Not more than one off-premises directional sign shall be located on
any parcel.
 
Identification Sign Standards, Wall Signs
Land Use                              Aggregate Area (Square Feet)
Commercial and industrial             2 square feet for each foot of street
                                      frontage
Multiple-family residential           6 square feet
Non-residential in a residential zone Conditional use only
Single-family residential             2.5 square feet
 
Free-Standing Sign Area
Distance of the Sign from the Property Line Area of Permitted Signage
0 - 8 feet                                  32 square feet
8 - 25 feet                                 48 square feet
Over 25 feet                                96 square feet
 
(Prior Code, § 11.16) (Ord. 336, Third Series, effective 8-7-2014)
§ 153.152 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   Real estate signs located on a single residential lot shall be
limited to one sign, not greater than four feet in height and six square feet
in area.
      (2)   Real estate signs advertising the sale of lots located within a
subdivision shall be limited to one sign per entrance to the subdivision, and
each sign shall be no greater than 12 square feet in area, nor eight feet in
height. All signs permitted under this section shall be removed within ten days
after the sale of the last original lot.
      (3)   Real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of space within
commercial or industrial buildings shall be no greater than 32 square feet, nor
eight feet in height, and shall be limited to one sign per street front.
      (4)   Real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of vacant
commercial or industrial land shall be limited to one sign per street front,
and each sign shall be no greater than 96 square feet and 12 feet in height.
      (5)   Real estate signs shall be removed not later than ten days after
execution of a lease agreement in the event of the purchase.
   (B)   Development and construction signs. Signs temporarily erected during
construction to inform the public of the developer, contractors, architects,
engineers, the nature of the project or anticipated completion dates, shall be
permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   The signs on a single residential lot shall be limited to one sign,
not greater than eight feet in height and 12 square feet in area.
      (2)   The signs for residential subdivision or multiple residential lots
shall be limited to one sign, at each entrance to the subdivision or on one of
the lots to be built upon, and shall be no greater than eight feet in height
and 16 square feet.
      (3)   The signs for commercial or industrial projects shall be limited to
one sign per 150 feet of frontage or part there of, not to exceed 12 feet in
height and 32 square feet in area.
      (4)   Development and construction signs may not be displayed until after
the issuance of construction permits by the Building/Zoning Official, or
approval of the Code Official and must be removed be removed not later than 48
hours following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any or all portions
of the project.
   (C)   Special promotion, event and grand opening signs. Promotional signage,
including banners, for special events of limited duration, not exceeding 16
square feet in a residential zone and 32 square feet in all other zones and not
exceeding eight feet in height; provided that:
      (1)   Placement shall not exceed 30 days before or five days following
the event; and
      (2)   The names and addresses of the sponsors and the person responsible
for removal must be filed with the Code Official.
   (D)   Special event signs in public ways. Signs advertising a special
community event shall not be prohibited in or over public rights-of-way,
subject to approval by the Code Official as to size, location and method of
erection. The Code Official may not approve any special event signage that
would impair the safety and convenience of use of public rights-of-way or
obstruct traffic visibility.
   (E)   Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted only in commercial
and business districts, subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   No more than one such sign may be displayed on any property, and
shall not exceed a height of six feet or area of 16 square feet.
      (2)   The signs shall be displayed not more than 20 days in a calendar
year.
      (3)   Any electrical portable signs shall comply with the state’s
Electrical Code.
      (4)   No portable sign shall be displayed prior to obtaining a sign
permit.
      (5)   All portable signs shall comply with setback requirements set out
in this chapter.
   (F)   Political signs. Political signs shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   All political signs shall comply with rules and regulations as
specified in state statute.
      (2)   Signs shall not be placed in any public right-of-way or obstruct
traffic visibility.
(Prior Code, § 11.17)
   (G)   Sandwich board signs. Sandwich board signs are allowed for use in
conjunction with commercial businesses, stores, or shops, and on premises of
eating or drinking establishments, subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   No more than one such sign may be displayed in front of the
associated establishment, limited to a maximum two feet in width and 42 inches
in height.
      (2)   The sign shall be placed on that part of the sidewalk closest to
the associated use and the nearest part of the sign structure shall not be
separated by more than two feet from the wall of the building. Sign shall not
be placed so as to interfere with or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
cause the width of the sidewalk to be reduced below five feet in width, nor
shall they be placed or maintained in a manner that prevents free ingress or
egress from any door, window, or fire escape.
      (3)   The sign must be constructed of materials that present a finished
appearance. Windblown devises, including balloons, may not be attached or
otherwise made part of the sign.
      (4)   Such signs with a singular (non-changing) message shall be
displayed not more than 30 days in a calendar year. The sign shall be removed
at the end of the business day and may only be displayed during regular
daylight business hours. Sandwich boards must be weighted down or removed if
wind gusts to 20 mph.
      (5)   Application for a sandwich board sign permit must include a signed
indemnification agreement.
§ 153.153 SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES.
   (A)   Canopy and marquee signs.
      (1)   The permanently-affixed copy area of a canopy or marquee sign shall
not exceed an area equal to 25% of the face area of the canopy, marquee or
architectural projection upon which the sign is affixed or applied.
      (2)   Graphic striping, patterns or color bands on the face of a
building, canopy, marquee or architectural projection shall not be included in
the computation of sign copy area.
   (B)   Awning signs.
      (1)   The copy area of an awning sign shall not exceed an area equal to
25% of the background area of the awning surface to which such a sign is
affixed or applied, or permitted area for wall or fascia signs, whichever is
less.
      (2)   Neither the background color of an awning, nor any graphic
treatment or embellishment thereto such as striping, patterns or valances,
shall be included in the computation of sign copy area.
   (C)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   Projecting signs shall be permitted in lieu of free-standing
signage on any street frontage limited to one sign per occupancy along any
street frontage with public entrance to the occupancy, and shall be limited in
area to two square feet per each lineal foot of building frontage; except that,
no sign shall exceed an area of 72 square feet. Projecting signs shall be
centered on the building as far as is practicable. A building having multiple
commercial tenants shall be permitted to have more than one projecting sign,
but total number of projecting signs for the building may not exceed more than
one sign for each 25 feet of frontage
      (2)   No such sign shall extend vertically above the highest point of the
building facade upon which it is mounted.
      (3)   The signs shall not extend more than seven feet from a building or
four feet from the inner curb line of the nearest street, whichever is less.
      (4)   The signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance above any public
sidewalk a minimum of eight feet.
   (D)   Under canopy signs.
      (1)   Under canopy signs shall be limited to no more than one such sign
per public entrance to any occupancy and shall be limited to an area not to
exceed eight square feet.
      (2)   The signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance above the
sidewalk or pedestrian way a minimum of eight feet or be flush with the
building.
   (E)   Roof signs.
      (1)   Roof signs shall be permitted in commercial and industrial areas
only when specifically designed into the structure at construction or
additional engineering is submitted with permit application.
      (2)   Such signs shall be limited to a height above the roofline of the
elevation parallel to the sign face of no more than 25% of the height of the
roofline in a commercial district and 33% in an industrial district.
      (3)   The sign area for a roof sign shall be assessed against the
aggregate permitted area for wall signs on the elevation of the building most
closely parallel to the face of the sign.
   (F)   Window signs. Window signs shall not be permitted for any non-
residential use in a residential district, and shall be permitted for all
commercial and industrial districts, subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed 25% of the
window area on which the signs are displayed. Window panels separated by
muntins or mullions shall be considered as one continuous window area.
      (2)   Window signs shall not be assessed against the sign area permitted
for other sign types.
   (G)   Menu boards. Menu board signs shall not be permitted to exceed 50
square feet.
   (H)   Home occupation. No sign other than one unlighted sign not over two
and one-half square feet in area, attached flat against the dwelling and
displaying only the occupants name and occupation, shall advertise the presence
or conduct of the home occupation.
(Prior Code, § 11.18) (Ord. 336, Third Series, effective 8-7-2014)
§ 153.154 SIGNS IN DEVELOPMENT COMPLEXES.
   (A)   Master sign plan required.
      (1)   All landlords or single owner controlled multiple-occupancy
development complexes on parcels exceeding eight acres in size, such as
shopping centers or planned industrial parks, shall submit to the Code Official
a master plan prior to issuance of new sign permits.
      (2)   The master sign plan shall establish standards and criteria for all
signs in the complex that require permits, and shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
         (a)   Proposed sign locations;
         (b)   Materials;
         (c)   Type of illumination;
         (d)   Design of free-standing sign structures;
         (e)   Size;
         (f)   Quantity; and
         (g)   Uniform standards for non-business signage, including
directional and informational signs.
   (B)   Development complex sign.
      (1)   In addition to the free-standing business identification signs
otherwise allowed by this chapter, every multiple-occupancy development complex
shall be entitled to one free-standing sign per street front, at the maximum
size permitted for business identification free-standing signs, to identify the
development complex.
      (2)   No business identification shall be permitted on a development
complex sign.
      (3)   Any free-standing sign otherwise permitted under this chapter may
identify the name of the development complex.
   (C)   Compliance with master sign plan. All applications for sign permits
for signage within a multiple-occupancy development complex shall comply with
the master sign plan.
   (D)   Amendment. Any amendments to a master plan must be signed and approved
by the owner(s) within the development complex before the amendment will become
effective.
(Prior Code, § 11.19)
§ 153.155 SIGN IMAGES.
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 153.170 SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS.
   All sewer and water systems hereafter constructed or maintained shall
conform to the provisions of this section and any other provisions of the city
code or regulations of the city and the state.
   (A)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   Public sanitary sewers shall be installed as required by standards
and specifications as established by the Council.
      (2)   Where municipal public sanitary sewer is not available, the Council
may, by ordinance, grant a franchise for the sewers to serve all properties in
the area where a complete and adequate community sanitary sewer system and
plant are designed, and complete plans for the system and plant are submitted
to and approved by the Council and the state’s Board of Health before
construction.
      (3)   Individual sewer systems shall be constructed according to
standards and regulations approved by the Council and the state’s Board of
Health. Individual sewer systems shall be located at least 50 feet from any
well.
   (B)   Water systems.
      (1)   Public water facilities, including pipe fittings, hydrants and the
like shall be installed as required by standards and specifications as
established by the Council.
      (2)   Where public water facilities are not available, the Council may,
by ordinance, grant a franchise for the water facilities, to serve all
properties within the area where a complete and adequate community water
distribution system is designed, and complete plans for the system are
submitted to and approved by the Council and the state’s Board of Health.
      (3)   Individual wells shall be constructed according to standards and
regulations approved by the Council and the state’s Board of Health.
      (4)   Individual wells shall be located at least 50 feet from any sewer
system.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 153.171 EXTRACTION OF MATERIALS AND MINERALS; OPEN PITS AND IMPOUNDING OF
WATERS.
   All excavations, extraction of materials and minerals, open pits and
impounding of waters hereafter established or enlarged shall conform to the
provisions of this section and any other provisions of the city code or
regulations of the city.
   (A)   Definition. EXCAVATIONS, as used in this section, shall mean any
artificial excavation of the earth, within the city, dug, excavated or made by
the removal from the natural surface of the earth of sod, soil, sand, gravel,
stone or other matter or made by tunneling or breaking or undermining the
surface of the earth. Excavations ancillary to other construction of any
installation erected or to be erected, built or placed thereon
contemporaneously with or immediately following the excavation and covering or
to cover the excavation when completed are excepted, if a permit has been
issued for the construction or installation. Excavations not exceeding 50
square feet of surface area and two feet in depth are accepted.
   (B)   Conditional use permit required. It is unlawful for any person to
hereafter dig, excavate, enlarge, make, maintain or allow to be maintained,
upon property owned or used by him or her, any open pit or excavation of any
impounding water, without first making an application for and obtaining from
the Council and the Planning Commission a conditional use permit therefor.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   Application for the permit shall be made in a form, and the
applicant shall furnish information, as shall be required by the Council and
among other things shall state:
         (a)   Applicant’s true name and address;
         (b)   A full description of the location of the land where the pit or
excavation is or is to be or where the impounded waters are or are to be
maintained, and also a full description of the location on the land of the pit,
excavation or impounded waters;
         (c)   When required by the state, an approval by the state to impound
the waters or to make the excavation as described in the application;
         (d)   The purpose of the pit or excavation or the quantity of water
impounded;
         (e)   The highways, streets or other public ways in the city upon and
along which any material for removal is to be hauled or carried; and
         (f)   The estimated time when building or removing will begin and be
completed.
      (2)   Such application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and
processed in a manner required of all conditional use permit applications.
   (D)   Filing of map, plat. The Council may require a map or plat of the
proposed pit or excavation to be made and filed with the application before
acting on the same, showing the confines or limits thereof, together with the
proposed depth thereof at different parts thereof. A similar map or plat may be
required in regard to the proposed container for the impounded water.
   (E)   Conditions of permit. The Council as a prerequisite to the granting of
a permit or after a permit has been granted may require the applicant to whom
the permit is issued or the owner or user of the property on which the open pit
or excavation or impounded waters are located to:
      (1)   Properly fence any pit or excavation;
      (2)   Slope the banks and otherwise properly guard and keep the pit or
excavation in such condition as not to be dangerous from caving or sliding
banks;
      (3)   Properly drain, fill or level any pit or excavation, after created,
so as to make the same safe and healthful as the Council shall determine;
      (4)   Keep any pit, excavation or impounded waters within the limits for
which the particular permit is granted;
      (5)   Remove excavated material from any pit or excavation, away from the
premises, upon and along the highways, streets or other public ways as the
Council shall order and direct; and
      (6)   Provide, for the purpose of retaining impounded waters, a container
of sufficient strength and durability and maintain the container in safe and
proper condition.
   (F)   Bond may be required. The Council may require either the applicant or
the owner or user of the property on which the open pit or excavation or
impounded waters are located to post a bond, in such form and sum as the
Council shall determine, with sufficient surety running to the city,
conditioned to pay the city the extraordinary cost and expense of repairing,
from time to time, any highways, streets or other public ways where the repair
work is made necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and travel,
in removing materials for any pit, excavation or impounded waters, the amount
of such cost and expense to be determined by the City Engineer; and conditioned
further to comply with all the requirements of this section and the particular
permit, and to pay any expense the city may incur by reason of doing anything
required to be done by any applicant to whom a permit is issued.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 153.172 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   It is the intent of this section to provide that conditional uses in all
residence districts and permitted and conditional uses of land and buildings in
all business and industry districts shall be established and
maintained with proper appearance from streets and adjoining properties and to
provide that each permitted use shall be a good neighbor to adjoining
properties by the control of the following.
   (A)   Standards.
      (1)   Landscaping. All required yards shall either be open landscaped and
green areas or be left in a natural state. If any yards are to be landscaped,
they shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs and the like.
Any areas left in a natural state shall be properly maintained in a sightly and
well-kept condition. Yards adjoining any residence district shall be landscaped
with buffer planting screens. Plans of the screens shall be submitted for
approval as a part of the site plan and installed prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for any tract in the district.
      (2)   Noise. Noise shall be measured on any property line of the tract on
which the operation is located. Noise shall be muffled so as to not become
objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or intensity.
      (3)   Odors. Odors from any use hereafter begun shall not be discernible
at the property line to a greater degree than odors from plants for the
manufacture or fabrication of books, textile weaves, electronic equipment or
other plants in which operations do not result in greater degree of odors.
Detailed plans for the prevention of odors crossing property lines may be
required before the issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   Glare. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlight
or high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination,
shall not be visible beyond any property line.
      (5)   Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination shall
direct light away from adjoining properties.
      (6)   Vibration. Vibration shall not be discernible at any property line
to the human sense of feeling for three minutes or more duration in any one
hour.
      (7)   Smoke. Measurements shall be of the point of emission. The
Ringelman Smoke Chart, published by the United State Bureau of Mines, shall be
used for the measurement of smoke. Smoke not darker or more opaque than No. 1
on the Chart may be emitted, except that smoke not darker or more opaque than
No. 2 on the Chart may be emitted for periods not longer than four minutes in
any 30 minutes. These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also
apply to visible smoke of different color, but with an equivalent opacity.
      (8)   Dust. Solid or liquid particles shall not be emitted at any point
in concentrations exceeding 0.3 grain per cubic foot of the conveying gas or
air. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack temperature of
500°F and 50% excess air.
      (9)   Hazard. Every operation shall be carried on with reasonable
precautions against fire and explosion hazards.
   (B)   Compliance.
      (1)   In order to ensure compliance with the performance standards set
forth above, the Council may require the owner or operator of any permitted or
conditional use to have investigations and tests as may be required to show
adherence to the performance standards.
      (2)   The investigation and tests as are required to be made shall be
carried out by an independent testing organization as may be selected by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 153.173 GRADING AND EXCAVATION REGULATIONS.
   This section is intended to provide the community fair and equitable grading
practices and shall not supersede the requirements of any other ordinance or
code.
   (A)   Protection of utilities. Public utilities or services shall be
protected from damage caused by grading or excavation operations.
   (B)   Protection of adjacent property. Adjacent properties shall be
protected from damage by grading operations. No person shall excavate on land
sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public or private property, without supporting
and protecting the property from damage that might result.
   (C)   Inspection notice. The Code Official shall be notified at least 24
hours prior to the start of work.
   (D)   Temporary erosion control. Precautionary measures necessary to protect
adjacent watercourses and public or private property from damage by water
erosion, flooding or deposition of mud or debris originating from the site
shall be put in effect. Precautionary measures shall include provisions of
properly designed sediment control facilities so that other properties are not
affected by erosion from run off.
   (E)   Traffic control and protection of streets. Flaggers, signs, barricades
and other safety devices to ensure adequate safety when working in or near
public streets shall be provided. All work on public ways and streets shall be
approved by the city’s Street Department prior to commencing work.
   (F)   Hazard from existing grading. Whenever any existing excavation,
embankment or fill has become a hazard to life or limb, endangers structures or
adversely affects the safety, use stability of a public way or drainage area,
the excavation, embankment or fill shall be eliminated.
   (G)   Tracking of dirt onto public streets. Adequate cleaning of equipment
to prevent the tracking of dirt and debris onto public streets shall be
provided.
   (H)   Maintenance of waterways and drainage areas. Precautionary measures to
protect and maintain the flow of waterways and drainage areas shall be taken.
   (I)   Revegetation. The loss of trees, ground cover and topsoil shall be
minimized on any grading project. In addition to mechanical methods of erosion
control, graded areas shall be protected to the extent practical from damage by
erosion by planting grass or ground cover plants and/or trees. The plantings
shall provide for rapid, short-term coverage of the slopes as well as long-term
permanent coverage. A plan by a registered design professional shall be
provided where required by the Code Official.
   (J)   Design standards. The grading design standards required shall be those
found in nationally recognized standards.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 153.174 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Height regulations.
      (1)   Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one foot rise or
fall in seven feet of horizontal distance from the established street elevation
at the property line, one story in addition to the number permitted in the
district in which the lot is situated shall be permitted on the down-hill side
of any building.
      (2)   Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this chapter may be
increased by 100% when applied to the following:
         (a)   Monuments;
         (b)   Flag poles;
         (c)   Cooling towers; and
         (d)   Grain elevators.
      (3)   Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this chapter shall have
no limitations when applied to the following:
         (a)   Church spires, belfries or domes which do not contain usable
space;
         (b)   Water towers;
         (c)   Chimneys or smokestacks; and
         (d)   Radio or television transmitting towers.
   (B)   Yard regulations. Measurements shall be taken from the nearest point
of the wall of a building to the lot line in question, subject to the following
qualifications.
      (1)   Cornices, canopies or eaves may extend into the required front yard
a distance not exceeding four feet, six inches.
      (2)   Fire escapes may extend into the required front yard a distance not
exceeding four feet, six inches.
      (3)   A landing place or uncovered porch may extend into the required
front yard to a distance not exceeding six feet, if the landing place or porch
has its floor no higher than the entrance floor of the building. An open
railing no higher than three feet, six inches may be placed around the place.
      (4)   The above enumerated architectural features may also extend into
any side or rear yard to the same extent; except that, no porch, terrace or
outside stairway shall project into the required side yard distance.
   (C)   Yard landscaping. In all business districts and in all industry
districts, all required yards shall be either open landscaped and green areas
or be left in a natural state, except as provided hereby. If any yards are to
be landscaped, they shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs
and the like. Any areas left in a natural state shall be properly maintained in
a sightly and well-kept condition. Yards adjoining any of the residence
districts shall be landscaped with planting buffer screens. Plans for such
screens shall be submitted as a part of the application for building permit and
installed as a part of the initial construction.
   (D)   Storage of materials. In all residential and business districts, open
storage or display of materials in any required front, side or rear yard shall
be prohibited. Any other storage shall be located or screened so as not to be
visible.
   (E)   Area regulations.
      (1)   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space required for or in connection with any building for the purposes
of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space
or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other
building, unless specifically allowed under other provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   No yard, lot or parcel, or combination thereof, which are adjacent
to each other so as to form one lot with continuous frontage and in the same or
similar ownership exercising common control over the entire parcel as a single
unit shall, at any time after the effective date of this chapter, be reduced in
size or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter. Yards or
lots created hereafter must meet at least the minimum size and area
requirements required by the city code.
      (3)   In any district where residential dwellings are permitted, a one-
family detached dwelling may be erected on any lot of official record at the
effective date of this chapter irrespective of its area or width; provided
that, a remaining portion of any adjacent lot of official record is not under
the same or similar ownership exercising common control over the entire parcel
as a single unit; and, further that, all other applicable yard and open space
requirements and setbacks are satisfied or a variance obtained.
   (F)   Accessory uses. The following accessory uses, in addition to those
herein before specified, shall be permitted in any residential district, if the
accessory uses do not alter the character of the premises in respect to their
use for the purposes permitted in the district:
      (1)   The operation of necessary facilities and the equipment in
connection with schools, colleges, universities, hospitals and other
institutions permitted in the district;
      (2)   Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks and
playgrounds; and
      (3)   Fallout shelters.
   (G)   Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall occupy the same lot as
the main use or building.
      (1)   Separation from main building. All accessory buildings shall be
separated from the main building by ten feet.
      (2)   Private garages. An accessory building used as a private garage
shall be permitted to be located in the rear yard or side yard provided that
setbacks are maintained and the structures do not encroach on recorded
easements. In all residential zones, garages and accessory building shall not
exceed the finished square footage of living space with a cumulative square
footage maximum of 1,200 square feet.
      (3)   Storage buildings. All detached accessory buildings used for
storage or other similar uses shall be permitted to be located in any portion
of the rear yard. No storage building shall be located in the side or front
yard. All storage buildings shall be located no closer than three feet from the
property line, ten feet from any other building or exceed 12 feet in height.
Exception: garages shall be allowed to exceed the height requirement when
constructed in a similar/consistent style with the house. Any storage building
over 120 square feet shall be considered a garage and must meet all State
Building Code requirements and require and building permit.
      (4)   Attachment to other building. In case any accessory building is
attached to the principal or main building, it shall be made structurally a
part of the principal or main building and shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal or main building
and the Building Code.
      (5)   Required main structure. On all residential zones no accessory
structure shall exist without a primary dwelling unit on the same parcel or
lot.
   (H)   Placement and screening of microwave dishes in all zoning districts.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to regulate microwave receiving
dishes within all zoning districts so as to minimize their visual impact.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to microwave
receiving dishes having a diameter of one meter (39.4 inches) or less.
      (3)   Any microwave receiving dish shall be screened by sight-obscuring
fences and/or dense landscape buffers.
      (4)   Location on any roof is prohibited.
      (5)   Satellite and/or antenna dishes shall not be located in any front
yard setback or side yard setback.
      (6)   The maximum height from grade level to the highest point of the
receiving dish shall be 15 feet.
      (7)   A zoning permit shall be required for the installation of any dish
or antenna. Zoning permit applications shall require the submission of a site
plan and structural components.
      (8)   Each dish or antenna shall be grounded to protect against natural
lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code.
      (9)   Dish and antenna electrical equipment and connections shall be
designed and installed in adherence with the National Electrical Code.
   (I)   Screening of microwave dishes in any district.
      (1)   Any ground-mounted microwave receiving dish located in any
district, except for an industrial district shall be screened by dense
landscape buffers.
      (2)   Ground-mounted dishes and antennas shall be set back from all
adjoining lots a distance equivalent to the height of the dish or antenna.
Ground-mounted dishes and antennas shall be located ten feet or more from any
other building or structure on the same lot and shall not be located within a
utility easement. Location shall not adversely obstruct views from an adjacent
property.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 153.175 FENCES.
   (A)   All fence installations shall be processed with a fence permit
application. No inspection will be required, fees, if any, will be set by
resolution. The application shall contain:
      (1)   Site plan, including lot dimensions, with structure locations
(including setbacks);
      (2)   Location of proposed fence with heights; and
      (3)   Description of materials used for fence.
   (B)   No fence shall exceed six feet in height, from the front of the house
to the back lot lines, and along the back lot line. No fence shall exceed four
feet in height from the front of the house to the front lot line, along front
lot line. Fences erected or other obstructions on corner lots must maintain a
25-foot (from corner pin location) and along the street side, a clear view
triangle. No fence or other obstructions shall exceed three feet in height in
the “clear view area”. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of
a fence to provide access for reading meters by means of an unlocked gate or
relocation of the meters or reading devices to an accessible location (property
owner’s expense).
   (C)   The city does not dictate which side of the fence must be “finished”.
No fences shall be constructed of light-weight materials such as chicken coop
wire, barbed wire or bamboo. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, chicken
coop wire may be used for vegetable gardens located within the perimeter of
rear or side yards. Products manufactured for other uses such as plywood,
corrugated steel or fiberglass panels are prohibited as allowed fencing
materials.
   (D)   The property owner is responsible for locating property lines.
Property pins may be located at each corner and should be located before a
fence is erected. Property dimensions and street rights-of-way may be obtained
from the Code Official. The owner may also hire a surveyor to locate the
property lines, and this is recommended if the location is in dispute. The city
does not survey properties, or represent a guarantee of lot dimensions or
corner locations. Fences must not encroach on adjacent properties. Maintenance
of both sides of the fence (painting, mowing and the like) should be considered
when determining placement. It is the responsibility of the fence owner to
maintain the fence.
   (E)   The city does not settle property line disputes between neighbors,
including, but not limited to, disputes over placement of fences, hedges and
trees.
   (F)   The city does enforce proper setbacks, as required in other sections
of this chapter. Fences may be placed in easement areas only with approval of
the city’s Public Utilities Departments.
(Prior Code, § 11.21)
NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES
§ 153.190 INTENT.
   (A)   Within the districts as originally established by this chapter or
amendments thereto or other prior zoning regulations of the city, there exist
lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before
previous zoning regulations or this chapter were adopted or amended, but which
would be prohibited under the terms of these ordinances and amendments thereto.
   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter to permit these non-conformities
to continue as provided hereinafter, but not to encourage their survival. The
uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts
involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that non-conformities shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded, nor be used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
   (C)   A non-conforming use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land, or
a non-conforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged
after adoption of any ordinance finding such use to be non-conforming by
attachment of additional signs to a building, or the placement of additional
signs or display devices on the land outside the building, or by the addition
of other structures or uses, if the additions are of a nature which would be
prohibited generally in the district involved.
   (D)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this section shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment to this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently pursued. ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION is hereby defined
to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and
fastening in a permanent manner, and demolition, elimination and removal of an
existing structure in connection with the construction; provided that, actual
construction work shall be diligently pursued until the completion of the
building involved and a building permit is continuously in force and effect for
the construction.
(Prior Code, § 11.23)
§ 153.191 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter which the original provision herein or amendment thereto would have
prohibited the dwelling or accessory building construction. The lot must be in
separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots or parcels in
the same or similar ownership exercising common control over the entire parcel
as a single unit. This provision shall apply even though the lot fails to meet
the requirements for total lot area, width or depth that are generally
applicable in the district; provided that, yard dimensions, setbacks and other
requirements not involving total lot area, width or depth of lots shall conform
to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located unless a
variance is obtained for the requirements.
   (B)   If two or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots or
parcels, or portions thereof, with continuous frontage are in the same or
similar ownership exercising common control of the entire parcel as a single
unit at any time after the effective date of this chapter, and the lots or
parcels together do not meet the requirements for lot width, depth and total
lot area as established in this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered
to be a non-divisible parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion
of the parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width, depth and
total lot area requirements established by this chapter unless all or a portion
of the land is sold or combined with adjoining other parcels so as to meet or
exceed the requirements. No division of any parcel of land may be made which
leaves any remaining portion of the land with a width, depth or total lot area
below the requirements stated in this chapter unless a variance is obtained.
(Prior Code, § 11.23)
§ 153.192 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where, at the original effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto,
or other prior zoning regulations of the city, wherein the lawful use of land
existed prior to the adoption thereof and that under the provisions thereof,
the use was no longer permissible under the terms thereof as enacted or
amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No non-conforming use of land shall be enlarged, increased or extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the effective date of the
ordinance making the use non-conforming.
   (B)   No non-conforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by the use at the effective
date of the ordinance making the use non-conforming.
   (C)   If any non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period
of more than 90 days, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the
regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which the land is
located.
   (D)   A non-conforming use of land shall not be changed to another non-
conforming use of land. When any non-conforming use of land has been changed to
a conforming use of land, it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-
conforming use.
   (E)   A non-conforming use of land may be changed to lessen the non-
conformity of that use of land. Thereafter, the use of the land may not be
altered so as to increase the non-conformity.
(Prior Code, § 11.23)
§ 153.193 NON-CONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The lawful use of a structure existing at the original effective date
of this chapter, or amendments thereto, or other prior zoning regulations
which, under the provisions of the ordinances or regulations do not conform to
the provisions therein, shall be discontinued within a reasonable period of
amortization of the structure thereafter. A reasonable period of amortization
shall begin after the date of the adoption of the ordinance or regulation
finding it to be non-conforming and shall be considered to be 40 years for
buildings of ordinary wood construction, 50 years for buildings of wood and
masonry construction and 60 years for buildings of fire-proof type
construction. The reasonable period of amortization for other structures shall
be ten years.
   (B)   No structure which contains a non-conforming use may be enlarged,
extended, converted, reconstructed or structurally altered unless the use of
the structure is changed to one permitted within the district in which the
building is located and the non-conforming use thereof shall not thereafter be
resumed.
   (C)   No structure containing a non-conforming use destroyed by any peril or
means to an extent where the cost to repair the damage to the structure equals
or exceeds the most current assessor’s market value prior to the time of the
damage shall be reconstructed or repaired, except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Should the structure containing a non-conforming use be moved for any
reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
   (E)   When a structure containing a non-conforming use, or the use and
premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive
months or any 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or
structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used, except in
conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (F)   Whenever a structure containing a non-conforming use, or the use and
premises in combination, loses its right to lawful use under the provisions of
this section, the Council may, at any time thereafter, require the use of such
structure to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located
or its removal and destruction. Failure on the part of the Council to make the
requirement within any period of time after its use becomes unlawful shall not
abrogate its right to do so at any future time.
   (G)   On any structure devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming
use, work may be done in any 12 consecutive month period on ordinary repairs
and maintenance to non-bearing non-structural walls, fixtures, wiring or
plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 10% of the most current assessed market
value of the structure; provided that, the cubical and habitable space content
of the building as it existed at the time it became non-conforming shall not be
increased.
   (H)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent the
restoring of a structure containing a non-conforming use to a safe condition
when the structure is declared to be hazardous or unsafe by an authorized
government official unless the cost of the restoration equals or exceeds the
most current assessor’s market value of the structure or a conditional use
permit is obtained. The restoration shall not extend the non-conforming use of
a structure in any manner, except as reasonably required to eliminate the
hazardous or unsafe condition, nor shall the amortization period for its
existence be extended. Non-structural and minor alterations may be made to any
residential structure containing non-conforming residential dwelling units when
the same will improve the liveability of the units; provided that, it does not
increase the number of dwelling units in the structure. Any non-conforming use
of a structure, or non-conforming use of a structure and premises combination,
to which its non-conformance relates solely to floodplain regulations may, if
permitted by the regulations, alter the structure for purposes of substantially
reducing potential flood damages to the entire structure. In no event shall any
repair or maintenance or other alteration to a non-conforming use of a
structure be allowed which would extend or intensify the non-conforming use of
the structure.
(Prior Code, § 11.23)
§ 153.194 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Well-maintained non-conforming structures which contain conforming uses may
be maintained, altered, enlarged and rebuilt; provided, the altered structure
is no less conforming than before the alteration.
(Prior Code, § 11.23)
CANNABIS BUSINESSES
§ 153.200 CANNABIS BUSINESS MINIMUM BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business within
1,000 feet of a school.
   (B)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a retail cannabis business
within 500 feet of an attraction within a public park that is regularly used by
minors, including a playground or athletic field excluding Rotary Park.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, subd. 1e, nothing in this section shall
prohibit an active cannabis business or a cannabis business seeking
registration from continuing operation at the same site if a school moves
within the minimum buffer zone.
(Ord. 47, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025)
§ 153.201 ZONING AND LAND USE FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Cultivation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cultivation
are permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning districts: I-1 or I-
2, cultivation to occur indoors.
   (B)   Cannabis manufacturer. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cannabis manufacturer are permitted as a conditional use in the following
zoning districts: D, I-1 or I-2, with all processing, handling, and storage
indoors.
   (C)   Hemp manufacturer. Businesses licensed or endorsed for lower-potency
hemp edible manufacturers permitted in the following zoning districts: D, I-1,
I-2, with all processing, handling, and storage indoors.
   (D)   Wholesale. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for wholesale are
permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning districts: D, I-1, I-2,
H-C or C-C, with all storage indoors.
   (E)   Cannabis retail business.
      (1)   Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cannabis retail are
permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning districts: I-1, I-2, H-
C, C-C or D.
      (2)   I-1 and I-2. Only when the principal use of the property is
cannabis cultivation and/or manufacturing in accordance with a licensed
cannabis micro- or mezzobusiness; retail may not exist as a principal use.
   (F)   Cannabis transportation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
transportation are permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning
districts: D, I-1, I-2, H-C or C-C.
   (G)   Cannabis delivery. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
delivery are permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning districts:
D, I-1, I-2, H-C or C-C.
   (H)   Cannabis testing facility. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed as
cannabis testing facilities are permitted as a conditional use in the following
zoning districts: D, I-1 or I-2.
   (I)   Lower-potency hemp edible retailer. Businesses licensed or endorsed to
sell lower-potency hemp edibles directly to consumers are permitted in the
following districts: H-C, C-C or D.
   (J)   Lower-potency hemp edible wholesaler. Businesses licensed or endorsed
for lower-potency hemp edible wholesale are permitted in the following
districts: D, I-1, I-2, H-C, or C-C, with all storage indoors.
(Ord. 47, Fourth Series, effective 4-24-2025; Ord. 55, Fourth Series, effective
8-7-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   STREET NAME CHANGES
      
II.   CHARTER AMENDMENTS
      
III.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
IV.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
      
V.   ANNEXATIONS
      
VI.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
VII.   UTILITY EASEMENTS
TABLE I: STREET NAME CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Effective Description
Ord./  Date
Res.   Effective Description
No.
43,              Changes the names of the following streets: Vary Street to Brown Street; Van Eps
New    3-2-1948  Street to Crawford Street; Howard’s Way to Cedar Street; and Fletcher Street to
Series           Warren Street
3,               Changes the names of the following streets: North Fairway Drive to North Fairview
Third  2-24-1981 Drive; South Fairway Drive to South Fairview Drive; and West Fairway Drive to West
Series           Fairview Drive
67,              Changes the names of the following streets: Cottage Grove Avenue and Harrison
Third  3-13-1989 Street, located and platted in Industrial Park First Addition, to Gabrielson Road
Series
147,             Changes the name of the following street: Veteran’s Drive to West Veteran’s Drive
Third  6-14-1993 in the Veteran’s Addition and to East Veteran’s Drive in the Veteran’s Second
Series           Addition
165,
Third  1-9-1995  Changes the name of the following street: Walnut Street to Walnut Avenue
Series
226,             Changes the name/named the following streets: Park River Road to Park River Drive;
Third  3-27-2000 names road from Main Street South to the Wastewater Plant as Red Bird Road
Series
19,              Changes the names of the following streets: Adams Street to Cardinal Drive; North
Fourth 8-26-2021 East Park Street to Alumni Avenue; and School Street to 2184 Lane
Series
                
 
 
TABLE II: CHARTER AMENDMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Effective Description
Ord./Res. No.   Date Effective Description
1957 Charter Amendments
161, New Series 6-7-1976       Amends §4.03 of the City Charter
167, New Series 3-22-1977      Amends sections in Ch. 1 through 7, 9 and 12 of
                               the City Charter
1987 Charter Amendments
53, Third       4-11-1988      Amends §§5.01, 5.02, 5.03 and 5.04 of the City
Series                         Charter
64, Third       1-9-1989       Amends §7.13 of the City Charter
Series
89, Third       6-25-1990      Amends §2.07 of the City Charter
Series
90, Third       6-25-1990      Amends §4.01 of the City Charter
Series
91, Third       6-25-1990      Amends §§5.01 and 5.03 of the City Charter
Series
92, Third       6-25-1990      Amends §§7.04, 7.06, 7.07 and 7.11 of the City
Series                         Charter
124, Third      1-27-1992      Amends §12.14 of the City Charter
Series
313, Third      3-9-2010       Amends §§5.03 and 5.04 of the City Charter
Series
315, Third      6-22-2010      Amends §§5.01 and 5.07 of the City Charter
Series
                              
 
 
TABLE III: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Effective Description
Ord./Res. No.        Date Effective Description
83, New Series       1-25-1966      The SE 1/4 of NE 1/4 and NE 1/4 of in 36-
                                    103-45
84, New Series       7-18-1966      Amends Ord. 83, New Series
                                    Lots 5 and 12 in Auditor s Plat No. 3,
86, New Series       11-22-1966     Subdivision of Outlot 17 of County Auditor
                                    s Plat of Luverne Outlots in 10-102-45
                                    Block 3, Greenvale Addition; part of Summit
105, New Series      11-4-1969      Avenue; and N 100 feet of W 443 feet of
                                    Outlot 23, Auditor s Outlot in 10-102-45
4, Third Series      4-28-1981      Emergency purchase of two police vehicles
13, Third Series     9-13-1982      Emergency repair of water tower transmitter
                                    Authorized trade of city land in Outlot 19
15, Third Series     1-17-1984      of County Auditor s Plat in 11-102-45 for
                                    Maxwell owned abandoned railroad land in
                                    11-102-45
                                    Donated Lots 7, 8 and 9, Block 15 of
16, Third Series     1-17-1984      Original Plat to Rock County Senior
                                    Citizens, Inc.
18, Third Series     4-10-1984      Purchase of new boiler at Rock County
                                    Community Pool
                                    Parcel in 11-102-45 adjacent to Blue Mound
19, Third Series     4-17-1984      Avenue to Rock County for additional right-
                                    of-way
28, Third Series     8-18-1986      Continued maintenance and operation of a
                                    turbine, generator and boiler
41, Third Series     12-28-1987     Lots 1 through 7, Block 2, Original Plat
61, Third Series     8-8-1988       Tract in NE 1/4-15-102-45 (Hakes)
63, Third Series     12-12-1988     Lot 4, Block 1, Kniss Park Addition (Street
                                    Shop)
                                    All of Lot 1 and E 100 feet of Lot 2, Block
76, Third Series     10-9-1989      1, Gabrielson Industrial Subdivision
                                    (Skattum)
82, Third Series     2-12-1990      A portion of Lot 3 in Gabrielson Addition
                                    (Taco Johns)
                                    Lot 3, Block 5, Gabrielson Industrial
86, Third Series     4-23-1990      Subdivision and a portion of Lot 4,
                                    Gabrielson Addition (M&M)
96, Third Series     7-24-1990      Portion of NW 1/4-2-102N-45W (conveyance/
                                    donation to State Vets Home)
106, Third Series    4-8-1991       East 100 feet of Lot 7, Block 1, Gabrielson
                                    Industrial Subdivision (Mark Jacobson)
                                    Lot 3 and a portion of Lot 2, Block 4,
109, Third Series    4-26-1991      Gabrielson Industrial Subdivision (Hills
                                    Stainless Steel)
110, Third Series    5-28-1991      Lots 1 through 20 in Block 1 and Lots 1
                                    through 14 in Block 2, Veteran s Addition
                                    North 85 feet of Lots 6 and 7, Block 2,
122, Third Series    12-2-1991      Randall and Holbert s Addition (Hall
                                    donated property)
148, Third Series    8-9-1993       Lots 19 through 22, Block 9, Original Plat
                                    (parking lot to Glen Gust)
                                    West 22 feet of Lot 20, all of Lots 21 and
153, Third Series    9-27-1993      22, Lot 10 - Original Plat (Connell
                                    Building to LEDA)
                                    Lots 2, except E 100 feet, 3 through 6 and
                                    7, except E 100 feet, Block 1; Lots 1
                                    through 8, Block 3; Lots 1 and 2, except
155, Third Series    10-12-1993     approximately 3.93 acres, Block 4; and
                                    undeveloped roads (1.82 acres) and drainage
                                    ditches (1.60 acres); Gabrielson Industrial
                                    Park Subdivision (Gabrielson Industrial
                                    Park to LEDA)
                                    Lots 1 through 10, 13 and 14, 16 through
157, Third Series    11-8-1993      20, Block 1; and Lots 1 through 7, 9
                                    through 13, Block 2 - Veteran s Addition
                                    (Veteran s Addition lots to LEDA)
                                    Portion of Lot 2, Block 1, Tri-State
169, Third Series    3-13-1995      Addition (Tri-State Insurance for
                                    Expansion)
172, Third Series    5-8-1995       Changing the name of Luverne Municipal
                                    Airport to Quentin Aanenson Field
187, Third Series    6-10-1996      Lots 4 through 7, Block 6, Original Plat
                                    (Sieps Rx Inc. for Family Drug Expansion)
                                    23.10 acres SW of I-90/TH 75 Interchange
191, Third Series    9-9-1996       (former Elmen Property to Christensen
                                    Corporation for Pamida Store)
198, Third Series    4-28-1997      Lot 1, Block 5, Gabrielson Industrial
                                    Subdivision (Charles P. Boson)
                                    1 acre in SE corner of 3-102N-45W
199, Third Series    5-27-1997      (transformer site to ISD #2184 for
                                    elementary school)
201, Third Series    7-14-1997      50.01 acres in SW 1/4 of 10-102N-45W (for
                                    Ethanol Plant)
                                    Lots 8, 9 and the W 1/2 of Lot 10, Block
220, Third Series    11-8-1999      12, Warren & Kniss Addition (212 W. Main/
                                    Baker)
                                    Lots 1 and 2, except N 36 feet, Lot 3,
223, Third Series    12-20-1999     except N 36 feet of W 20 feet, Lots 4 and
                                    5, Block 8, Original Plat (parking lot 100
                                    Block, S. Cedar Street)
                                    Block 18, except parcel in Van Eps and Vary
                                    s Addition; Lots 12, 13, 14 and 15 in Block
                                    14, Original Plat; Lots 1 and 2 and the W
224, Third Series    2-28-2000      81 feet of Lot 7, in Block 19, Van Eps and
                                    Vary s Addition; and Lots 2, 3, 4 and 8 in
                                    Block 23, Van Eps and Vary s Addition
                                    (hospital property)
225, Third Series    3-27-2000      Repeals Ord. 28, Third Series
244, Third Series    11-27-2001     N 68 feet of Lot 19, Block 16, Original
                                    Plat (land swap with Holy Trinity Church)
248, Third Series    6-25-2002      Sidewalk Tract in Block 3, Evergreen
                                    Addition (Roland and Karen Miller)
255, Third Series    12-9-2003      Lots 2 and 3, Block 1, Veteran s Addition
                                    (Sioux Valley Regional Health Services)
276, Third Series    6-14-2005      Lots 4 (except N 13.2 feet) and 5, Block 5,
                                    Auditor s Subdivision (Gene Rosenberg)
                                    W 25 feet of S 120 feet of Lot 4, Bock 15,
277, Third Series    6-14-2005      Warren and Kniss Second Addition (Blaine
                                    Radtke)
278, Third Series    7-12-2005      Well site, vicinity of Dodge Street and
                                    Blue Md Avenue (Robert Frakes)
                                    N 20 feet of S 68 feet of W ten feet of Lot
284, Third Series    6-13-2006      19 and N 20 feet of S 68 feet of Lots 20,
                                    21 and 22, Block 16, Original Plat (Holy
                                    Trinity Church)
                                    Lots 15, 16, 17 and E three feet of Lot 18,
286, Third Series    9-12-2006      Block 6, Original Plat (Dunkle Main Street
                                    Property)
                                    N 86 feet of Lots 12, 13, 14 and all of Lot
288, Third Series    12-12-2006     15, Block 10, Original Plat (Spring and
                                    Lincoln parking lot) (Jim Johannsen/Glen
                                    Gust)
                                    Lots 1 and 2, Block 23, Van Eps and Vary s
                                    Addition (parking lot) and Lot 8, Block 23,
289, Third Series    12-27-2006     Van Eps and Vary s Addition, (Chemical
                                    Dependency Office) (The Church of St.
                                    Catherine)
                                    S 100 feet of Lot 1 and S 100 feet of W 9.9
290, Third Series    5-22-2007      feet of Lot 2, Block 9, Original Plat
                                    (former City Hall, 203 E. Main Street)
                                    Part of N 1/2 NE 1/4 NW 1/4 - 15-102N-45W
296, Third Series    4-22-2008      land swap with Agri-Energy (12 A. to Agri-
                                    Energy; 8.66 A. to city)
                                    Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 Special Industry
299, Third Series    8-12-2008      First Addition (Special Industry First
                                    Addition to LEDA)
300, Third Series    10-14-2008     Sidewalk tract in Block 3, Evergreen
                                    Addition (Jim and Heather Johnson)
                                    Lots 7 through 12 and E ten feet of 13,
302, Third Series    2-10-2009      Block 7, Warren and Kniss (Library, 201 W.
                                    Main)
341, Third Series    9-10-2015      Lots 1 and 3 Barck Subdivision (Cleveringa
                                    Construction)
344, Third Series    3-24-2016      Lot 2 Barck Subdivision (Cleveringa
                                    Construction)
345, Third Series    4-7-2016       Lot 1, Block 1, Industrial Park First
                                    Addition (Merlin Kracht)
351, Third Series    2-14-2017      Lots 1 through 7 in Walnut Second
                                    Industrial Subdivision
10, Fourth Series    10-31-2019     A portion of Block 2, Mayes Addition
11, Fourth Series  11-26-2019     Replat of Uithoven Addition
13, Fourth Series  1-14-2020      Portions of Outlot 16 of Kniss Outlot
15, Fourth Series    3-11-2021      102 S. Walnut Ave. Lot 1, Replat of Lopau
                                       Addition
                                    Block 1, Towne Square First Addition and
16, Fourth Series    4-8-2021       Lot 2, 3, and 4, Block 3, Towne Square
                                    Second Addition
                                    Block 1, Towne Square First Addition and
20, Fourth Series    9-30-2021      Lot 2, 3, and 4, Block 3, Towne Square
                                    Second Addition (GreenSmith Luverne
                                    Holdings, LLC)
22, Fourth Series    10-14-2021     101 West Brown Street (Cleveringa
                                    Construction, Inc.)
25, Fourth Series    2-17-2022      A tract in Lot 3 and Lot 4, Block 8, Warren
                                    and Kniss Addition (Generations, Inc.)
30, Fourth Series    12-8-2022      Lot 10, Block 2, Warren & Kniss Addition
                                    (115 West Warren Street)
32, Fourth Series    1-5-2023       Outlot A, Replat of Lopau Addition
                                    West 63 feet of Lot 4, Block 4, Barck,
39, Fourth Series    2-8-2024       Adams and Howe s Addition, also known as
                                    409 E. Dodge Street (Jonathan D. Gamache
                                    and Alexis Randi Maria Kremer)
                                    West 63 feet of Lot 4, Block 4, Barck,
41, Fourth Series    5-2-2024       Adams and Howe s Addition, also known as
                                    409 E. Dodge Street (Rusty and Ashley
                                    Feuerstein)
                                    Tract consisting of parts of Lots 19, 20,
45, Fourth Series    10-10-2024     21, and 22 in Block 16 (Joshua and Amelia
                                    Young)
                                    Various tracts including part of Lots 1 and
46, Fourth Series    3-13-2025      2, Block 5, PJ Kniss Addition; part of Lots
                                    19 and 20, Block 7, Warren and Kniss
                                    Addition (State of Minnesota)
                                    Lot 8 in Block 22 in Van Eps and Vary s
49, Fourth Series    6-12-2025      Addition, also known as 414 N. Spring
                                    Street (Marcia Grabinski Revocable Trust)
                                    East 67 feet of Lot 1 in Block 4 in Kniss
50, Fourth Series    7-3-2025       Park Addition, also known as 712 W. Lawn
                                    Park Avenue (Francis Ladd)
51, Fourth Series    7-3-2025       Lot 1, Block 1, Mayes Addition (Luverne
                                    Economic Development Authority)
                                   
 
 
TABLE IV: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Effective Description
Ord./  Date
Res.   Effective Description
No.
131,   11-28-    Grants franchise to Central Natural Gas Company to operate and maintain
New    1972      a gas system in the city for a period of 25 years
Series
2,               Grants franchise to Zylstra Communications Corporation to operate and
Third  12-3-1980 maintain a cable television system in the city for a period of 15 years
Series           accepted by franchisee on 3-5-1981
180,   12-11-    Extends the term of the cable television franchise ordinance with
Third  1995      Zylstra Communications until 5-10-1996
Series
182,             Extends the term of the cable television franchise ordinance with
Third  4-8-1996  Zylstra Communications until 7-10-1996
Series
188,             Extends the term of the cable television franchise ordinance with
Third  6-10-1996 Zylstra Communications until 9-20-1996
Series
190,             Extends the term of the cable television franchise ordinance with
Third  8-26-1996 Zylstra Communications until 11-15-1996
Series
192,             Grants franchise to Zylstra Communications Corporation to operate and
Third  10-28-    maintain a cable television system in the city until 11-12-2016,
Series 1996      provided upgrade is completed by 11-12-2001; accepted by franchisee on
                 11-12-1996
206,             Grants franchise to Dakota Telecom Inc. (DTI) to operate and maintain a
Third  7-13-1998 cable television system in the city for a term of 15 years (2013);
Series           accepted by franchisee on 8-7-1998
236,   12-11-    Grants franchise to Reliant Energy Minnegasco to operate and maintain a
Third  2000      gas system in the city for a period of 20 years; accepted by franchisee
Series           on 1-3-2001
240,
Third  7-10-2001 Approves Mediacom’s cable television system upgrade proposal
Series
355,             Granting a franchise to Meidacom Minnesota LLC to construct, operate,
Third  7-25-2017 and maintain a cable television system
Series
                 Granting Centerpoint Energy Resources Corp., d/b/a Centerpoint Energy
14,              Minnesota Gas (“Centerpoint Energy”), its successors and assigns, a
Fourth 10-27-    nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate, repair and maintain
Series 2020      facilities and equipment for the transmission, distribution and sale of
                 gas energy for public and private use and to use the public ways and
                 grounds of the city for such purpose
 
 
TABLE V: ANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Effective Description
Ord./    Date      Description
Res. No. Effective
71, New  7-3-1956  Tract in SE 1/4 of 2-102-45
Series
85, New  7-18-1966 Tract in NE 1/4 of 15-102-45
Series
103, New 5-13-1969 Tract in NW 1/4 of 14-102-45
Series
135, New 5-22-1973 Tract in Westview Addition
Series
162, New 8-24-1976 Portion of NW 1/4 of Section 14 north of Interstate Highway 90, west of east
Series             right-of-way line of Chicago, St. Paul, Minneapolis and Omaha Railway
55,
Third    5-23-1988 All that part of NE 1/4-15-102-45 north of Interstate 90 (Gabrielson - 69.16 A)
Series
(Mun.
Board    6-9-1988
Order)
JT Res.  8-13-1990 SW 1/4 of NW 1/4-2-102-45 (Orderly annexation) (Veteran’s Addition - 40.00 A)
39-90
(Mun.
Board    10-1-1990
Order)
(Mun.
Board    11-2-1990 Correcting range number
Order)
137,     10-13-
Third    1992      Portion of SE 1/4 of NW 1/2-2-102-45 (Veteran’s Second Addition - 3.89 A)
Series
(Mun.
Board    11-6-1992
Order)
149,               SE 1/4 of NW 1/4-2-102-45, except Veteran’s Second Addition and S 438.57 feet
Third    8-30-1993 of NE 1/4 NW 1/4-2-102-45 (Evergreen Addition - 49.22 A)
Series
(Mun.
Board    9-15-1993
Order)
151,
Third    9-13-1993 0.96 acre of S 1/2 of SE 1/4-3-102-45 (portion of John Schuur property)
Series
(Mun.    10-13-
Board    1993
Order)
JT Res.            Magnolia Steak House, ELJIM, RIBOB, Viking Inn, I-90 right-of-way, E 50 feet of
62-93    9-13-1993 Olhausen property and Schoon, Renken and Limesand properties (orderly
                   annexation, south of I-90 - 90A)
(Mun.    10-13-
Board    1993
Order)
JT Res.  2-14-1994 East 33 feet of Walnut Avenue right-of-way (between Hatting and Warren - 2.0A)
9-94
(Mun.
Board    3-3-1994
Order)
158,
Third    3-14-1994 48.5 acres in SW 1/4-10-102-45 (Sybesma property)
Series
(Mun.
Board    4-8-1994
Order)
159,
Third    3-14-1994 0.74 acres in W 1/2 of SE 1/4-3-102-45 (Forrest property to Laabs)
Series
(Mun.
Board    4-8-1994
Order)
184,
Third    5-13-1996 31.51 acres in SW 1/4-10-102-45 (Sybesma Subdivision)
Series
(Mun.
Board    6-6-1996
Order)
202,
Third    8-11-1997 9.27 acres in E 1/4 corner of 15-102-45 (Hohn Implement)
Series
(Mun.
Board    9-12-1997
Order)
205,
Third    2-23-1998 2.29 acres in SW 1/4-10-102-45 (Fagen, Inc.)
Series
(Mun.
Board    3-6-1998
Order)
208,               9.27 acres in E 1/4 corner of 15-102-45 (Hohn Implement; amends Ord. 202, Third
Third    8-24-1998 Series, corrects legal description)
Series
(Mun.
Board    9-11-1998
Order)
217,
Third    8-9-1999  161.87 acres in Sections 9 and 16-102-45 (IBP/Gold’n Plump Area)
Series
(Minn.
Planning 9-3-1999
Order)
218,
Third    8-9-1999  55 acres in Section 15-102-45 (Industrial Park area, Fick property)
Series
(Minn.
Planning 9-3-1999
Order)
219,
Third    11-8-1999 123.97 acres in Section 3-102-45 (school area)
Series
(Minn.
Planning 12-3-1999
Order)
221,
Third    11-8-1999 8.3 acres in Section 14-102-45 (south of I-90, Drive-In Theatre Area)
Series
(Minn.
Planning 12-3-1999
Order)
242,               1.58 acres in NE 1/4 NW 1/4 of 15-102-45 (city-owned Industrial Park area,
Third    9-11-2001 Dreckman)
Series
(Minn.
Planning 9-27-2001
Order)
243,
Third    10-9-2001 0.3243 acre in W 1/2 SE 1/4 of 3-102-45 (Laabs Buffer Area)
Series
(Minn.
Planning 11-9-2001
Order)
253,
Third    9-16-2003 65.45 Acres in NW 1/4 of 2-102N-45W (Christensen property - new hospital area)
Series
(Minn.   10-13-
Planning 2003
Order)
254,
Third    9-23-2003 2.09 acres abutting Juhl Addition (Thielbar Addition)
Series
(JT.     11-12-
Res. 39- 2003
03)
(Minn.
Planning
Order)
JT Res.  12-27-    91.11 acres in NW 1/4 of 15-102N-45W (Marty Mayes)
66-06    2006
(Minn.
Planning 1-16-2007
Order)
304,
Third    4-14-2009 5.076 acres in SE 1/4 of 15-102N-45W (Rock Veterinary Clinic)
Series
(Minn.
Planning 5-14-2009
Order)
JT Res.  7-14-2015 3.89 acres (06-0096-100 and 06-0096-300) (Crossroads and James Remme)
32-15
(Minn.
Planning 7-22-2015
Order)
354,               Amends Ord. 253, Third Series; correcting and replacing the legal description
Third    4-25-2017 of the property annexed: 65.45 acres - Christensen property
Series
 
 
TABLE VI: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Effective Description
Ord./Res. No.     Date Effective Description
165, New Series   9-28-1976      Zoning map amendment
172, New Series   1-24-1978      Zoning map amendment
7, Third Series   8-25-1981      Zoning map amendment
8, Third Series   8-25-1981      Zoning map amendment
20, Third Series  5-15-1984      Zoning map amendment
27, Third Series  8-5-1985       Zoning map amendment
33, Third Series  4-17-1987      New zoning map adopted
36, Third Series  6-22-1987      Establishes interim zoning regulations
                                 designated for orderly annexations
39, Third Series  10-26-1987     Establishes permanent zoning regulations
                                 designated for orderly annexations
56, Third Series  6-27-1988      Zoning map amendment
60, Third Series  8-8-1988       Zoning map amendment
104, Third Series 3-11-1991      Zoning map amendment
115, Third Series 8-12-1991      Zoning map amendment
129, Third Series 4-27-1992      Zoning map amendment
150, Third Series 9-13-1993      Zoning map amendment
154, Third Series 10-12-1993     Zoning map amendment
179, Third Series 11-22-1995     New zoning map adopted
185, Third Series 5-28-1996      Sybesma Subdivision
186, Third Series 6-10-1996      Evergreen Second Addition
194, Third Series 1-27-1997      Repealed by Ord. 196
196, Third Series 3-10-1997      Lot 8, Block 23, Van Eps and Vary’s
197, Third Series 3-24-1997      M&M/Fleming
213, Third Series 1-11-1999      Provides for Commercial Agricultural
                                 Districts; repeals Ord. 39, Third Series
222, Third Series 2-13-1999      Lot 2, Block 5, Gabrielson Industrial
                                 Subdivision
245, Third Series 3-26-2002      Hospital area, 29 lots
262, Third Series 4-13-2004      Outlot 1, Sioux Valley Addition
272, Third Series 2-22-2005      New zoning map adopted
309, Third Series 10-27-2009     Thone Addition
310, Third Series 10-27-2009     Rock Veterinary Clinic
339, Third Series 8-13-2015      Great Plains Processing
6, Fourth Series  12-27-2018     Lot 1, Block 1, Mayes Addition
8, Fourth Series  7-9-2019       Lots 1 & 2, Uithoven Addition
21, Fourth Series 10-14-2021     606 East Dodge Street
24, Fourth Series 11-11-2021     617 Kniss Avenue
                                 Lot 1, Block 1, Mayes Addition; Outlot A,
33, Fourth Series 3-2-2023       Lopau Addition; Lot 1, Lopau Addition; Lot 1,
                                 Block 1, Tri-State Addition; Lots 1, 2, and 3,
                                 Reisch Addition
                                
 
 
TABLE VII: UTILITY EASEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Effective Description
Ord./Res. No.     Date Effective Description
145, Third Series 3-8-1993       Utility easement changes (Poppenga/Rozeboom)
162, Third Series 7-11-1994      Utility easement changes (Gabrielson
                                 Industrial Subdivision)
164, Third Series 11-28-1994     Utility easement changes (Okarski-North
                                 Pleasant View Addition)
264, Third Series 5-25-2004      Utility easement changes (Michael Wenninger-
                                 Siebenahle r Addition)
266, Third Series 11-9-2004      Utility easement changes (Greg Aubert-
                                 Siebenahler Addition)
291, Third Series 6-12-2007      Repeals Ord. 162, Third Series; corrects
                                 utility easement error
308, Third Series 8-25-2009      Utility easement changes (Lots 1 and 2, Block
                                 5, Evergreen Addition) (three lots into two)
                                
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cites Code Section
M.S. Cites                             Code Section
10A.14                                 111.061
12                                     34.01,
                                       34.04
12.25                                  34.01,
                                       34.04
                                       32.02,
13                                     110.03,
                                       111.016
14.001 to 14.69                        111.015
15.73, subd. 3                         93.03
18G.07                                 91.40
65B.48, subd. 5                        70.17
89.001                                 91.40
89.01                                  91.40
89.51—89.64                          91.40
103F                                   153.076
103G.005, subd. 15                     91.19
105                                    153.083
115.01, subd. 5                        53.01
115.07                                 53.01
120A.05                                118.04
120A.24                                118.04
138.17                                 31.02
152.0263, subd. 5                      118.02
168                                    33.01
168.002                                153.081
168B.011                               91.18
                                       33.01,
169                                    70.01,
                                       91.03
169.222                                70.01
171.01                                 70.01
171.02                                 70.01
171.08                                 70.01
171.22                                 70.01
171.23                                 70.01
171.24                                 70.01
176.001 et seq.                        30.09,
                                       34.07
176.011, subd. 9, clause 6             30.09
176.182                                118.08
216B                                   50.22
216B.02                                93.03
216B.02, subd. 4                       93.03
216B.02, subd. 6                       93.03
216C.06, subd. 2                       153.020
216C.06, subd. 14                      153.008
216D                                   93.06,
                                       93.17
                                       93.11,
216D.01—216D.09                      93.17,
                                       93.26
216D.04, subd. 3                       93.03
237.16                                 93.01
                                       93.01,
237.162                                93.03,
                                       93.19
237.162, subd. 4                       93.03
237.162, subd. 12                      93.03
237.162, subd. 13                      93.03
237.162, subd. 16                      93.03
                                       93.01,
237.163                                93.03,
                                       93.19,
                                       93.31
237.163, subd. 2(b)                    93.02
237.163, subd. 6                       93.31
237.79                                 93.01
237.81                                 93.01
238                                    93.03
238.086                                93.01
245.462, subd. 23                      118.04
260.185                                131.01
260.755, subd. 12                      133.04
273.13, subd. 23, i(2)                 153.064
300.06                                 93.07
308A                                   93.03
326.242                                55.74
326.244                                55.74
                                       150.01,
326B.101—326B.194                    150.02,
                                       150.46
326B.121                               150.01,
                                       150.04
326B.133, subd, 1                      150.01
326B.139                               31.18
326B.140                               150.04
326B.153                               150.46
327.14                                 153.081
327.31                                 153.081
329                                    113.03
331A.01, subd. 10                      117.15
340A                                   118.25
340.29                                 111.001
340A.101                               111.001
340A.101, subd. 25                  111.001
340A.301                               111.001,
                                       111.065
340A.301, subd. 6(b)                   111.001
                                       111.001,
340A.301, subd. 6(c), (6)(i) or (6)(j) 111.065,
                                       111.066
340A.301, subd. 6(d), (6)(i) or (6)(j) 111.064
340A.315                               111.061,
                                       111.080
340A.404, sub. 1(c)                 111.060
340A.403                               111.046
                                       111.045,
340A.404                               111.060—
                                       111.062,
                                       111.080
340A.409                               111.022,
                                       111.062
340A.409, subd. 1 to 3a                111.061
340A.410, subd. 7                      111.001
                                       111.045,
340A.411                               111.047,
                                       111.080
340A.419                               111.060
340A.504                               111.048,
                                       111.081
340A.801                               111.022
340A.802                               111.015
                                       118.01,
                                       118.06,
342                                    118.25,
                                       118.26,
                                       153.008
342.01                                 118.04,
                                       133.01
342.01, subd. 34                       118.04
342.01, subd. 50                       118.04
342.01, subd. 59                       118.26
342.09                                 133.03
342.11                                 118.27
342.13(c)                              118.02
342.13(h)                              118.19
342.14                                 118.04
342.17                                 118.04
342.22                                 118.02,
                                       118.08
342.22, subd. 4(b)                     118.11
342.22, subd. 5(e)                     118.17
342.39, subd. 2                        118.27
343.235                                90.24
347.50                                 90.20
                                       117.01,
349                                    117.02,
                                       117.13
349.11—349.21                        117.99
349.11—349.23                        117.06,
                                       117.07
349.12                                 117.04
349.213                                117.02
                                       32.02,
364.06                                 110.03,
                                       111.016
                                       32.02,
364.09                                 110.03,
                                       111.016
366.011                                57.01
366.012                                57.01
412.191, subd. 4                       117.15
415.01                                 57.01
                                       33.52,
429                                    93.24,
                                       132.05,
                                       152.01
429.011                                151.05
429.02                                 33.32
429.021, subd. 1                       33.32
429.061                                91.40
429.101                                33.52,
                                       91.40
444.075                                56.01
444.075, subd. 3                       56.07
453                                    93.03
453A                                   93.03
                                       93.24,
462                                    152.01,
                                       153.076
462.357                                118.02
462.357, subd. 1e                      153.200
462.357, subd. 3                       153.021
462.358                                152.10
462.3593                               153.055
462.3593, subd. 9                      153.055
463                                    132.05
469.190                                116.14
471.465—471.469                      31.18
505                                    152.01
609.75—609.763                       117.06,
                                       117.99
624.20                                 130.22
626.862                                10.20
631.48                                 10.99
                                       
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Code Section
Prior Code Code Section
1.02       10.05
2.01       30.01
2.02       30.02
2.03       30.03
2.04       30.04
2.05       30.25
2.06       31.15
2.07       31.01
2.08       30.26
2.09       30.25
2.10       30.27
2.31       30.05
2.32       30.05
2.33       30.06
2.34       30.07
2.35       30.08
2.36       30.09
2.37       30.10
2.39       32.01
2.40       32.02
2.50       31.02
2.51       31.16
2.55       31.35—
           31.43
2.57       31.17
2.58       31.18
2.59       31.19
2.61       31.20
2.71       33.01—
           33.04
2.72       33.15—
           33.19
2.73       33.30—
           33.39
2.731      33.50—
           33.52
2.74       33.65—
           33.69
3.01       50.01
3.02       50.02
3.03       50.03
3.04       50.04
3.05       50.20—
           50.29
3.06       50.05
3.07       50.06
3.08       51.01—
           51.04
3.20       52.01—
           52.11
           53.01—
3.21       53.06,
           53.20—
           53.26
3.215      53.40—
           53.44
3.22       54.01—
           54.09
3.23       55.02—
           55.04
3.24       56.01—
           56.09
3.25       55.15—
           55.20
3.26       55.35—
           55.37
3.30       57.01—
           57.08
4.01       150.01
4.011      150.02
4.012      150.03
4.03       150.04
4.031      150.04
4.04       150.15—
           150.19
4.09       150.30—
           150.34
5.01       111.001
5.02       111.015
5.021      111.016
5.03       111.017
5.04       111.018
5.05       111.019
5.06       111.020
5.07       111.021
5.08       111.022
5.09       111.023
5.10       111.024
5.11       111.025
5.12       111.026
5.13       111.027
5.14       111.028
5.15       111.029
5.16       111.030
5.17       111.031
5.18       111.031
5.19       111.023
5.20       111.032
5.21       111.033
5.30       111.045
5.31       111.046
5.32       111.047
5.33       111.048
5.40       111.060
5.41       111.061
5.42       111.062
5.43       111.063
5.44       111.064
5.45       111.065
5.50       111.080
5.51       111.081
5.55       111.082
5.60       111.002
6.01       110.01
6.02       110.02
6.021      110.03
6.03       110.04
6.04       110.05
6.05       110.06
6.06       110.07
6.07       110.08
6.08       110.09
6.09       110.10
6.10       110.11
6.21       112.01—
           112.04
6.23       112.20—
           112.22
           114.01,
6.60       114.02,
           114.04,
           114.05
           111.003,
6.70       115.01—
           115.04
           111.003,
6.71       115.15—
           115.19
6.72       112.35—
           112.43
6.81       116.01—
           116.16
6.90       111.004
7.01       151.01
7.02       151.02
7.03       151.03
7.05       151.04
7.06       151.05
7.07       151.06
7.081      151.07
7.09       151.30—
           151.36
7.20       151.50—
           151.53
7.21       151.08
7.22       151.09
7.23       151.10
7.24       151.11
7.25       151.12
7.27       151.13
7.28       151.14
8.01       70.01
8.10       71.01
8.20       71.02
8.21       71.03 
8.22       71.04
8.23       71.05
8.50       73.01—
           73.12
8.60       70.15—
           70.17
8.61       73.25—
           73.27
8.99       70.99
9.01       72.01
9.02       72.02
9.03       72.03
9.04       72.04
9.05       72.05
9.06       72.06
9.07       72.07
9.08       72.08
9.09       72.09
9.10       72.10
9.20       72.11
9.30       72.12
9.31       72.13
9.32       72.14
9.33       72.15
9.34       72.16
9.35       72.17
9.36       72.18
9.37       72.19
9.50       72.20
9.99       72.99
10.01      130.01
10.10      130.20—
           130.24
10.11      90.20—
           90.28
10.12      90.01—
           90.06
10.14      130.03
10.20      130.04
10.22      130.05
10.32      130.06
10.43      92.01—
           92.03
10.44      91.02
10.51      91.03
10.52      91.04
10.55      130.07
           91.15—
10.56      91.18,
           91.20—
           91.26
10.57      91.19
10.58      132.01—
           132.05
11.01      153.001
11.02      153.002
11.03      153.003
11.04      153.004
11.05      153.005
11.06      153.006
11.07      153.007
11.08      153.008
11.09      153.055—
           153.062
11.10      153.075—
           153.089
11.11      153.100—
           153.102
11.12      153.115—
           153.118
11.13      153.130—
           153.132
11.14      153.145—
           153.149
11.15      153.150
11.16      153.151
11.17      153.152
11.18      153.153
11.19      153.154
11.20      153.170—
           153.174
11.21      153.175
11.22      153.035—
           153.041
11.23      153.190—
           153.194
11.24      153.020
11.25      153.021
11.26      153.022
11.27      153.023
11.28      153.024
12.01      152.01—
           152.07
12.02      152.08
12.10      152.25—
           152.29
12.15      152.40,
           152.41
12.20      152.09
12.25      152.55—
           152.59
12.30      152.10
12.40      152.11
13.01      10.98
13.02      10.98
13.03      10.98
13.04      10.98
13.05      10.98
13.06      10.98
13.07      10.98
13.08      10.98
13.99      10.98
14.01      34.01
14.02      34.02
14.03      34.03
14.04      34.04
14.05      34.05
14.06      34.06
14.07      34.07
14.08      34.08
           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Series No. Date Effective Code Section
Ord. No. Series No.    Date Effective Code Section
64       Third Series  --             Charter, Sec.
                                      7.13
89       Third Series  - -            Charter, Sec.
                                      2.07
90       Third Series  --             Charter, Sec.
                                      4.01
                                      Charter, Sec.
92       Third Series  --             7.04,
                                      7.06,
                                      7.11
124      Third Series  --             Charter, Sec.
                                      12.14
                                      Charter, Sec.
313      Third Series  --             5.03,
                                      5.04
                                      Charter, Sec.
315      Third Series  --             5.01,
                                      5.07
43       New Series    3-2-1948       TSO Table I
71       New Series    7-3-1956       TSO Table V
83       New Series    1-25-1966      TSO Table III
84       New Series    7-18-1966      TSO Table III
85       New Series    7-18-1966      TSO Table V
86       New Series    11-22-1966     TSO Table III
103      New Series    5-13-1969      TSO Table V
105      New Series    11-4-1969      TSO Table III
131      New Series    11-28-1972     TSO Table IV
135      New Series    5-22-1973      TSO Table V
                                      152.09 
                                      152.11,
                                      152.25,
                                      152.29,
149      New Series    1-17-1975      152.40,
                                      152.41,
                                      152.56,
                                      152.57,
                                      152.59
161      New Series    6-7-1976       TSO Table II
162      New Series    8-24-1976      TSO Table V
165      New Series    9-28-1976      TSO Table VI
167      New Series    3-22-1977      TSO Table II
172      New Series    1-24-1978      TSO Table VI
                                      33.30,
179      New Series    1-19-1979      33.32 
                                      33.35
                                      152.09,
                                      152.26,
                                      152.29,
180      New Series    1-19-1979      152.40,
                                      152.41,
                                      152.55,
                                      152.57
2        Third Series  12-3-1980      TSO Table IV
3        Third Series  2-24-1981      TSO Table I
4        Third Series  4-28-1981      TSO Table III
7        Third Series  8-25-1981      TSO Table VI
8        Third Series  8-25-1981      TSO Table VI
9        Third Series  10-9-1981      31.16
13       Third Series  9-13-1982      TSO Table III
15       Third Series  1-17-1984      TSO Table III
16       Third Series  1-17-1984      TSO Table III
18       Third Series  4-10-1984      TSO Table III
19       Third Series  4-17-1984      TSO Table III
20       Third Series  5-15-1984      TSO Table VI
22       Third Series  10-17-1984     53.01,
                                      53.06
27       Third Series  8-5-1985       TSO Table VI
28       Third Series  8-18-1986      TSO Table III
29       Third Series  10-18-1986     151.06
30       Third Series  2-8-1987       33.35
33       Third Series  4-17-1987      TSO Table VI
36       Third Series  6-22-1987      TSO Table VI
                                      33.34,
34       Third Series  7-25-1987      33.35,
                                      151.33
39       Third Series  10-26-1987     TSO Table VI
41       Third Series  12-28-1987     TSO Table III
40       Third Series  12-31-1987     70.15 
                                      70.17
                                      30.05,
                                      30.25,
                                      33.01,
44       Third Series  3-24-1988      33.03,
                                      33.36,
                                      33.65 
                                      33.69
                                      111.003,
                                      111.015,
                                      111.020,
47       Third Series  3-24-1988      111.023,
                                      111.029,
                                      111.030,
                                      111.061,
                                      111.082
46       Third Series  3-31-1988      150.15 
                                      150.19
48       Third Series  3-31-1988      110.11
49       Third Series  3-31-1988      151.11
51       Third Series  3-31-1988      72.10,
                                      72.20
                                      91.02,
52       Third Series  3-31-1988      130.03,
                                      130.04
53       Third Series  4-11-1988      TSO Table II
                                      30.27,
54       Third Series  5-5-1988       31.01,
                                      31.16,
                                      32.01
55       Third Series  5-23-1988      TSO Table V
56       Third Series  6-27-1988      TSO Table VI
58       Third Series  7-7-1988       33.35
60       Third Series  8-8-1988       TSO Table VI
61       Third Series  8-8-1988       TSO Table III
63       Third Series  12-12-1988     TSO Table III
64       Third Series  1-9-1989       TSO Table II
67       Third Series  3-13-1989      TSO Table I
68       Third Series  3-20-1989      30.09
9        Third Series  5-4-1989       111.031
                                      111.003,
69       Third Series  5-4-1989       111.021,
                                      111.032,
                                      111.082
71       Third Series  6-22-1989      31.17
                                      33.31 
72       Third Series  7-20-1989      33.33,
                                      33.35,
                                      33.38
76       Third Series  10-9-1989      TSO Table III
                                      50.06,
75       Third Series  10-19-1989     50.27,
                                      50.29
77       Third Series  10-30-1989     33.35
80       Third Series  12-7-1989      111.082
82       Third Series  2-12-1990      TSO Table III
81       Third Series  3-1-1990       72.11,
                                      72.12
86       Third Series  4-23-1990      TSO Table III
84       Third Series  5-3-1990       112.01 
                                      112.04
89       Third Series  6-25-1990      TSO Table II
90       Third Series  6-25-1990      TSO Table II
91       Third Series  6-25-1990      TSO Table II
92       Third Series  6-25-1990      TSO Table II
87       Third Series  7-5-1990       70.01,
                                      73.25
95       Third Series  7-19-1990      70.01
96       Third Series  7-24-1990      TSO Table III
                                      90.21,
88       Third Series  8-2-1990       90.22,
                                      90.28
98       Third Series  9-6-1990       31.19
101      Third Series  1-24-1991      31.37
                                      152.01 
102      Third Series  2-21-1991      152.08,
                                      152.10,
                                      152.59
103      Third Series  3-7-1991       152.08
104      Third Series  3-11-1991      TSO Table VI
106      Third Series  4-8-1991       TSO Table III
109      Third Series  4-26-1991      TSO Table III
107      Third Series  5-2-1991       91.18,
                                      91.26
110      Third Series  5-28-1991      TSO Table III
111      Third Series  7-4-1991       111.003
113      Third Series  8-1-1991       33.39
115      Third Series  8-12-1991      TSO Table VI
122      Third Series  12-2-1991      TSO Table III
117      Third Series  12-12-1991     152.56,
                                      152.58
118      Third Series  12-12-1991     150.04
120      Third Series  12-12-1991     53.03
121      Third Series  12-12-1991     30.27,
                                      31.01
124      Third Series  1-27-1992      TSO Table II
126      Third Series  3-5-1992       151.07
129      Third Series  4-27-1992      TSO Table VI
114      Third Series  6-18-1992      90.23
130      Third Series  6-18-1992      72.12
132      Third Series  6-18-1992      50.22
                                      115.01,
133      Third Series  6-18-1992      115.15 
                                      115.19
135      Third Series  7-23-1992      56.03
131      Third Series  8-10-1992      30.10
137      Third Series  10-13-1992     TSO Table V
139      Third Series  11-19-1992     56.03
140      Third Series  12-24-1992     70.01
142      Third Series  12-24-1992     111.015,
                                      111.029
145      Third Series  3-8-1993       TSO Table VII
146      Third Series  3-18-1993      33.36
147      Third Series  6-14-1993      TSO Table I
148      Third Series  8-9-1993       TSO Table III
149      Third Series  8-30-1993      TSO Table V
150      Third Series  9-13-1993      TSO Table VI
151      Third Series  9-13-1993      TSO Table V
153      Third Series  9-27-1993      TSO Table III
152      Third Series  10-7-1993      112.35 
                                      112.43
154      Third Series  10-12-1993     TSO Table VI
155      Third Series  10-12-1993     TSO Table III
157      Third Series  11-8-1993      TSO Table III
158      Third Series  3-14-1994      TSO Table V
159      Third Series  3-14-1994      TSO Table V
162      Third Series  7-11-1994      TSO Table VII
164      Third Series  11-28-1994     TSO Table VII
165      Third Series  1-9-1995       TSO Table I
149      New Series    1-17-1995      152.08
166      Third Series  2-2-1995       50.21
167      Third Series  3-9-1995       53.43
168      Third Series  3-9-1995       116.01 
                                      116.16
169      Third Series  3-13-1995      TSO Table III
170      Third Series  5-4-1995       53.44
171      Third Series  5-4-1995       150.03
172      Third Series  5-8-1995       TSO Table III
173      Third Series  5-18-1995      31.16
176      Third Series  8-3-1995       111.061
177      Third Series  9-7-1995       130.01
179      Third Series  11-22-1995     TSO Table VI
180      Third Series  12-11-1995     TSO Table IV
181      Third Series  3-21-1996      30.25
182      Third Series  4-8-1996       TSO Table IV
183      Third Series  5-2-1996       151.06
184      Third Series  5-13-1996      TSO Table V
185      Third Series  5-28-1996      TSO Table VI
186      Third Series  6-10-1996      TSO Table VI
187      Third Series  6-10-1996      TSO Table III
188      Third Series  6-10-1996      TSO Table IV
189      Third Series  7-4-1996       71.05
190      Third Series  8-26-1996      TSO Table IV
191      Third Series  9-9-1996       TSO Table III
192      Third Series  10-28-1996     TSO Table IV
194      Third Series  1-27-1997      TSO Table VI
196      Third Series  3-10-1997      TSO Table VI
197      Third Series  3-24-1997      TSO Table VI
198      Third Series  4-28-1997      TSO Table III
199      Third Series  5-27-1997      TSO Table III
201      Third Series  7-14-1997      TSO Table III
202      Third Series  8-11-1997      TSO Table V
203      Third Series  8-21-1997      55.15 
                                      55.20
205      Third Series  2-23-1998      TSO Table V
54       Third Series  5-5-1998       30.03
206      Third Series  7-13-1998      TSO Table IV
207      Third Series  8-20-1998      53.01
208      Third Series  8-24-1998      TSO Table V
212      Third Series  12-24-1998     150.30 
                                      150.34
213      Third Series  1-11-1999      TSO Table VI
222      Third Series  2-13-1999      TSO Table VI
216      Third Series  7-8-1999       73.25 
                                      73.27
217      Third Series  8-9-1999       TSO Table V
218      Third Series  8-9-1999       TSO Table V
219      Third Series  11-8-1999      TSO Table V
220      Third Series  11-8-1999      TSO Table III
221      Third Series  11-8-1999      TSO Table V
223      Third Series  12-20-1999     TSO Table III
224      Third Series  2-28-2000      TSO Table III
225      Third Series  3-27-2000      TSO Table III
226      Third Series  3-27-2000      TSO Table I
                                      54.04,
227      Third Series  4-20-2000      54.08,
                                      54.09
228      Third Series  5-18-2000      111.015
231      Third Series  6-29-2000      90.24
236      Third Series  12-11-2000     TSO Table IV
235      Third Series  12-21-2000     10.05
240      Third Series  7-10-2001      TSO Table IV
242      Third Series  9-11-2001      TSO Table V
241      Third Series  9-13-2001      50.22
243      Third Series  10-9-2001      TSO Table V
244      Third Series  11-27-2001     TSO Table III
245      Third Series  3-26-2002      TSO Table VI
246      Third Series  4-11-2002      54.01
247      Third Series  5-2-2002       30.04
248      Third Series  6-25-2002      TSO Table III
249      Third Series  4-10-2003      72.02
252      Third Series  5-1-2003       132.01 
                                      132.05
251      Third Series  5-2-2003       150.01
253      Third Series  9-16-2003      TSO Table V
254      Third Series  9-23-2003      TSO Table V
255      Third Series  12-9-2003      TSO Table III
260      Third Series  2-12-2004      31.01
                                      54.01,
261      Third Series  4-8-2004       54.05,
                                      54.08
262      Third Series  4-13-2004      TSO Table VI
264      Third Series  5-25-2004      TSO Table VII
262      Third Series  5-27-2004      10.98
263      Third Series  5-27-2004      10.98
265      Third Series  7-1-2004       130.22
266      Third Series  11-9-2004      TSO Table VII
268      Third Series  12-30-2004     130.21
269      Third Series  12-30-2004     130.20
271      Third Series  1-13-2005      91.18
272      Third Series  2-22-2005      TSO Table VI
272      Third Series  3-10-2005      153.023,
                                      153.059
273      Third Series  3-31-2005      90.21,
                                      90.23
274      Third Series  5-26-2005      10.98
276      Third Series  6-14-2005      TSO Table III
277      Third Series  6-14-2005      TSO Table III
278      Third Series  7-12-2005      TSO Table III
279      Third Series  11-24-2005     31.18
                                      153.055,
280      Third Series  1-12-2006      153.061,
                                      153.062
281      Third Series  1-12-2006      111.003
283      Third Series  2-2-2006       34.01 
                                      34.08
284      Third Series  6-13-2006      TSO Table III
285      Third Series  9-7-2006       130.21
286      Third Series  9-12-2006      TSO Table III
288      Third Series  12-12-2006     TSO Table III
289      Third Series  12-27-2006     TSO Table III
290      Third Series  5-22-2007      TSO Table III
291      Third Series  6-12-2007      TSO Table VII
296      Third Series  4-22-2008      TSO Table III
                                      150.01,
295      Third Series  4-24-2008      150.02,
                                      150.04
299      Third Series  8-12-2008      TSO Table III
298      Third Series  8-21-2008      153.061
300      Third Series  10-14-2008     TSO Table III
302      Third Series  2-10-2009      TSO Table III
303      Third Series  2-26-2009      31.20
304      Third Series  4-14-2009      TSO Table V
306      Third Series  6-25-2009      50.28
308      Third Series  8-25-2009      TSO Table VII
309      Third Series  10-27-2009     TSO Table VI
310      Third Series  10-27-2009     TSO Table VI
312      Third Series  12-10-2009     153.024
313      Third Series  3-9-2010       TSO Table II
314      Third Series  5-27-2010      57.01 
                                      57.08
315      Third Series  6-22-2010      TSO Table II
320      Third Series  12-8-2011      151.50 
                                      151.53
322      Third Series  3-1-2012       31.16
323      Third Series  3-1-2012       116.02
326      Third Series  9-27-2012      51.01 
                                      51.04
327      Third Series  5-3-2013       32.02
328      Third Series  5-3-2013       111.016
329      Third Series  5-3-2013       110.03
331      Third Series  8-30-2013      50.20
332      Third Series  11-7-2013      31.02
333      Third Series  1-30-2014      33.52,
                                      50.23
                                      111.001,
                                      111.022,
                                      111.045 
335      Third Series  6-26-2014      111.048,
                                      111.060 
                                      111.062,
                                      111.080 
                                      111.082
                                      153.146,
336      Third Series  8-7-2014       153.151,
                                      153.153
337      Third Series  8-12-2014      91.19
338      Third Series  3-12-2015      153.055
339      Third Series  8-13-2015      TSO Table VI
341      Third Series  9-10-2015      TSO Table III
343      Third Series  1-28-2016      111.065
344      Third Series  3-24-2016      TSO Table III
345      Third Series  4-7-2016       TSO Table III
346      Third Series  5-26-2016      153.056
347      Third Series  6-30-2016      52.06
348      Third Series  9-1-2016       153.055
350      Third Series  12-8-2016      111.060,
                                      111.063
349      Third Series  12-19-2016     30.10
351      Third Series  2-14-2017      TSO Table III
352      Third Series  4-13-2017      33.03
353      Third Series  4-13-2017      91.18
2        Fourth Series 12-17-2018     30.10
3        Fourth Series 10-25-2018     33.35
6        Fourth Series 12-27-2018     153.064,
                                      TSO Table VI
7        Fourth Series 5-30-2019      90.26
8        Fourth Series 7-9-2019       TSO Table VI
10       Fourth Series 10-31-2019     TSO Table III
11       Fourth Series 11-26-2019     TSO Table III
                                      Charter
                                      2.01, Charter Chapters 2, 4, 5, 12;
12       Fourth Series 1-14-2020      30.02,
                                      30.10,
                                      30.26,
                                      31.36
13       Fourth Series 1-14-2020      TSO Table III
14       Fourth Series 10-27-2020     TSO Table IV
15       Fourth Series 3-11-2021      TSO Table III
16       Fourth Series 4-8-2021       TSO Table III
17       Fourth Series 5-27-2021      111.001,
                                      111.060
                                      55.01-
                                      55.04,
                                      55.15-
18       Fourth Series 6-24-2021      55.20,
                                      55.35-
                                      55.37,
                                      55.45-
                                      55.77
19       Fourth Series 8-26-2021      TSO Table I
20       Fourth Series 9-30-2021      TSO Table III
21       Fourth Series 10-14-2021     TSO Table VI
22       Fourth Series 10-14-2021     TSO Table III
23       Fourth Series 11-11-2021     50.22
24       Fourth Series 11-11-2021     TSO Table VI
25       Fourth Series 2-17-2022      TSO Table III
26       Fourth Series 3-24-2022      30.04
27       Fourth Series 4-28-2022      153.055
                                      111.001,
28       Fourth Series 7-7-2022       111.065,
                                      111.066
30       Fourth Series 12-8-2022      TSO Table III
32       Fourth Series 1-5-2023       TSO Table III
33       Fourth Series 3-2-2023       TSO Table VI
34       Fourth Series 5-25-2023      111.060
35       Fourth Series 6-29-2023      150.45-
                                      150.47
36       Fourth Series 6-29-2023      91.27
37       Fourth Series 8-24-2023      91.22
                                      117.01-
38       Fourth Series 10-26-2023     117.15,
                                      117.99
39       Fourth Series 2-8-2024       T.S.O. Table III
40       Fourth Series 2-8-2024       57.04
41       Fourth Series 5-2-2024       T.S.O. Table III
42       Fourth Series 6-13-2024      31.20
                                      133.01-
44       Fourth Series 7-10-2024      133.04,
                                      133.99
45       Fourth Series 10-10-2024     T.S.O. Table III
46       Fourth Series 3-13-2025      T.S.O. Table III
                                      153.008,
47       Fourth Series 4-24-2025      153.200,
                                      153.201
48       Fourth Series 4-24-2025      118.01-
                                      118.29
49       Fourth Series 6-12-2025      T.S.O. Table III
50       Fourth Series 7-3-2025       T.S.O. Table III
51       Fourth Series 7-3-2025       T.S.O. Table III
52       Fourth Series 7-3-2025       118.08
53       Fourth Series 7-3-2025       91.02
54       Fourth Series 7-3-2025       91.05
55       Fourth Series 8-7-2025       153.008,
                                      153.201
                                      118.04,
56       Fourth Series 8-7-2025       118.08,
                                      118.10
57       Fourth Series 8-28-2025      118.09,
                                      118.19
                                    
 
 
