CITY CODE
of
MONTEVIDEO, MINNESOTA
1998
Code current through:
Ord. 995, passed 10-6-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Montevideo, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 995, passed October 6, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
CHARTER
THE CHARTER
of the
CITY OF
MONTEVIDEO
Chippewa County
State of Minnesota
Adopted July 7, 1969, effective October 15, 1969
Amended by Ordinance 476, effective July 6, 1975
CHARTER TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter Subject
Chapter Subject
       NAME, BOUNDARIES, POWERS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
1
        1.01  Name And Boundaries
             Powers Of The City
        1.02
             Charter A Public Act
        1.03
       FORM OF GOVERNMENT
2
             Form Of Government
        2.01
             The Mayor
        2.02
             Elective Officers
        2.03
             Incompatible Offices
        2.04
             Vacancies In The Council
        2.05
             Salaries
        2.06
             Boards
        2.07
             Investigation Of City Affairs
        2.08
             Interference With Administration
        2.09
       PROCEDURE OF COUNCIL
3
             Council Meetings
        3.01
             Officers Of The Council
        3.02
             Rules Of Procedure And Quorum
        3.03
             Ordinances, Resolutions And Motions
        3.04
             Procedure On Ordinances
        3.05
             Emergency Ordinances
        3.06
             Procedure On Resolutions
        3.07
             Signing And Publication Of Ordinances And Resolutions
        3.08
             When Ordinances And Resolutions Take Effect
        3.09
             Amendment And Repeal Of Ordinances And Resolutions
        3.10
             Revisions And Codification Of Ordinances
        3.11
       NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
4
             Election Date
        4.01
             Procedure
        4.02
       INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
5
             Powers, Reserved By The People
        5.01
             Expenditures By Petitioners
        5.02
             Further Regulations
        5.03
             Initiation Of Measure
        5.04
             Form Of Petition And Of Signature Papers
        5.05
             Filing Petitions And Action Thereon
        5.06
             Action Of Council On Petition
        5.07
             Initiative Ballots
        5.08
             Initiation Of Charter Amendments
        5.09
             The Referendum
        5.10
             Referendum Petitions
        5.11
             Referendum Ballots
        5.12
             The Recall
        5.13
             Recall Petition
        5.14
             Filing Of Petition
        5.15
             Recall Elections
        5.16
             Procedure At Recall Election
        5.17
             Form Of Ballot
        5.18
       ADMINISTRATION OF CITY AFFAIRS
6
             The City Manager
        6.01
             Powers And Duties Of The City Manager
        6.02
             Department Of Administration
        6.03
             Subordinate Officers
        6.04
             Purchases And Contracts
        6.05
             Contracts; How Let
        6.06
       TAXATION AND FINANCES
7
             Council To Control Finances
        7.01
             Fiscal Years
        7.02
             System Of Taxation
        7.03
             Board Of Equalization
        7.04
             Preparation Of The Annual Budget
        7.05
             Passage Of The Budget
        7.06
             Enforcement Of The Budget
        7.07
             Alterations In The Budget
        7.08
             Emergency Appropriation In Budget
        7.09
             Disbursements, How Made
        7.10
             Funds To Be Kept
        7.11
             Accounts And Reports
        7.12
             City Indebtedness
        7.13
             Tax Anticipation Certificates
        7.14
             Emergency Debt Certificates
        7.15
       PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
8
             Power To Make Payments And Levy Assessments
        8.01
             Procedure
        8.02
       EMINENT DOMAIN
9
        9.01  Power To Acquire Property
       FRANCHISES
10
             Franchises Required
        10.01
             Term
        10.02
             Public Hearing
        10.03
             Power Of Regulation Reserved
        10.04
             Renewals Or Extensions
        10.05
       PUBLIC OWNERSHIP AND OPERATION OF UTILITIES
11
        11.01 Acquisition And Operation Of Utilities
             Rates And Finances
        11.02
             Purchase In Bulk
        11.03
             Lease Of Plant
        11.04
             Public Utility, How Sold
        11.05
       MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
12
             Official Publications
        12.01
             Oath Of Office
        12.02
             City Officers Not To Be Interested In Contracts
        12.03
             Official Bonds
        12.04
             Sales Of Real Property
        12.05
             Vacation Of Streets
        12.06
             Delinquent Utility Charges
        12.07
             City To Succeed To Rights And Obligations Of Former City
        12.08
             Statutes Not Affected By Charter
        12.09
             Existing Ordinance Continued
        12.10
             Pending Condemnations And Assessments
        12.11
             Ordinance To Make Charter Effective
        12.12
             Promoting Good Relations With Montevideo, Uruguay
        12.13
 
CHAPTER 1
Name, Boundaries, Powers And General Provisions
Section 1.01. Name And Boundaries. 
The City of Montevideo, in the County of Chippewa, and State of Minnesota,
shall, upon the taking effect of this charter, continue to be a municipal
corporation, under the name and style of the City of Montevideo, with the same
boundaries as now are or hereafter may be established.
Section 1.02. Powers Of The City.
The city shall have all powers which it may now or hereafter be possible for a
municipal corporation in this state to exercise in harmony with the
constitutions of this state and of the United States. It is the intention of
this charter that every power which the people of the City of Montevideo might
lawfully confer upon themselves, as a municipal corporation, by specific
enumeration in this charter shall be deemed to have been so conferred by the
provisions of this section. This charter shall be construed liberally in favor
of the city and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall
not be construed as limiting in any way the generality of the power herein
sought to be conferred.
Section 1.03. Charter A Public Act.
This charter shall be a public act and need not be pleaded or proved in any
case.
CHAPTER 2
Form Of Government
Section 2.01. Form Of Government.
The form of government established by this charter shall be known as the
"Council-Manager Plan". All discretionary powers of the city, both legislative
and executive, shall vest in and be exercised by the city council, subject to
the initiative, referendum, and recall powers of the people. It shall have
complete control over the city administration, but shall exercise this control
exclusively through the city manager and shall not itself attempt to perform
any administrative work.
Section 2.02. The Mayor.
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and shall exercise
all powers and perform all duties conferred and imposed upon him by this
charter, the ordinances of the city and laws of the state. He shall be
recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the
courts for the purpose of serving civil processes, and by the governor for the
purpose of martial law. He shall study the operations of the city government
and shall report to the council any neglect, dereliction of duty or waste on
the part of any officer or department of the city. In time of public danger or
emergency he may, with the consent of the council take command of the police,
maintain order, and enforce the law. In the event of a vacancy in the office of
the mayor, whether by death, resignation, or any other cause, the council shall
appoint a mayor for the unexpired term, but in case of a recall the vacancy
shall be filled in the manner provided in this charter.
Section 2.03. Elective Officers 1
.
The elective officers of the city shall be a mayor and five councilmen, who
shall be qualified electors and who shall be elected at large in the manner
hereinafter provided. The five councilmen shall serve for a term of four years
and until their successors are elected and qualified. The mayor shall serve for
a term of two years and until his successor is elected and qualified.
   The terms of all officers shall begin on the first Monday after the first
Tuesday in January following a regular municipal election.
   All present elective officers shall hold office until their respective terms
expire.
 
Notes
1 1. Section 2.03 amended by Ordinance 476, 4-7-1975, effective 7-6-1975.
Section 2.04. Incompatible Offices.
No member of the council shall be appointed city manager nor shall any member
hold any paid municipal office or employment under the city; and until one year
after the expiration of his term as mayor or councilman no former member shall
be appointed to any paid office or employment under the city, which office or
employment was created or the emoluments of which were increased during his
term as councilman, and no mayor or councilman shall hold any other office
which is incompatible with such offices under the laws of the State of
Minnesota. Nothing in this charter shall, however, prevent a paid volunteer
fireman from serving as mayor or councilman.
Section 2.05. Vacancies In The Council.
A vacancy in the council shall be deemed to exist in case of the failure of any
person elected thereto to qualify on or before the date of the second regular
meeting of the new council, removal from the city, continuous absence from the
city for more than three months, or conviction of a felony of any person
whether before or after his qualification, or by reason of the failure of any
councilman without good cause to perform any of the duties of membership in the
council for a period of three months. In each such case the council shall by
resolution declare such vacancy to exist and shall forthwith appoint an
eligible person to fill the same until the next regular municipal election,
when the office shall be filled for the unexpired term; provided that any
vacancy resulting from a recall election or from a resignation following the
filing of a recall petition shall be filled in the manner provided in such
case.
Section 2.06. Salaries.
Salaries of the mayor and councilmen shall be fixed as provided in Minnesota
Statutes 415.11 as the same may from time to time amended, and until so fixed,
they shall continue to receive the same salary they were receiving at the time
of the adoption of this charter.
Section 2.07. Boards.
The council shall appoint five park commissioners, a board of health consisting
of three members, a city planning commission, and may appoint a radio
commission, an airport commission, and such other boards and commissions as it
may deem necessary. They shall be appointed by the council by ballot, and the
affirmative vote of three members shall be necessary for such appointments. The
park commissioners shall hold their offices for five years and until their
successors shall have been appointed and qualified. The members of the board of
health shall be appointed annually. The duties of the various boards and
commissions shall be fixed by the council by ordinances. All present members
shall hold office until their respective term expires.
Section 2.08. Investigation Of City Affairs.
The council and the city manager or either of them, and any officer or officers
formally authorized by them shall have power to make investigations into the
city's affairs, to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and to compel the
production of books and papers. The council may at any time provide for an
examination or audit of the accounts of any officer or department of the city
government. The accounts of the city shall be audited by the state public
examiner or a certified public accountant at least once each year.
Section 2.09. Interference With Administration.
Neither the council nor any of its members shall dictate the appointment or in
any manner interfere with the city manager or prevent him from exercising his
own judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the administrative
service. Except for the purpose of inquiry the council and its members shall
deal with and control the administrative service solely through the city
manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to
any of its subordinates of the city manager; either publicly or privately.
CHAPTER 3
Procedure Of Council
Section 3.01. Council Meetings.
On the first Monday after the first Tuesday in January following a regular
municipal election, the council shall meet at the usual place and time for the
holding of council meetings. At this time the newly elected members of the
council shall assume their duties. Thereafter the council shall meet at such
times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, except that they shall
meet in regular session twice each month. The mayor, or any two members of the
council, may call special meetings of the council upon at least twelve hours'
notice to each member of the council.
   Such notice shall be delivered personally to each member or shall be left
with some responsible person at the member's usual place of residence.
   All meetings of the council shall be public, and any citizen shall have
access to the minutes and records thereof at all reasonable times.
Section 3.02. Officers Of The Council.
The city clerk, or other city official selected by the council, shall be the
secretary of the council and serve as such at its meetings, and shall keep such
records and perform such other duties as may be required by this charter or by
vote of the council. The president of the council shall be elected by the
council from its members at the first regular meeting of the council in January
following each city election.
Section 3.03. Rules Of Procedure And Quorum.
The council shall determine its own rules and order of business, and shall keep
a journal of its proceedings. A majority of all members elected shall
constitute a quorum to do business, but a less number may adjourn from time to
time. The council shall provide by ordinance a means by which a minority may
compel the attendance of absent members.
Section 3.04. Ordinances, Resolutions And Motions.
Except as in this charter otherwise provided, all legislation shall be by
ordinance, and except as otherwise required in this charter or by ordinance of
the City of Montevideo, or by the laws of the State of Minnesota, all other
actions of the council may be by motion. The aye and no vote on ordinances,
resolutions and motions shall be recorded unless the vote is unanimous. Except
as otherwise provided in this charter, an affirmative vote of the members of
the council present shall be required for the passage of all motions, and four
votes shall be required for the passage of all ordinances and resolutions.
Section 3.05. Procedure On Ordinances.
The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be in the words, "The City of
Montevideo does ordain." Every ordinance shall be presented in writing. No
ordinance except an emergency ordinance shall be passed at the meeting at which
it is introduced, and at least one week shall elapse between its introduction
and final passage.
Section 3.06. Emergency Ordinances.
An emergency ordinance or resolution is an ordinance or resolution for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, in which the
emergency is defined or declared in a preamble thereto, separately voted upon,
and agreed to by at least four members of the council, as recorded by ayes and
noes. An emergency ordinance or resolution must be in writing, but may be
enacted without previous filing. No grant of any franchise shall be construed
to be an emergency ordinance. No prosecution shall be based upon the provisions
of any emergency ordinance until twenty four hours after the ordinance has been
filed with the city clerk and posted in three conspicuous places, or until the
ordinance has been published, unless the person charged with violation had
actual notice of the passage of the ordinance prior to the act or omission
complained of.
Section 3.07. Procedure On Resolutions.
Every resolution shall be presented in writing and read in full before a vote
is taken thereon, unless the reading of a resolution is dispensed with by
unanimous consent.
Section 3.08. Signing And Publication Of Ordinances And Resolutions.
Every ordinance or resolution passed by the council shall be signed by the
president of the council and attested by the city clerk, and shall be filed
with the city clerk and by him recorded and preserved. Every ordinance, except
emergency ordinances, shall, before it takes effect, forthwith be presented to
the mayor for his approval. If he approves he shall sign the same, but if he
disapproves it, he shall return it to the city council with his objections
thereto, by depositing the same with the city clerk, to be presented to the
city council at the next regular meeting, and if the same shall not be returned
to him before the next regular meeting of the city council after it shall have
been presented to him, it shall have the same force and effect as if approved
by him. Upon the return of any ordinance by the mayor, without his approval,
the city council may at the next regular meeting thereof pass the same by the
affirmative vote of all five members, and it shall have the same effect as if
approved by the mayor. Every ordinance except emergency ordinances shall be
published once in the official paper of the city within fifteen days after its
approval by the mayor or after its passage by the council over the veto of the
mayor, and shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose, which record
shall be attested by the city clerk.
Section 3.09. When Ordinances And Resolutions Take Effect.
Emergency ordinances and resolutions, and ordinances and resolutions making the
annual tax levy, determining the annual budget, and providing for local
improvements and assessments, shall take effect immediately upon their passage.
All other ordinances enacted by the council shall take effect thirty days after
the date of their publication unless a later date is fixed therein, in which
event they shall take effect at such later date. Ordinances and resolutions
adopted by the electors of the city shall take effect at the time fixed
therein, or, if no such time is designated therein, then immediately upon the
adoption thereof.
Section 3.10. Amendment And Repeal Of Ordinances And Resolutions.
Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous ordinance or resolution or
section or subdivision thereof shall give the number, if any, and the title of
the ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. No ordinance or
resolution or section or subdivision thereof shall be amended by reference to
the title alone, but such an amending ordinance or resolution shall set forth
in full each section or subdivision to be amended, and shall indicate new
matter by underscoring and old matter to be omitted by enclosing it in
brackets. In newspaper publication, the same indications of omitted and new
matter shall be used except that italics or bold-faced type may be substituted
for underscoring, and omitted matter may be printed in capital letters without
parentheses.
Section 3.11. Revision And Codification Of Ordinances.
The city may revise, rearrange and codify its ordinances with such additions
and deletions as may be deemed necessary by the council. Such ordinance code
shall be published in book, pamphlet or continuously revised loose-leaf form,
and copies shall be made available by the council at the office of the city
clerk for general distribution to the public free or at a reasonable charge.
Publication in such a code shall be sufficient publication of any ordinance
provision not previously published if a notice that copies of the codification
are available at the office of the city clerk is published in the official
newspaper for at least two successive weeks.
CHAPTER 4
Nominations And Elections
Section 4.01. Election Date.
A regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in every even numbered year at such place or places as the
city council may designate.
Section 4.02. Procedure.
Nominations and elections shall be conducted as provided in the general
election laws of the State of Minnesota.
CHAPTER 5
Initiative, Referendum And Recall
Section 5.01. Powers, Reserved By The People.
The people of Montevideo reserve to themselves the powers, in accordance with
the provisions of this charter, to initiate and adopt resolutions and
ordinances, to require measures passed by the council to be referred to the
electorate for approval or disapproval, and to recall public officials. These
powers shall be called the initiative, the referendum, and the recall
respectively.
Section 5.02. Expenditures By Petitioners.
No member of any initiative, referendum or recall committee, no circulator of a
signature paper, and no signer of any such paper, or any other person shall
accept or offer reward, pecuniary or otherwise for service rendered in
connection with the circulation thereof, but this shall not prevent the
committee from incurring an expense not to exceed one hundred dollars for legal
advice, stationery, copying, printing and notaries' fees. Any violation of the
provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Section 5.03. Further Regulations.
The council may after the organization of the city government under this
charter provide by ordinance such further regulations for the initiative,
referendum, and recall, not inconsistent with this charter, as may be deemed
necessary. Such ordinance shall include the relevant provisions of this
charter.
Section 5.04. Initiation Of Measure.
Any five electors may form themselves into a committee for the initiation of
any measure of public concern. After formulating their measure they shall file
a verified copy thereof with the city clerk together with their names and
addresses as members of such committees. They shall also attach a verified copy
of the proposed measure to each of the signature papers herein described,
together with their names and addresses as sponsors therefor.
Section 5.05. Form Of Petition And Of Signature Papers.
The petition for the adoption of any measure shall consist of the measure
together with all the signature papers and affidavits thereto attached. Such
petition shall not be completed unless signed by a number of voters equal to at
least ten percent of the total number of votes cast at the last preceding
regular municipal election. All the signatures need not be on one signature
paper, but the circulator of every such paper shall make an affidavit that each
signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the person whose
name it purports to be. Each signature paper shall be in substantially the
following form:
   INITIATIVE PETITION
Proposing an ordinance (or resolution as the case may be) to                   
(stating the purpose of the measure), a copy of which ordinance (or resolution)
is hereto attached. This measure is sponsored by the following committee of
electors:
   Name            Address
1.                                                                     
2.                                                                    
3.                                                                    
4.                                                                    
5.                                                                    
The undersigned electors, understanding the terms and the nature of the measure
hereto attached, petition the council for its adoption, or, in lieu thereof,
for its submission to the electors for their approval.
   Name            Address
1.                                                                    
2.                                                                    
3.                                                                    
At the end of the list of signatures shall be appended the affidavit of the
circulator, mentioned above.
Section 5.06. Filing Petitions And Action Thereon.
All the signature papers shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as one
instrument. Within five (5) days after the filing of the petition the city
clerk shall ascertain by examination the number of electors whose signatures
are appended thereto, and whether this number is at least ten percent of the
total number of electors who cast their votes at the last preceding regular
municipal election. If he finds the petition insufficient or irregular, he
shall at once notify all the members of the committee of sponsors of that fact
in writing by mail, certifying the reasons for his finding. The committee shall
then be given thirty days in which to file additional signature papers and to
correct the petition in all other particulars. If at the end of the period the
petition is found to be still insufficient or irregular the clerk shall file
the same in his office or shall notify by mail each member of the committee of
that fact. The final finding of the insufficiency or irregularity of a petition
shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose, nor
shall it prevent the council from referring the measure to the electors at the
next regular or any special election, at its option.
Section 5.07. Action Of Council On Petition.
Whenever the petition shall be found to be sufficient, the city clerk shall so
certify to the council at its next meeting, stating the number of petitioners
and the percentage of the total number of voters which they constitute, and the
council shall at once read the measure and refer it to an appropriate
committee, which may be a committee of the whole. The committee or council
shall thereupon provide for public hearings upon the measure, after the holding
of which the measure shall be finally acted upon by the council not later than
sixty five days after the date upon which such measure was submitted to the
council by the city clerk. If the council shall fail to pass the proposed
measure, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the
petition and unsatisfactory to the petitioners, the proposed measure shall be
submitted by the council to the vote of electors at the next regular municipal
election. But in case the number of signers of said petition is equal to at
least twenty five percent of the total number of voters voting at the last
regular municipal election, then the council shall call a special election,
upon the measure to be held not less than thirty nor more than forty five days
from such date, unless a regular election is to occur within three months, in
which case it may be submitted at such regular municipal election. In case the
council passes the proposed measure with amendments and at least four-fifths of
the committee of petitioners do not express their dissatisfaction with such
amended form by a certificate filed with the city clerk within ten days from
the passage thereof by the council, then the measure need not be submitted to
the electors.
Section 5.08. Initiative Ballots.
The ballots used when voting upon any such proposed measure shall state the
substance thereof and shall give the voter the opportunity to vote either "Yes"
or "No". If a majority of the electors voting on any such measure shall vote in
favor thereof, it shall thereupon become an ordinance or resolution of the city
as the case may be. Any number of proposed measures may be voted upon at the
same election, but in case there shall be more than one, the voter shall be
allowed to vote for or against each separately. In the event of the
simultaneous adoption of two initiated ordinances containing inconsistent
provisions, the one adopted by the larger majority shall prevail.
Section 5.09. Initiation Of Charter Amendments.
Nothing in this charter contained shall be construed as in any way affecting
the right of the electors under the constitution and statutes of Minnesota to
propose amendments to this charter.
Section 5.10. The Referendum.
If prior to the date when an ordinance or resolution takes effect a petition
signed by qualified electors of the city equal in number to fifteen percent of
the total vote at the last regular municipal election be filed with the city
clerk requesting that any such measure, or any part thereof, be repealed or be
submitted to a vote of the electors, the said measure shall thereby be
prevented from going into operation. The council shall thereupon reconsider the
said measure at its next regular meeting, and either repeal the same, or repeal
by the petitioners, or by aye and no votes reaffirm its adherence to the
measure as passed. In the latter case the council shall immediately order an
election to be held thereon, pending which the ordinance or resolution shall
remain suspended. If a majority of the voters voting thereon are opposed to the
measure it shall not become effective; but otherwise it shall take effect
immediately or on the date therein specified.
Section 5.11. Referendum Petitions.
The requirements laid down in Sections 5.04 5.05, and 5.06 above as to the
formation of committees for the initiation of measures and as to the form of
petitions and signature papers and action thereon shall apply to the referendum
as far as possible, but with such verbal changes as may be necessary. A
referendum petition shall read as follows:
   REFERENDUM PETITION
Proposing the repeal of an ordinance (or resolution, as the case may be) to
(stating the purpose of the measure), a copy of which ordinance (or resolution)
is hereto attached. The proposed repeal is sponsored by the following committee
of electors:
   Name            Address
1.                                                                    
2.                                                                    
3.                                                                    
4.                                                                    
5.                                                                    
Section 5.12. Referendum Ballots.
The ballots used in any referendum election shall conform to the rules laid
down in Section 5.08 of this charter for initiative ballots.
Section 5.13. The Recall.
Any five electors may form themselves into a committee for the purpose of
bringing about the recall of any elected officer of the city. The committee
shall certify to the city clerk the name of the officer whose removal is
sought, a statement of the grounds for removal in not more than two hundred
fifty words and their intention to bring about his recall. A copy of this
certificate shall be attached to each signature paper and no signature paper
shall be put into circulation previous to certification.
Section 5.14. Recall Petition.
The petition for the recall of any official shall consist of a certificate
identical with that filed with the city clerk as provided in Section 5.13,
together with all the signature papers and affidavit thereto attached. Such
petition shall not be completed unless signed by a number of voters equal to at
least twenty five percent of the total number of votes cast at the last
preceding regular municipal election. All the signatures need not be on one
signature paper, but the circulator of every such paper shall make an affidavit
that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the
person whose name it purports to be. Each signature paper shall be in
substantially the following form:
   RECALL PETITION
Proposing the recall of                   from his office as                  
which recall is sought for the reasons set forth in the attached certificate.
This movement is sponsored by the following committee of electors:
   Name            Address
1.                                                                    
2.                                                                    
3.                                                                       
4.                                                                    
5.                                                                    
The undersigned electors, understanding the nature of the charges against the
officers herein sought to be recalled, desire the holding of a recall election
for that purpose.
1.                                                                    
2.                                                                    
3.                                                                    
At the end of the list of signatures shall be appended the affidavit of the
circulator, mentioned above.
Section 5.15. Filing Of Petition.
Within thirty days after the filing of the original certificate, the committee
shall file the completed petition in the office of the city clerk. The city
clerk shall examine the same within the next five days, and if he finds it
irregular in any way, or finds that the number of signers is less than twenty
five percent of the total number of electors who cast their votes at the last
preceding regular municipal election, he shall so notify all of the members of
the committee by mail. The committee then shall be given ten days in which to
file additional signature papers and to correct the petition in all other
respects, but they may not change the statement of the grounds upon which the
recall is sought. If at the end of that time the city clerk finds the petition
still insufficient or irregular, he shall notify all the members of the
committee by mail to that effect and shall file the petition in his office. No
further action shall be taken thereon.
Section 5.16. Recall Election.
If the petition or amended petition be found sufficient, the city clerk shall
transmit it to the council without delay. The council shall at its next regular
meeting, by motion, provide for the holding of a special recall election not
less than thirty nor more than forty five days thereafter, provided that if any
other municipal election is to occur within sixty days after such meeting, the
council may in its discretion provide for the holding of the recall election at
that time.
Section 5.17. Procedure At Recall Election.
In the published call for the election, whether posted on bulletin boards or
printed in the official paper, there shall be given the statement for the
grounds for the recall and also, in not more than five hundred words, the
answer of the officer concerned in justification of his course in office.
Candidates to succeed the officer to be recalled shall be nominated in the
usual way, and the election shall be conducted as far as possible in accordance
with the usual procedure in municipal elections.
Section 5.18. Form Of Ballot.
Unless the officer whose removal is sought shall have resigned within ten days
after the receipt by the council of the completed recall petition, the form of
the ballot at such election shall be as near as may be: "Shall A be recalled?",
the name of the officer whose recall is sought being inserted in place of A,
and the electors shall be permitted to vote separately "Yes" or "No" on this
question. The ballot shall also contain the name of the candidates to be voted
upon to fill the vacancy, in case the recall is successful, under the caption:
"Candidates to fill the place of A, if recalled". But the officer whose recall
is sought shall not himself be a candidate upon such ballot. In case a majority
of those voting for and against the recall of any official shall vote in favor
of recalling such official, he shall be thereby removed from office, and in
that event the candidate who receives the highest number of votes for his place
shall be elected thereto for the remainder of the unexpired term. If the
officer sought to be recalled shall have resigned within ten days after the
receipt by the council of the completed recall petition, the form of ballot at
the election shall be the same, as nearly as may be, as the form in use at a
regular municipal election.
CHAPTER 6
Administration Of City Affairs
Section 6.01. The City Manager.
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He
shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his training, experience,
and administrative qualifications. The choice shall not be limited to
inhabitants of the city or state, but the person chosen shall be a citizen of
the United States. The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite
period, and he shall be removable by the council at any time. If removed at any
time after one year of service he may demand written charges and a public
hearing on the same before the council prior to the date on which his final
removal shall take effect, but pending and during such hearing the council may
suspend him from office. During the suspension, absence, or disability of the
city manager the duties of his office shall be performed by some properly
qualified person designated by the council.
Section 6.02. Powers And Duties Of The City Manager.
Subject to the revisions of this charter and any regulations consistent
therewith which may be adopted by the council, and subject to the provisions of
any civil service plan in operation in the City of Montevideo at the time of
the adoption of this charter, the city manager shall control and direct the
administration of the city's affairs. His powers and duties as city manager
shall be:
   a.   To see that this charter and the laws, ordinances, and resolutions of
the city are enforced;
   b.   To appoint and, except as herein provided, remove the city clerk, all
heads of departments, and all subordinate officers and employees in the
departments, all appointments to be upon merit and fitness alone;
   c.   To exercise control over all departments and divisions of the city
administration created by this charter or which may be hereafter created by the
council;
   d.   To attend all meetings of the council, with the right to take part in
the discussion but having no vote; but the council may at its discretion
exclude him from meetings at which his removal is considered;
   e.   To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem
necessary for the welfare of the people and the efficient administration of the
city's affairs;
   f.   To keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and
needs of the city, and to prepare and to submit to the council the annual
budget;
   g.   To prepare and to submit to the council for adoption an administrative
code incorporating the details of administrative procedure, and from time to
time to suggest amendments to the same;
   h.   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or
required of him by ordinance or resolutions adopted by the council.
Section 6.03. Department Of Administration.
The council may create such departments, divisions, and bureaus for the
administration of the city's affairs as may seem necessary, and from time to
time alter the powers and organization of the same. It shall, in conjunction
with the city manager, prepare a complete administrative code for the city and
enact the same in the form of an ordinance, which may be amended from time to
time by ordinance. The president of the council may appoint members of the
council as advisory committees of each major section of the city's various
departments.
Section 6.04. Subordinate Officers.
There shall be a city clerk and such other officers subordinate to the city
manager as the council may create by ordinance. The city clerk shall be subject
to the direction of the city manager, and shall have such duties in connection
with the keeping of the public records, and the custody and disbursement of the
public funds, and the general administration of the city's affairs as shall be
ordained by the council. He may be designated to act as secretary of the
council, and also as treasurer. The council may by ordinance abolish offices
and the employments which have been created by ordinance, and, subject to the
provisions of this charter, it may combine the duties of various offices as it
may see fit.
Section 6.05. Purchases And Contracts.
The city manager shall be the chief purchasing agent of the city. All city
purchases and contracts shall be made or let by the city manager when the
amount of the purchase or contract does not exceed $1,500.00. All other
purchases shall be made and all other contracts let by the council after the
recommendation of the city manager has first been obtained. All contracts,
bonds and instruments of any kind to which the city is a party shall be signed
by the mayor and the city manager on behalf of the city, and shall be executed
in the name of the city.
Section 6.06. Contracts; How Let 1
.
All contracts for the sale or purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, or
the rental thereof, or the construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of
real or personal property shall be let as provided in the Uniform Municipal
Contracting Law, M.S.A. 471.345.
 
Notes
1 1. Section 6.06 amended by Ordinance 476, 4-7-1975, effective 7-6-1975.
CHAPTER 7
Taxation And Finances
Section 7.01. Council To Control Finances.
The council shall have full authority over the financial affairs of the city,
and shall provide for the collection of all revenues and other assets, the
auditing and settlement of accounts, and the safekeeping and disbursement of
public moneys, and in the exercise of a sound discretion shall make
appropriations for the payment of all liabilities and expenses.
Section 7.02. Fiscal Years.
The fiscal year of the city shall be the calendar year.
Section 7.03. System Of Taxation.
Subject to the state constitution, and except as forbidden by it or by state
legislation, the council shall have full power to provide by ordinance for a
system of local taxation. In the taxation of real and personal property as
such, the city shall conform as fully as possible to the general state law as
to the assessment of such property and the collection of such taxes.
Section 7.04. Board Of Equalization.
The council shall constitute a board of equalization to equalize assessments of
property for taxation purposes according to law.
Section 7.05. Preparation Of The Annual Budget.
The city manager shall prepare the estimates for the annual budget. The budget
shall be by funds and shall include all the funds of the city, except the funds
made up of proceeds of bond issues, utility funds, and special assessment
funds, and may include any of such funds of the discretion of the council. The
estimates of expenditures for each fund budgeted shall be arranged for each
department or division of the city under the following heads: (1) Ordinary
expenses (for operation, maintenance, and repairs); (2) payment of principal
and interest on bonds and other fixed charges; (3) capital outlays (for new
construction, new equipment, and all improvements of a lasting character).
Ordinary expenses shall be subdivided into: (a) salaries and wages, with a list
of all salaried offices and positions, including the salary allowance and the
number of persons holding each; (b) other expenses, with sufficient detail to
be readily understood. All increases and decreases shall be clearly shown. In
parallel columns shall be added the amounts granted and the amounts expended
under similar heads for the past two completed fiscal years and the current
fiscal year, actual to date and estimated for the balance of the year. In
addition to the estimates of expenditures, the budget shall include for each
budgeted fund a statement of the revenues which have accrued for the past two
completed fiscal years with the amount collected and the uncollected balances
together with the same information, based in so far as necessary on estimates
for the current fiscal year, and on estimate of the revenues for the ensuing
fiscal year. The statement of revenues for each year shall specify the
following items; sums derived from (a) taxation; (b) fees, (c) fines, (d)
interest, (e) miscellaneous, not included in the foregoing, (f) sales and
rentals, (g) earnings of public utilities and other public service enterprises,
(h) special assessments, and (i) sales of bonds and other obligations. Such
estimates shall be printed or typewritten and there shall be sufficient copies
for each member of the council, for the city manager, for the city clerk, and
three at least, to be posted in public places in the city. The estimates shall
be submitted to the council at its first regular monthly meeting in September
and shall be made public. The city manager may submit with the estimates such
explanatory statement or statements as he may deem necessary, and during the
first three years of operation under this charter he shall be authorized to
interpret the requirements of this section as requiring only such comparisons
of the city's finances with those of the previous government of the city as may
be feasible and pertinent.
Section 7.06. Passage Of The Budget.
The budget shall be the principal item of business at the first regular monthly
meeting of the council in September and the council shall hold adjourned
meetings from time to time until all the estimates have been considered. The
meetings shall be so conducted as to give interested citizens a reasonable
opportunity to be heard. The budget estimates shall be read in full and the
city manager shall explain the various items thereof as fully as may be deemed
necessary by the council. The annual budget finally agreed upon shall set forth
in detail the complete financial plan of the city for the ensuing fiscal year
for the funds budgeted, and shall be signed by the majority of the council when
adopted. It shall indicate the sums to be raised, and from what sources, and
the sums to be spent, and for what purposes according to Section 7.05. The
total sum appropriated shall be less than the total estimated revenue by a safe
margin. The council shall adopt the budget not later than the first week of
October by a resolution which shall set forth the total for each budgeted fund
and each department with such segregation as to objects and purposes of
expenditures as the council deems necessary for purpose of budget control. The
council shall also adopt a resolution levying whatever taxes it considers
necessary within statutory limits for the ensuing year for each fund. The tax
levy resolution shall be certified to the county auditor in accordance with law
not later than October 10. At the beginning of the fiscal year, the sums fixed
in the budget resolution shall be and become appropriated for the several
purposes named in the budget resolution and no other.
Section 7.07. Enforcement Of The Budget.
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce strictly the provisions of
the budget. He shall not approve any order upon the city treasurer for any
expenditure unless an appropriation has been made in the budget resolution, nor
for any expenditure covered by the budget resolution unless there is a
sufficient unexpended balance left after deducting the total past expenditures
and the sum of all outstanding orders and encumbrances. No officer or employee
of the city shall place any order or make any purchase except for a purpose and
to the amount authorized in the budget resolution. Any obligation incurred by
any person in the employ of the city for any purpose not authorized in the
budget resolution or for any amount in excess of the amount therein authorized
shall be a personal obligation upon the person incurring the expenditure.
Section 7.08. Alterations In The Budget.
After the budget resolution has been adopted, the council shall have no power
to increase the amounts fixed in the budget resolution, by the insertion of new
items or otherwise, beyond the estimated revenues, unless the actual receipts
exceed the estimates and then not beyond the actual receipts. The council may
at any time, by resolution, approved by a majority of its members, reduce the
sums appropriated for any purpose by the budget resolution, or by a vote of
four members, authorize the transfer of sums from unencumbered balances of
appropriations in the budget resolution to other purposes.
Section 7.09. Emergency Appropriation In Budget.
The council may include an emergency appropriation as a part of the budget but
not to exceed ten percent of the total budget. A transfer from the emergency
appropriation to any other appropriation shall be made only by a vote of at
least four members of the council, and shall be used only for the purposes
designated by the council.
Section 7.10. Disbursements, How Made.
No disbursement of city funds shall be made except by check signed by the city
manager and treasurer and specifying the purposes for which the disbursement is
made and the fund from which it is drawn. No such check shall be issued until
there is money to the credit of the fund from which it is to be paid sufficient
to pay it together with all outstanding encumbrances upon the fund. No such
check shall be issued until the claim to which it relates has been supported by
an itemized bill, payroll, or time-sheet approved and signed by the responsible
city officer who vouches for its correctness and reasonableness. The city
manager shall note on each contract requiring the payment of money by the city
the particular fund out of which it is to be paid. The council may by ordinance
make further regulations for the safe-keeping and disbursement of the funds of
the city.
Section 7.11. Funds To Be Kept.
   Subd. 1.There shall be maintained in the city treasury the funds provided
for in the following subdivisions.
   Subd. 2. A general fund for the payment of such expenses of the city as the
council may deem proper. Into this fund shall be paid all money not provided
herein or by statute to be paid into any other fund.
   Subd. 3. A debt service fund, into which shall be paid all receipts from
taxes or other sources for the payment of principal and interest of all
obligations issued by the city except bonds issued on account of any local
improvement to be financed wholly or partly by special assessments and bonds
issued on account of any municipally owned utility. Out of this fund shall be
paid the principal and interest of such obligations when due. Any surplus in
such fund not needed immediately for debt service may be invested under the
direction of the council in such securities as are authorized by statute for
the investment of such funds; and such investments may be liquidated at any
time. To the extent required by law, a separate account in the debt service
fund shall be maintained for each issue of city obligations.
   Subd. 4. A bond fund, into which shall be paid and disbursed the proceeds of
all bonds issued by the city except bonds issued on account of any local
improvement to be financed wholly or party by special assessments and bonds
issued on account of any municipally owned utility. A separate bond account
shall be kept for each issue of such bonds.
   Subd. 5. A special assessment fund, which shall be used to finance local
improvements to be paid for, in whole or in part, from special assessments
against benefited property. There shall be paid into this fund: (1) collections
of special assessments, with interest, levied against benefited property; (2)
proceeds of bonds or warrants sold by the city to finance local improvements to
be paid for, in whole or in part, by special assessments; and the proceeds of
inter-fund loans; (3) amounts from other city funds representing either (a)
apportionments of costs against the city at large, (b) benefit assessments
against city property, or (c) appropriations to maintain the integrity of the
fund. There shall be paid out of this fund: (1) all expenses and costs of the
improvement projects financed through the fund; (2) the redemption of all
special assessment fund obligations, with interest, at or before maturity; and
any inter-fund loans; and (3) abatements of assessments and refunds of receipts
in error. The council shall maintain the integrity of this fund by
appropriations from tax funds if necessary, and in addition may by ordinance
create and maintain in the fund a cash reserve sufficient for working capital
purposes. In order to anticipate the collection of special assessments and the
municipal share of the cost of a local improvements, the council may by a
majority vote issue and sell obligations pledging the full faith and credit of
the city, or pledging only special assessments, in such amounts and maturities
as it may determine, but the aggregate amount of such obligations outstanding
at any time shall not exceed the sum of the following: (1) all assessments
levied and uncollected; (2) cost of work in progress to be financed in whole or
in part by special assessments, and (3) the cash reserve for working capital as
previously determined by ordinance. In order that the fund may be administered
on a self-sustaining basis, all local improvement projects financed through it
shall upon completion be certified by the city manager as to total cost, which
shall thereupon be apportioned by the council either as assessments against
benefited property or as amounts due from other city funds. Amounts apportioned
against other city funds shall be due when installments of special assessments
levied for the same project are due, corresponding assessment rolls shall be
charged interest as in the case of assessments and shall be credited to the
fund, with any interest due, when collected. To the extent required by law, a
tax for the city's share of the cost shall be levied before any obligations
against the fund are issued and sold. When a local improvement to be financed
wholly or partly from special assessment is undertaken under any applicable
statute, any provision of this subdivision inconsistent with the statute shall
not apply.
   Subd. 6. A public utility fund, into which shall be paid all money derived
from the sale of obligations issued on account of any municipally owned utility
and all money derived from the sale of utility services, and from the sale of
any property acquired for or used in connection with any such utility. There
shall be paid out of this fund the cost of the purchase, construction,
operation, maintenance and repair of such utility, including the principal of
and interest upon obligations which have been or shall be issued on its
account. Separate accounts within the public utility fund shall be kept for all
utilities which are operated separately.
   Subd. 7. In addition to the foregoing funds, there may be maintained in the
city treasury, whenever the council deems it advisable, the following funds:
      (a)   One or more working capital or revolving funds, for financing self-
sustaining activities not accounted for through other funds;
      (b)   One or more trust and agency funds, for the care and disbursement
of money received and held by the city as trustee or custodian or in the
capacity of any agent for individuals or other governmental units;
      (c)   Such other funds as may be required by statute or ordinance.
   Subd. 8. In lieu of establishing any of the types of funds specified in
Subd. 7, the council may provide for the recording of operations or activities
for which the use of such funds might be suitable through the maintenance of
separate accounts in any appropriate fund already established. The council
shall have full power by ordinance or resolution to make inter-fund loans,
except from trust and agency funds, as it may deem necessary and appropriate
from time to time.
Section 7.12. Accounts And Reports.
The city manager shall be the chief accounting officer of the city and of every
branch thereof, and the council may prescribe and enforce proper accounting
methods, forms, blanks, and other devices consistent with the law, this
charter, and the ordinances adopted in accord therewith. He shall submit to
this council a statement each month showing the amount of money in the custody
of the city treasurer, the status of all funds, the amount spent or chargeable
against each of the annual budget allowances and the balances left in each, and
such other information about the finances of the city as the council may
require. Once each year on or before the last day of February, the city manager
shall submit a report to the council covering the entire financial operations
of the city for the past year. This report shall show: the actual receipts and
expenditures omitting duplications and stating the cash balance at the
beginning of the last fiscal year and at the close, the total outlays for
operation and maintenance and the total capital outlays; the condition of each
of the funds; the total receipts by sources and the total expenditures by
general purposes; the total outstanding bonds and debts of the city when due
the amount of new bonds issued and the amount redeemed and the interest rate of
each; the condition of all the annual budget allowances; an inventory of all
the property owned by the city; and such further information as the city
manager deems advisable or the council requires.
Section 7.13. City Indebtedness 1
.
Except as provided in Sections
7.14 and
7.15, no obligations shall be issued to pay current expenses, but the council
may issue and sell obligations for any other municipal purpose in accordance
with law and within the limitations prescribed by law. Such obligations which
do not exceed $50,000.00 in any one issue may be issued and sold without
approval of the electors of the city. Except where an issue of obligations does
not exceed $50,000.00, or where an election is not required by some other
provision of this charter or by state law, no such obligation shall be issued
and sold without the approval of a majority of the electors of the city voting
on the question at a general or special election.
 
Notes
1 1. Section 7.13 amended by Ordinance 476, 4-7-1975, effective 7-6-1975.
Section 7.14. Tax Anticipation Certificates.
At any time after January 1 following the making of an annual tax levy, the
council may issue certificates of indebtedness in anticipation of the
collection of taxes levied for any fund and not yet collected. The total amount
of certificates issued against any fund for any year with interest thereon
until maturity shall not exceed ninety percent of the total current taxes for
the fund uncollected at the time of issuance. Such certificates shall be issued
on such terms and conditions as the council may determine and shall bear
interest at a rate not to exceed six percent per annum, but they shall become
due and payable not later than the 1st day of April of the year following their
issuance. The proceeds of the tax levied for the fund against which tax
anticipation certificates are issued and the full faith and credit of the city
shall be irrevocably pledged for the redemption of the certificates in the
order of their issuance against the fund.
Section 7.15. Emergency Debt Certificates.
If in any year the receipts from taxes or other sources should from some
unforeseen cause become insufficient for the ordinary expenses of the city, or
if any calamity or other public emergency should subject the city to the
necessity of making extraordinary expenditures, the council may by ordinance
issue and sell on such terms and in such manner as the council determines,
emergency debt certificates to run not to exceed two years and to bear interest
at not more than six percent per year. A tax sufficient to pay principal and
interest on such certificates with the margin required by law shall be levied
as required by law. The ordinance authorizing an issue of such emergency debt
certificates shall state the nature of the emergency and be approved by at
least four members of the council. It may be passed as an emergency ordinance.
CHAPTER 8
Public Improvements And Special Assessments
Section 8.01. Power To Make Payments And Levy Assessments.
The city shall have the power to make any and every type of improvement not
forbidden by the laws of this state and to levy special assessments for all or
any part of the cost of such improvements as are of local character pursuant to
the laws of the State of Minnesota.
Section 8.02. Procedure.
All proceedings for construction and improvements to be paid for by special
assessment against benefited property may be instituted by either of two
methods as follows: (1) procedures authorized by the laws of the State of
Minnesota, or (2) the procedures established by the council by ordinance.
CHAPTER 9
Eminent Domain
Section 9.01. Power To Acquire Property.
The City of Montevideo is hereby empowered to acquire by purchase, gift, devise
or condemnation in the manner provided by law, any property or any interest
therein, either within or without its corporate boundaries, which may be needed
by said city for any public use or purpose.
CHAPTER 10
Franchises
Section 10.01. Franchises Required.
Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, firm, or corporation shall
place or maintain any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures, in, over, upon, or
under any street or public place for the purpose of operating a public utility
or for any other purpose, without a franchise therefor from the city. A
franchise shall be granted only by ordinance, which shall not be an emergency
ordinance. Every ordinance granting a franchise shall contain all the terms and
conditions of the franchise. The grantee shall bear the cost of publication of
the franchise ordinance and shall make a sufficient deposit with the clerk to
guarantee publication before the ordinance is passed.
Section 10.02. Term.
No exclusive or perpetual franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise for a
term exceeding twenty five years shall be effective until approved by a
majority of the electors voting thereon.
Section 10.03. Public Hearing.
Before any franchise ordinance is adopted or any rates, fares, or prices to be
charged by a public utility are fixed by the council, the council shall hold a
public hearing on the matter. Notice of such hearing shall be published at
least once in the official newspaper not less than ten (10) days prior to the
date of the hearing.
Section 10.04. Power Of Regulation Reserved.
Subject to any applicable law, the council may by ordinance reasonably regulate
and control the exercise of any franchise, including the fair and reasonable
rates, fares or prices to be charged by the grantee. No franchise value shall
be included in the valuation of the grantee's property in regulating utility
rates, fares, or prices under any applicable law, ordinance, or regulation or
in proceedings for municipal acquisition of the grantee's property by purchase
or eminent domain.
Section 10.05. Renewals Or Extensions.
Every extension, renewal or modification of any existing franchise, or of any
franchise granted hereafter, shall be subject to the same limitations and shall
be granted in the same manner as a new franchise.
CHAPTER 11
Public Ownership And Operation Of Utilities
Section 11.01. Acquisition And Operation Of Utilities.
The city shall have the power to acquire public utilities as provided, when
approved by the electorate, in the manner and by the majority required by the
laws of the State of Minnesota. The operation of all public utilities owned by
the city shall be under the supervision of the city manager.
Section 11.02. Rates And Finances.
Upon recommendations made by the city manager or upon its own motion, the
council may fix rates, fares and prices for municipal utilities, but such
rates, fares and prices shall be just and reasonable. In like manner the
council may prescribe the time and manner in which payments for all such
services shall be made, and may make such other regulations as may be
necessary, and prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations.
Section 11.03. Purchase In Bulk.
The council may, in lieu of providing for the local production of gas,
electricity, water, and other utilities, purchase the same in bulk and resell
them to local consumers at such rates as it may fix.
Section 11.04. Lease Of Plant.
The council may, if the public interests will be served thereby, contract with
any responsible person, co-partnership, or corporation for the operation of any
utility owned by the city, upon such rentals and conditions as it may deem
necessary; but such contract shall be embodied in and let only by an ordinance
approved by four members of the council and subject to popular referendum. Such
ordinance shall not be an emergency ordinance. In no case shall such contract
be for a longer term than ten years.
Section 11.05. Public Utility, How Sold.
No public utility owned by the city shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by
the city unless the full terms of the proposition of sale or other disposition
are embodied in an ordinance approved by the electorate in the manner and by
the majority required by the laws of the State of Minnesota.
CHAPTER 12
Miscellaneous And Transitory Provisions
Section 12.01. Official Publications.
The council shall annually designate a legal newspaper of general circulation
in the city as its official newspaper in which shall be published ordinances
and other matters required by law to be so published, as well as such other
matters as the council may deem it in the public interest to have published in
this manner.
Section 12.02. Oath Of Office.
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office,
take and subscribe an oath of office, in substantially the following form: "I
do solemnly swear (or affirm) to support the Constitution of the United States
and of this State, and to discharge faithfully the duties devolving upon me as
(mayor, councilman, or city clerk, etc.) of this city to the best of my
judgment and ability".
Section 12.03. City Officers Not To Be Interested In Contracts.
Except as otherwise permitted by law, no officer of the city who is authorized
to take part in any manner in any contract with the city shall voluntarily have
a personal financial interest in such contract or personally benefit
financially therefrom.
Section 12.04. Official Bonds.
The city manager, the city clerk, and such other officers of the city as may be
provided for by ordinance, shall each before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, give bond to the city in such sum as may be fixed by the
council as an additional security for the faithful performance of their
respective official duties and the safe-keeping of the public fund. Such bonds
may be either individual or blanket bonds in the discretion of the council, and
shall be approved by the City council and shall be endorsed by at least three
members of the council as having been so approved. They shall be filed with the
secretary of the council. The provisions of the laws of the state relating to
official bonds, not inconsistent with this charter, shall be complied with.
Section 12.05. Sales Of Real Property.
No real property of the city shall be disposed of except by ordinance or
resolution. The proceeds of any such sale shall be used as far as possible to
retire outstanding indebtedness incurred by the city in the purchase,
construction or improvement of this or other property for the same public
purpose; but if there be no such outstanding indebtedness, then the council may
by a resolution adopted by a four-fifths vote designate some other public use
for such proceeds.
Section 12.06. Vacation Of Streets.
No street or alley within the city shall be discontinued except by ordinance
approved by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the council. Any such vacation shall be
in compliance with the laws of the State of Minnesota, and a record of such
vacation shall be made in the office of the Registrar of Deeds of the county.
Section 12.07. Delinquent Utility Charges.
The city council may by ordinance provide the procedure by which delinquent
utility charges owed to the city may be made liens upon the real estate to
which the utilities were furnished.
Section 12.08. City To Succeed To Rights And Obligations Of Former City.
The city shall succeed to all the property, rights and privileges, and shall be
subject to all the legal obligations of the city under this charter prior to
its amendments.
Section 12.09. Statutes Not Affected By Charter.
All general laws and statutes of the state applicable to all cities operating
under home rule charters or applicable to the cities of the same class as the
City of Montevideo operating under home rule charters, and not inconsistent
with the revisions of this charter, shall apply to the City of Montevideo, and
shall be construed as supplementary to the provisions of this charter.
Section 12.10. Existing Ordinance Continued.
All ordinances and regulations of the city in force when the amendments to this
charter take effect and not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, are
hereby continued in full force and effect until amended or repealed.
Section 12.11. Pending Condemnations And Assessments.
Any condemnation or assessment proceedings in progress when the amendments to
this charter take effect shall be continued and completed under the laws under
which such proceedings were begun. All assessments made by the city prior to
the time when the amendments to this charter take effect shall be collected and
the lien enforced in the same manner as if this charter had not been amended.
Section 12.12. Ordinance To Make Charter Effective.
The council is hereby empowered to, and it shall by ordinance, make such
regulations as may be necessary to carry out and make effective the provisions
of this charter as amended.
Section 12.13. Promoting Good Relations With Montevideo, Uruguay 1
.
The City of Montevideo may expend $1,000.00 annually for use by the mayor of
the City for the purpose of promoting civic and social relationships between
the City and the City of Montevideo, Uruguay as authorized by Chapter 94 of
Minnesota Session Laws for 1969. This is in addition to any other moneys which
the city may be authorized to spend for advertising or trade promotion
purposes.
 
Notes
1 1. Chapter 12 amended by adding Section 12.13, Ordinance 476, 4-7-1975,
  effective 7-6-1975.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Montevideo. This City
Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MONTEVIDEO CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents 1 . (1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. M.S.A. § 415.021.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title. (1998 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall comply with the procedure set out in
the City Charter. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be
immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall
be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code.
Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted
in each individual copy of the City Code. (1998 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having custody of a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to
maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the City
Clerk. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1998 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1998 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1998 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1998 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The City of Montevideo, County of Chippewa, State of Minnesota.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Montevideo.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of
Montevideo.
COUNTY: The County of Chippewa, State of Minnesota.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Montevideo".
EX OFFICIO MEMBER: Ex officio members of a commission shall have the right to
participate in discussions but shall have no vote and shall not be counted in
determining if a majority of the members are present for a quorum.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health, safety and
welfare of inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation
can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person
or persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Montevideo".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The State of Minnesota.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1998 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: License Revocation
1-4-4: Payment Of Fines
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanors: Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this code
and except for the provisions of subsection B of this section, any person
violating any provisions of this code or any rule or regulation adopted or
issued in pursuance thereof or any provision of any code adopted herein by
reference shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine or by imprisonment, or
both established in Minnesota statutes section 609.02, subdivision 3, as
amended from time to time. (1998 Code)
   B.   Petty Misdemeanors: A petty misdemeanor shall be considered a payable
offense and shall not require a court appearance. Any person convicted of a
petty misdemeanor shall be subject to a fine of not more than the maximum fine
set by Minnesota statutes section 609.02 subdivision 4a, as amended from time
to time. The city council by resolution, may schedule a fine for particular
petty misdemeanors on the city's fees and charges schedule. (Ord. 910, 2-7-
2011)
   C.   Administrative Offenses: Any person violating an administrative rule,
or any offense that would otherwise be a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor for
which the city has established a scheduled penalty, shall be subject to the
scheduled penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
The determination as to whether to treat an offense as an administrative
offense, petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor shall be up to the discretion of the
complainant. (Ord. 831, 10-21-2002)
   D.   Separate Violations: Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation
and every day upon which a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate
offense.
   E.   Failure Of Officers To Perform Duties: The failure of any officer or
employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this code shall
not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of
this code unless a penalty is specifically provided for such conduct or
omission. (1998 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Amendments, Codes Adopted By Reference: The penalties provided by this
chapter or any section of this code apply to the amendment of any section of
this code or any code adopted herein by reference to which the penalty relates,
whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory provision, unless
otherwise provided in the amendment.
   C.   Penalty Section Included: Reference to any sections of this code shall
be understood also to refer to and include the penalty section relating
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   D.   One Judgment Only: In all cases where the same offense is made
punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   E.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1998 Code)
1-4-3: LICENSE REVOCATION:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued to such person by the city may be revoked by the
court or by the council following a hearing and opportunity to be heard. (1970
Code §
1-4-3; amd. 1998 Code)
1-4-4: PAYMENT OF FINES:
All fines, forfeitures and penalties recovered for the violation of any
provision of this code shall be paid into the city treasury by the court or
officer thereof receiving such monies. Payment shall be made in the manner and
at the time provided by law. (Ch. 284, 10-20-1959)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Compensation Of Mayor And Council Members
1-5-1: COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 415.11, the Mayor's compensation for
services to the City is fixed in the sum of seven thousand five hundred forty-
six dollars and ninety-two cents ($7,546.92) for calendar year 2025 and seven
thousand nine hundred twenty-four dollars and twenty-seven cents ($7,924.27)
per annum thereafter payable quarterly, and the compensation of each Council
member for services to the City as Council member is fixed in the sum of seven
thousand five hundred forty-six dollars and ninety-two cents ($7,546.92) for
calendar year 2025 and seven thousand nine hundred twenty-four dollars and
twenty-seven cents ($7,924.27) per annum thereafter payable quarterly, and when
meeting as the Board of Equalization, they each shall receive not to exceed
twenty dollars ($20.00) per hour of actual service, payable quarterly. (Ord.
950, 10-15-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 973, 9-6-2022, eff. 1-1-2023; Ord.
992, 9-3- 2024)
CHAPTER 6
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
SECTION:
1-6-1: Adoption Of Code
1-6-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as "City of Montevideo
Administrative Code", as amended, be and the same hereby is adopted by
reference as the Administrative Code of the City in its entirety as fully as
though the same were written herein. (Ord. 607, 9-19-1983; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election Districts Designated
1-7-2: Elections; Interference
1-7-1: ELECTION DISTRICTS DESIGNATED:
The city shall be and hereby is divided into two (2) election districts
designated as precincts as follows:
Precinct 1: All that part of the city of Montevideo bounded on the west, north,
and east by the corporate limits and bounded on the south by the following
described lines: beginning at the eastern corporate limits at Black Oak A
venue, thence west along Black Oak A venue to 12th Street; thence South along
12th Street to Lincoln A venue; thence west along Lincoln Avenue to [Ninth] 8th
Street; thence north along [Ninth] 8th Street to Eureka A venue; thence west
along Eureka A venue and Eureka A venue vacated to First Street; thence north
along First Street to Canton A venue, thence west along Canton A venue to the
Chippewa River, thence south along the Chippewa River to the corporate limits.
Precinct 2: All that part of the city of Montevideo not in precinct 1. (Ord.
915, 3-19-2012; amd. Ord. 965, 3-21-2022)
1-7-2: ELECTIONS; INTERFERENCE:
No person shall interfere or in any way violate any of the rules or regulations
of any election conducted wholly or partly by, or within, this city. (Ch. 105)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Membership And Appointment
2-1-2: Terms Of Office
2-1-3: Chair Appointed
2-1-4: Duties
2-1-1: MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
The City shall at all times have a Planning Commission consisting of nine (9)
members appointed by the City Council. The City Manager, City Planning
Director, City Attorney and City Engineer shall be ex officio members. One ex
officio member shall be nominated by the Board of Commissioners of Chippewa
County and appointed annually by the Council, one ex officio member shall be
nominated by the School Board of Independent School District No. 129 and
appointed annually by the Council, one ex officio member shall be nominated by
the Town Board of Sparta Township and appointed annually by the Council. (Ord.
594, 12-20-1982; amd. 1998 Code)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
Unless otherwise provided by State law, the Council shall appoint three (3)
Commission members in December of each year. Terms for the Commissioners shall
be for three (3) years and begin January 1 and end December 31, or when a
successor has been appointed and sworn in, in the applicable year. (1998 Code)
2-1-3: CHAIR APPOINTED:
The Planning Commission shall elect a chair from its members and provide its
own rules of procedure. The City Manager, or someone appointed by the City
Manager, shall serve as secretary of the Planning Commission. (1970 Code §
1-7-2)
2-1-4: DUTIES:
The Planning Commission shall provide assistance to the City Council and Zoning
Administrator in the administration of planning and zoning regulations.
Recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be advisory in nature.
Specifically, the Planning Commission shall review, hold public hearings, and
make recommendations to the City Council on all applications for zoning
amendments and conditional use permits. In addition, it shall perform all
duties imposed upon the Planning Commission of the City by these ordinances, or
by the laws or regulations of this State or the United States. The Planning
Commission shall also review site plans presented to it according to procedures
prescribed by the City Council. (1970 Code; amd. Ord. 531, 12-18-1978; 1998
Code)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
2-2-1: Membership And Appointment
2-2-2: Chair Appointed
2-2-3: Powers
2-2-1: MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
A Board of Zoning Adjustment is hereby established and vested with such
administrative authority as is hereinafter provided. The Board shall consist of
five (5) members of the City Planning Commission. The City Engineer and Zoning
Administrator shall be ex officio members. Members shall be appointed by the
chairman of the City Planning Commission, approved by the Mayor and Council and
shall be appointed for terms coinciding with terms on the Planning Commission.
The Board shall serve without compensation. Members of the Planning Commission
who are not appointed as members of the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be
alternate members of the Board of Zoning Adjustment with the right to serve as
members of that Board at any meeting where all appointed members of the Board
are not present. When so acting, an alternate member shall serve as a
substitute for an absent member of the Board of Zoning Adjustment with all
authority of a member of the Board. Any appointed member of the Board of Zoning
Adjustment who does not expect to be present at a called or regular meeting of
the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall secure an alternate member to serve in his
or her place. (Ord. 639, 7-21-1986; amd. 1998 Code)
2-2-2: CHAIR APPOINTED:
The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall elect a chair from its members and provide
its own rules of procedure. The City Manager, or someone appointed by the City
Manager, shall serve as secretary of the Board. (1998 Code)
2-2-3: POWERS 1 :
The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall act upon all questions as they may arise
in the administration of the Zoning Ordinance, including the interpretation of
zoning maps, and it shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by such an administrative official
charged with enforcing the Zoning Ordinance. Such appeal may be made by any
person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City.
The Board of Adjustment shall also have the power to grant variances, subject
to approval and confirmation of the City Council, to the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance under certain conditions. No use variances (uses different
than those allowed in the district) shall be issued by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment. (1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 2-3-3 of this Title for powers of the Airport Board of
  Adjustment.
CHAPTER 3
AIRPORT BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
2-3-1: Membership, Appointment And Initial Terms
2-3-2: Terms Of Office
2-3-3: Powers
2-3-4: Rules And Procedures
2-3-1: MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT AND INITIAL TERMS:
The Airport Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members initially
appointed by the Montevideo-Chippewa County Joint Airport Zoning Board, and
each shall serve for a term of three (3) years and until his or her successor
is duly appointed and qualified. The five (5) members shall consist of a
representative from each of the following: the Montevideo-Chippewa County
Airport Commission, Rosewood Township, Sparta Township, Chippewa County, and
the City of Montevideo. Of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed
for a term of one year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) for a
term of three (3) years. Following the expiration of the initial terms in
office, Montevideo-Chippewa County Airport Commission, Rosewood Township Board,
Sparta Township Board, Chippewa County Board of Commissioners and the
Montevideo City Council shall each appoint or reappoint a representative to the
Airport Board of Adjustment so that at all times the Board consists of one
member representing each of the five (5) entities. Upon their appointment the
members shall select a chair to act at the pleasure of the Board. Members shall
be removable by the Joint Airport Zoning Board for cause, upon written charges,
after a public hearing. (1998 Code)
2-3-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
Unless otherwise provided by State law, the Council shall appoint Board members
in December of each year. Terms for the Board shall begin January 1 and end
December 31, or when a successor has been appointed and sworn in, in the
applicable year. (1998 Code)
2-3-3: POWERS:
The Airport Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise the following powers:
   A.   Appeals: To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement
of this Chapter and Title 11, Chapter 11 of this Code.
   B.   Special Exceptions: To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms
of this Chapter and Title 11, Chapter 11, upon which such Airport Board of
Adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass.
   C.   Variances: To hear and decide specific variances. (1998 Code)
2-3-4: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   The Airport Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance
and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this Chapter and Title 11,
Chapter 11 of this Code. Meetings of the Airport Board of Adjustment shall be
held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Airport Board
of Adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his or her absence the acting
chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The
Airport Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the
Zoning Administrator and shall be a public record.
   B.   The Airport Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order,
requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this Chapter and Title 11, Chapter 11 of this Code. The Airport
Board of Adjustment shall promptly notify any applicant of its decision on the
application.
   C.   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Airport Board
of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Chapter
and Title 11, Chapter 11 of this Code, or to effect any variation in this
Chapter and Title 11, Chapter 11 of this Code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 5
POLICE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5-1: Commission Established
2-5-2: Terms Of Office
2-5-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created and established a Police Civil Service Commission for
the City pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes 419.01 and acts
amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, which provisions are hereby
expressly accepted and hereby made a part of the same as though herein set
forth at length and in full detail. (See Charter section 2.07.) (Ch. 183, 12-7-
1946; amd. 1998 Code)
2-5-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
Unless otherwise provided by State law, the Council shall appoint Commission
members in December of each year. Terms for the Commission shall begin January
1 and end December 31, or when a successor has been appointed and sworn in, in
the applicable year. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
REMOVAL
SECTION:
2-6-1: Removal Of Member
2-6-1: REMOVAL OF MEMBER:
A Board or Commission Member of any City Board or Commission, appointed or
approved by the City Council may be removed by vote of the City Council in the
following circumstances:
   A.   Failure to meet or cease to meet any eligibility requirements of the
Board or Commission.
   B.   Failure to attend three (3) regular board or commission meetings or
failure to attend board or committee meetings for three (3) months, without
excuse granted by the committee chair, or, in the case of the committee chair,
by the City Manager, whichever occurs later. (Ord. 960, 11-16-2020)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LODGING TAX
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: Imposition Of Tax
3-1-3: Exceptions
3-1-4: Collection And Disbursement Of Tax
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The total amount received, in money or otherwise, for lodging
as measured by the rate for the lodging.
HOTEL, MOTEL AND TOURIST COURT: Every building or structure or enclosure, or
any part thereof, kept, used as, maintained as, or advertised as, or held out
to the public to be an enclosure where sleeping accommodations are furnished to
the public and furnishing accommodations for periods of less than one week.
MUNICIPAL CAMPGROUND: Property owned by the city used to provide temporary
lodging for the public while fishing, hunting, vacationing or touring in tents,
campers or other portable shelters owned by such members of the public.
RESORT: Any building, structure or enclosure or any part thereof, located on,
or on property neighboring any lake, stream, or skiing or hunting area for
purposes of providing convenient access thereto, kept, used, maintained or
advertised as, or held out to the public to be an enclosure where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to the public, and primarily to those seeking
recreation, for periods of one day, one week, or longer, and having for rent
five (5) or more cottages, rooms or enclosures.
ROOMING HOUSE: Every building or structure, or any part thereof, kept, used as,
maintained as, advertised as, or held out to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to the public as regular roomers, for periods of
one week or more, and having five (5) or more beds to let to the public. (Ord.
774, 1-8-1996)
3-1-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed a lodging tax on the gross receipts from the furnishing for
consideration of lodging at a hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court,
resort or municipal campground. The tax shall be at the rate of three percent
(3%) per annum. (Ord. 808, 2-5-2001, eff. 4-1-2001)
3-1-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Lengthy Rental Periods: The lodging tax shall not apply to the
furnishing for consideration of lodging for a continuous period of thirty (30)
days or more.
   B.   Statute Exception Honored: The lodging tax shall not apply to any such
consideration for lodging on which no tax imposed by Minnesota Statutes chapter
297A is collected. (Ord. 774, 1-8-1996)
3-1-4: COLLECTION AND DISBURSEMENT OF TAX:
The city council shall, by resolution, establish a system for collection and
disbursement of the tax, including imposition of interest and penalties for
late payment of the tax. (Ord. 774, 1-8-1996)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. INTOXICATING LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Provisions Of State Law Adopted
3-2A-2: Licensing Requirements
3-2A-3: Application For License
3-2A-4: License Fees
3-2A-5: Granting Of License
3-2A-6: Persons Ineligible For License
3-2A-7: Places Ineligible For License
3-2A-8: Conditions Of License
3-2A-9: Restrictions On Purchase And Consumption
3-2A-10: Suspension And Revocation
3-2A-11: Criminal Penalty
3-2A-12: Administrative Penalties
3-2A-1: PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Article, the provisions of
Minnesota statutes chapter 340A, relating to the definition of terms,
licensing, consumption, sales, conditions of bonds of licensees, hours of sale,
and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and
consumption of intoxicating liquor are adopted and made a part of this article
as if set out in full.
(Ord. 527, 10-2-1978; amd. Ord. 986, 2-20-2024)
3-2A-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required; Classification: No person, except a wholesaler or
manufacturer to the extent authorized under state license, shall directly or
indirectly deal in, sell or keep for sale in the city any intoxicating liquor
without a license to do so as provided in this article. Liquor licenses shall
be of five (5) kinds: on-sale, on-sale wine, club licenses, temporary on-sale
licenses, and Sunday on-sale licenses.
      1.   On-Sale Licenses:
         a.   Issuance; Number: On-sale licenses shall be issued only to
hotels, restaurants and to clubs as authorized by the ordinances of the city as
provided in sections
3-2D-1 through
3-2D-9 of this chapter and shall permit on-sale of liquor only. (Ord. 899, 7-6-
2010)
         b.   Definitions:
    HOTEL: An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to
transients and which has:
            (1)   A dining room serving the general public at tables and having
facilities for seating at least thirty (30) guests at one time; and
            (2)   At least thirty (30) guestrooms.
   RESTAURANT: An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises and served at tables to the general public, and having seating
capacity for at least thirty (30) guests.
         c.   Service During Remodeling Or Renovation: Nothing in this section
shall prevent the sale of intoxicating liquor by a hotel or restaurant licensed
to make such sales during the hours there is no serving of food because of
remodeling or renovation of the premises, subject to the following conditions:
            (1)   The interruption in the serving of food does not continue
more than ninety (90) days;
            (2)   The hotel or restaurant was licensed to serve intoxicating
liquor for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to such remodeling or
renovation.
      2.   On-Sale Wine License: On-sale wine licenses shall only be issued
pursuant to article C of this chapter.
      3.   Club Licenses: Club licenses shall only be issued pursuant to
article D of this chapter. (Ord. 873, 1-22-2008)
      4.   Temporary On-Sale Licenses: Temporary on-sale licenses may be issued
for the following:
         a.   For winetasting purposes. Winetasting is an event at which
persons pay a fee or donation to participate and are allowed to consume wine by
the glass without paying a separate charge for each glass. A charitable,
religious, or other nonprofit organization may conduct a winetasting of not
more than four (4) hours' duration on premises the organization owns or leases
or has donated to it, or on the licensed premises of a holder of an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license that is not a temporary license, if the
organization complies with the following:
            (1)   Statutory provisions regarding the use of the net proceeds
from the winetasting;
            (2)   No wine at a winetasting may be sold or orders taken for off
premises consumption;
            (3)   All other provisions of Minnesota statutes section 340A.418
as it is amended from time to time.
         b.   As authorized by Minnesota statutes section 340A.404, subdivision
10, to a club or charitable, religious, or other nonprofit organization in
existence for at least three (3) years. A license issued under this section is
subject to the following:
            (1)   The temporary license is for the on-sale of intoxicating
liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the
licensee;
            (2)   The on-sale of intoxicating liquor is for not more than four
(4) consecutive days, and may be on-sales on premises other than premises the
licensee owns or permanently occupies;
            (3)   The licensee shall pay the license fee set by the resolution
of the city council;
            (4)   Licenses issued under this section are subject to all laws
and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor;
            (5)   Licenses are not valid unless first approved by the
commissioner of public safety of the state of Minnesota.
A license under this subsection A4b will only be issued to an entity with a
license to sell intoxicating liquor under this article and article D of this
chapter. (Ord. 890, 2-17-2009)
      5.   Sunday On-Sale License: Sunday on-sale licenses may be issued for
the following:
         a.   A restaurant, club or hotel with a seating capacity for at least
thirty (30) persons and which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license;
         b.   For consumption on the licensed premises in conjunction with the
sale of food between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on Sundays and one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Mondays. (Ord. 899, 7-6-2010)
   B.   Temporary Permits For Special Events Accessory Use; Outdoor Areas: The
use of an outdoor enclosure, beer garden, deck or patio as an accessory use to
a hotel, restaurant or club licensed to sell intoxicating liquor on a temporary
basis, shall be by permit only and conducted in accordance with the following
terms and conditions:
      1.   The licensee shall first secure a permit by request to the city
council. The request shall specifically define the area of outdoor use and the
nature of the use. The applicant shall pay a permit fee to the city prior to
issuance of the permit. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the
city council. After the initial issuance of such a permit, the issuance of the
license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor to the licensee shall permit the
sale of intoxicating liquor in such outdoor area according to the provisions of
this section.
      2.   The permit shall only apply to the approved or defined area and
shall not be transferable to other portions of the property, without prior
approval of the city.
      3.   That said sale, consumption and possession be limited to property
adjacent to and contiguous with the building of the on- sale business, and on
real property owned or leased by licensee. Such designated outdoor area is to
be specifically described as part of the licensed premises in the license
application. The structure shall comply with all applicable zoning restrictions
and setbacks unless a variance to those requirements has been obtained. Under
no circumstances shall the sale, consumption or possession of the intoxicating
liquor occur on any public streets, alleys, sidewalks, park or other public
property unless the licensee has obtained a permit for use of city property.
      4.   Access to and egress from the designated outdoor area shall be
reviewed for each event and the city may require screening or may prohibit the
direct passage of any person between the area and any unlicensed area of the
premises or other premises prohibit public access to and egress from the
outdoor area other than from the main premises or structure depending on the
event.
      5.   Sound equipment and all other noise on the outdoor enclosure shall
be so controlled that it does not disturb the peace of the surrounding area.
      6.   Lighting equipment shall be permitted to the extent that it
illuminates the designated outdoor area. Lighting equipment shall not be
permitted to shine toward residential areas or to cause a glare upon any public
street or sidewalk, or upon any other public or private property.
      7.   In issuing the permit under this section, the city council shall set
a time after which no intoxicating liquor shall be sold, served, possessed or
consumed in the designated area outside of the building of an on-sale business
as is appropriate for the neighborhood in which the business is located.
      8.   The designated outdoor area must be kept in a neat and clean
condition, and all debris located adjacent to the area, but originating from
the designated outdoor area, must be picked up and removed.
      9.   All other provisions of this article and state law, applying to the
sale of intoxicating liquor, and the manner in which the licensee must conduct
business, shall apply to the designated outdoor area in a similar manner as
they apply to the licensed premises and the usual business conducted therein.
Specifically the designated outdoor area must be included in the required
liquor liability insurance for the premises.
      10.   Upon issuing a permit under this section, the city council may
waive any of the requirements of this section if the council finds that the
requirement imposes an undue hardship on the property owner and that the waiver
would not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of
neighboring property owners or the public. The city council may place
additional conditions or restrictions on any permit issued under this section
for the protection of the health, safety or general welfare of neighboring
property owners or the public. (Ord. 881, 9-17-2008)
3-2A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Contents Of Application: Every application shall contain the following:
      1.   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership
or other form of organization.
      2.   If the applicant is a natural person, the following information:
         a.   True name and street resident address of applicant.
         b.   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other
than such applicant's true name, and if so, what was such name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used.
         c.   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant.
         d.   Street addresses at which applicant has lived during the
preceding ten (10) years.
         e.   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation applicant
has been engaged in during the preceding ten (10) years.
         f.   Whether applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, crime or
violation of any ordinance other than traffic. If so, the applicant shall
furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions
were had.
         g.   Whether applicant has ever engaged in operating a saloon, hotel,
restaurant, cafe, tavern or other business of a similar nature. If so,
applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place and length of time.
         h.   The name, address and business address of each person who is
engaged in Minnesota in the business of selling, manufacturing or distributing
intoxicating liquor and who is nearer of kin to the applicant than first
cousin, whether of the whole or half blood computed by the rules of civil law,
or who is a brother-in-law or sister-in-law of the applicant.
         i.   The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of
the premises to be licensed.
      3.   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a single
applicant in subsection A2 of this section. A managing partner, or partners,
shall be designated. The interest of each partner in the business shall be
disclosed. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the
application.
      4.   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization and is
applying for an on-sale license, the following:
         a.   Name, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
         b.   A true copy of the certification of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement and bylaws or similar documents for any
other organization, and, if a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority
as described in Minnesota statutes chapter 303.
         c.   The name of the manager, proprietor or other agent in charge of
the premises to be licensed, giving all the information about said person as it
is required of a single applicant in subsection A2 of this section.
         d.   The names and addresses of the corporation or other organization
and all information required of a single applicant in subsection A2 of this
section.
         e.   If requested by the city council, a list of all persons who,
singly or together with their spouse or a parent, brother, sister or child, own
or control any interest in said corporation or other organization.
      5.   The exact legal description of the premises to be licensed, together
with a plot plan of the area showing dimensions, location of buildings, street
access, parking facilities and locations of and distances to the nearest church
building and school grounds. The plot plan shall also show the location and all
improvements on any outdoor area to be included as part of the license.
      6.   The floor number and the street number where the sale of
intoxicating liquor is to be conducted and the rooms where liquor is to be sold
or consumed. An applicant for an on-sale license shall submit a floor plan of
the dining room or dining rooms, which shall be open to the public, shall show
dimensions and shall indicate the number of persons intended to be served in
each of said rooms, and where on the premises liquor will be sold.
      7.   The names and addresses of all persons, other than the applicant,
who have any financial interest in the business, building, premises, fixtures,
furniture and stock in trade; the nature of such interest, amount thereof and
terms for payment or other reimbursement.
      8.   If requested by the city council the names and contact information
of three (3) references, not related to the applicant or financially interested
in the premises or business to be licensed, to provide a character reference
for the applicant or manager as the case may be.
      9.   Whether or not all real estate and other taxes for the premises and
the business to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years for
which they are delinquent.
      10.   Whenever the application for an on-sale license or for a transfer
thereof is for premises either planned or under construction or undergoing
substantial alteration, the application shall be accompanied by a set of
preliminary plans showing the design of the premises to be licensed.
      11.   A release authorizing the city to obtain all financial and
background information that may be appropriate.
      12.   Such other information as the city council shall require. The
requirements of this section and other sections of this article set forth
minimum requirements but the council reserves the right to consider any and all
other factors as to the qualification of any applicant and the suitability of
any location.
   B.   Liability Insurance: Prior to the issuance of a liquor license, the
applicant shall file with the city clerk a proof of liability insurance in the
amount required by Minnesota statutes section 340A.409, as amended, and shall
comply with the provisions of the Minnesota statutes section 340A.301(4)
relating to liability insurance policies.
   C.   Approval Of Security: The security offered under subsection B of this
section shall be approved by the city council. Liability insurance policies
shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. Operations of a licensed
business without having on file with the city at all times effective security
as required in subsection B of this section is a cause for suspension and
revocation of the license. (Ord. 936, 9-8-2015)
3-2A-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees: The annual fee for an on-sale license shall be one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) a year. In addition, a licensee shall pay a fee of
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) a year for each serving station or bar,
including portable bars, located in an outside area or on a separate level on
the licensed premises and which are under the control of the management of the
same licensee. The license fee for a Sunday on-sale license shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) a year, in addition to the on-sale license fee. All
licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. The fee for a license
granted after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a
monthly basis; and each part of a month shall constitute a full month. (Ord.
899, 7-6-2010)
   B.   Payment: Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the city treasurer for payment in full of the license fee. All
fees shall be paid into the general fund. If an application for a license is
rejected, the treasurer shall refund the amount paid, less the sum of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) which will be retained to cover investigation and
other expenses connected with the consideration of the application by the
council. If an applicant resides at a substantial distance from Montevideo or
for any other reason charges of making investigation and other expenses
connected with the application are anticipated to exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00), an additional deposit may be required from an applicant to cover
such anticipated additional costs. Any portion of this additional deposit which
is not used for expenses in excess of the three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall
be refunded to the applicant whether such applicant's application is granted or
denied. (Ord. 527, 10-2-1978)
   C.   Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by
statute or by this section. The council may refund the unused portion of the
annual license fee prorated, to the date of the request for a refund, on a
monthly basis with each part of a month constituting a full month, less the sum
of three hundred dollars ($300.00) which will be retained by the city to cover
expenses connected with the issuance and refund of the license. (Ord. 812, 4-2-
2001)
3-2A-5: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
   A.   Investigation And Issuance: The city manager, with the assistance of
the chief of police and other city officials, shall investigate all facts set
out in the application. No application for a license shall be considered until
a thorough investigation has been conducted and a written report has been
presented to the city council. This report shall be required not sooner than
thirty (30) days nor later than forty five (45) days after the presentation of
a completed application is delivered to the office of the city clerk. After
presentation, the city clerk shall have thirty (30) days to issue or reject a
license. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against
the granting of the license. After the investigation and public testimony, if
any, the city council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the
application. (Ord. 527, 10-2-1978)
   B.   Person And Premises Licensed; Transfer: Each license shall be issued
only to the applicant and for the premises described in the application,
including any outdoor area described in the application, and no license shall
be issued for a premises which is not properly zoned for the business to be
licensed. No license may be transferred to another person or place. Any
transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed a transfer of the license
and a transfer of stock without prior council approval is grounds for
revocation of the license.
   C.   Minimum Standards: The requirements of this article are minimum
standards which must be met to have an application considered at all. Beyond
these minimum standards the council retains its discretion to determine the
qualifications of an applicant and the suitability of a location or premises
for which application is made. The council may place restrictions or conditions
on that portion of a license which is an outdoor area, including some or all of
the restrictions or conditions listed in subsection
3-2A-2B of this article as are necessary or advisable for the protection of the
neighborhood and the general public. (Ord. 881, 9-17-2008)
3-2A-6: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for such a license by
state law. No license shall be issued to a person who has delinquent taxes,
assessments or other financial obligations to the city. (Ord. 527, 10-2-1978;
amd. 1998 Code)
3-2A-7: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   General Prohibition: No license shall be issued for any place or any
business ineligible for such a license under state law.
   B.   Delinquent Taxes And Charges: No license shall be granted for operation
of any premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the
city are delinquent and unpaid.
(Ord. 898, 6-7-2010; amd. Ord. 986, 2-20-2024)
3-2A-8: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Generally: Every license is subject to the conditions in the following
subsections and all other provisions of this article and of any other
applicable ordinance, state law or regulation.
   B.   Licensee's Responsibility: Every licensee is responsible for the
conduct of his or her place of business and the conditions of sobriety and
order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to
sell intoxicating liquor is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the
licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this article and the law
equally with the employee.
   C.   Inspections: Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health
officer or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect and search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a
warrant.
   D.   Display During Prohibited Hours: No on-sale establishment shall display
liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   E.   Federal Stamps: No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor
dealer's special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
   F.   Off-Sale Of Liquor: No off-sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made
by any licensee.
   G.   Books Of Account: Licensees shall keep complete and accurate books of
account including accurate records showing receipts from the sale of
intoxicating liquor and from the sale of food showing separate receipts, and
upon request by the city council shall furnish such records to the city council
for its review. (Ord. 527, 10-2-1978)
   H.   Consumption After Hours: No person shall consume and no licensee shall
permit the consumption of any intoxicating liquor on premises licensed for the
sale of such liquor and all persons, except employees of the licensee, shall be
off the premises of a licensee beginning thirty (30) minutes after the sale of
such liquor is prohibited by this chapter.
   I.   Time Limits: Any license issued to an establishment less than three
hundred feet (300') from the property lines of a school shall not permit sales
prior to 3:30 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays.
(Ord. 843, 12-1-2003; amd. Ord. 986, 2-20-2024)
3-2A-9: RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION:
No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place or
place of business unless it has a license to sell liquor on-sale or a permit
from the state commissioner of public safety under Minnesota statutes section
340A.414 and no person shall consume liquor in any such place. (Ord. 527, 10-2-
1978; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2A-10: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
The council may either suspend for not to exceed sixty (60) days or revoke any
liquor license upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to intoxicating liquor. No
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Minnesota statutes sections 15.0418 to
15.0426. (Ord. 527, 10-2-1978)
3-2A-11: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code plus the cost of prosecution in any case. (Ord. 899, 7-6-
2010)
3-2A-12: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:
In addition to any criminal penalties, the following administrative penalties
shall apply to any violations of this chapter:
   A.   Violations And Fines:
      1.   First violation: The licensee shall be charged an administrative
penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and the clerk/seller, if any, shall be
charged an administrative penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Second violation within twenty four (24) months by the same
licensee: A two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty for the license holder and a
fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty for the clerk/seller, if any.
      3.   Third violation by the same licensee within a twenty four (24) month
period: The city council shall suspend the license of that licensee for a
minimum of seven (7) days and impose a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the license holder and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the clerk/
seller, if any.
      4.   Fourth violation by the same licensee within twelve (12) months of
the first violation: The city council shall revoke that licensee's license for
a period of at least six (6) months.
   B.   Penalties: All administrative penalties shall be payable to the city.
If not paid, this shall be grounds for suspension of a license. (Ord. 899, 7-6-
2010)
ARTICLE B. 3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Definitions
3-2B-2: License Required
3-2B-3: Applications For License
3-2B-4: Fees
3-2B-5: Granting Of Licenses
3-2B-6: Conditions Of Licenses
3-2B-7: Closing Hours
3-2B-8: Clubs; Sale To Members Only
3-2B-9: Revocation Of License
3-2B-10: Criminal Penalty
3-2B-11: Administrative Penalties
3-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Restaurant: Restaurant is an establishment, other than a hotel, under
the control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly
prepared on the premises and served at tables to the general public, and having
seating capacity for at least thirty (30) guests.
   B.   Terms Defined: The terms used in this article shall have the meaning
given by Minnesota statutes section 340a.101 as amended from time to time.
(1998 Code)
3-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell, vend, deal in or dispose of by gift, sale of, or
otherwise, or keep or offer for sale, any 3.2 percent malt liquor within this
city without first having received a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
Licenses shall be of two (2) kinds: on-sale and off-sale.
   A.   On-Sale Licenses: On-sale licenses shall be granted only to
restaurants, hotels, bona fide clubs, bowling centers, and establishments for
the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and
soft drinks. A Sunday on-sale license may be issued to any intoxicating liquor
licensee who otherwise qualifies for an on-sale license under this article. A
club, a charitable, religious or nonprofit organization, an on- sale 3.2
percent malt liquor licensee, or an on-sale intoxicating liquor licensee may be
issued a temporary on-sale license. A temporary on-sale license may only be
issued for community festivals, for a maximum of four (4) consecutive days. A
club or a charitable, religious or nonprofit organization is not required to
have a permanent establishment to be eligible for a temporary on-sale license.
For an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licensee or an on-sale intoxicating
liquor licensee, the temporary on-sale license shall authorize the temporary
sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor at a place other than the licensee's
established permanent place of business. No entity or person may be issued more
than three (3) temporary on-sale licenses in any one calendar year. Temporary
licenses may be subject to such further restrictions as the city council feels
appropriate.
   B.   Off-Sale Licenses: Off-sale licenses shall be granted to permit the
sale at retail of 3.2 percent malt liquor in the original packages for removal
from and consumption off the premises only. (Ord. 653, 3-7-1988; amd. 1998
Code)
3-2B-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
All applications for license to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor shall be made on
forms to be supplied by the city clerk, setting forth the name of the
applicant, his or her age, and all other information required thereon. It shall
be unlawful to make any false statement in the application for such license.
(Ord. 653, 3-7-1988)
3-2B-4: FEES:
   A.   Receipt From Treasurer; Monies To General Fund: All applications for
licenses shall be accompanied by a receipt from the city treasurer for the
required annual fee for the respective license. All such fees shall be paid
into the general fund of the city. Upon rejection of any application for a
license, the treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
   B.   Fee Amount Set Annually By Council: The council shall, by resolution
adopted at a regular or special meeting, following a public hearing pursuant to
Minnesota statutes section 340A.408, subdivision 3a, prescribe a fee for
licenses for each ensuing year. All licenses, except temporary on-sale
licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year. (Ord. 653, 3-7-1988; amd.
1998 Code)
   C.   Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by
statute. (1998 Code)
3-2B-5: GRANTING OF LICENSES:
The city council shall cause an investigation to be made of all facts set forth
in the application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of any license. After such investigation, the council
shall grant or refuse any such application in its discretion. All licensed
premises shall have the license therefor posted in a conspicuous place at all
times. (Ord. 653, 3-7-1988)
3-2B-6: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES:
   A.   Age Requirement: No license shall be granted to any person under twenty
one (21) years of age.
   B.   Prohibition Against Serving; Loitering: It shall be unlawful for any
licensee or his or her employees to sell or serve 3.2 percent malt liquor to
any person under the age for legal purchase of 3.2 percent malt liquor as
determined by the laws of the state or obviously intoxicated person, or to
permit any person under the age for legal purchase of 3.2 percent malt liquor
or obviously intoxicated person to consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent
malt liquor on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee
holding an on-sale license as an establishment for the sale of 3.2 percent malt
liquor for his or her employees to permit any person under the age for legal
purchase of 3.2 percent malt liquor to loiter or to remain in the room where
3.2 percent malt liquor is being sold or served unless accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian.
   C.   Tamper With Content Of Liquor: No person shall add to or increase the
alcoholic content of any 3.2 percent malt liquor.
   D.   Open To Inspection: All premises where any license hereunder is granted
shall be open to inspection by any police or health officer or other properly
designated officer or employee of the city at any time during which the place
so licensed is open to the public for business. (Ord. 653, 3-7-1988)
   E.   License Nontransferable: Licenses under this article shall be issued in
the name of the applicant only and for the premises described in the
application, and no such license shall be transferable to another person or
place within the city. (Ord. 653, 3-7-1988; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Manufacturer Ineligible: No license shall be granted to any
manufacturer of 3.2 percent malt liquor nor to anyone interested in the control
of any such place, and no equipment or fixture in any licensed place shall be
owned in whole or in part by any such manufacturer. (Ord. 653, 3-7-1988)
   G.   Qualifications And Exceptions:
      1.   No on-sale license shall be issued to any person for any other
premises than the premises fronting upon First Street in the city, between the
intersection of said First Street and the north line of Park Avenue extended
westerly and the intersection of said First Street and the south line of Black
Oak Avenue if extended westerly; provided, however, that the foregoing
restrictions shall have no application to the following:
         a.   Bona fide clubs;
         b.   Establishments licensed to operate bowling centers;
         c.   Establishments licensed to sell intoxicating liquors at on-sale;
         d.   Hotels and restaurants located in a B-1 or B-2 zoning district;
         e.   Temporary licenses which may be issued for periods of time not to
exceed four (4) days;
         f.   Licenses issued in connection with racetracks. (Ord. 869, 3-5-
2007)
      2.   No licenses shall be issued pursuant to the above exceptions unless
and until the city council finds that the granting of such a license will not
be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience or welfare
of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood or to the public
welfare, or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood. (Ord.
653, 3-7-1988)
   H.   Age Restrictions On Employees: All premises for which any license is
granted shall have: 1) at least one employee eighteen (18) years of age or
older working and on the premises during all business hours, or 2) all 3.2
percent malt liquors and intoxicating liquors secured in a locked area when
there is not an employee eighteen (18) years of age or older working and on the
premises. Access to this area must be secure from the employees under eighteen
(18) years of age when they are unsupervised by a person of eighteen (18) years
of age or older. (Ord. 653, 3-7-1988; amd. 1998 Code)
   I.   Persons Or Places Ineligible For License: No license shall be issued to
any person or for any premises from which or on which taxes, assessments or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. (1998 Code)
   J.   Consumption After Hours: No person shall consume and no licensee shall
permit the consumption of any 3.2 percent malt liquor on premises licensed for
the sale of such liquor and all persons, except employees of the licensee,
shall be off the premises of a licensee beginning thirty (30) minutes after the
sale of such liquor is prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 843, 12-1-2003)
3-2B-7: CLOSING HOURS:
No sale or serving of any 3.2 percent malt liquor shall be made between the
hours as now are or may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the state. (Ord.
653, 3-7-1988; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2B-8: CLUBS; SALE TO MEMBERS ONLY:
No club shall sell 3.2 percent malt liquor except to members and to guests in
the company of members. (Ord. 653, 3-7-1988; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2B-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license granted hereunder may, after a hearing, be revoked at the
discretion of the council. Any violation of any provision or condition of this
article, or any falsification of any statement in the application shall be
grounds for revocation. Upon conviction of any licensee, employee, servant or
agent, for any violation of any of the provisions or conditions hereof, or
state statutes governing 3.2 percent malt liquors, the council may, in its
discretion, revoke said licensee's license, or, except as otherwise required by
law, the council may, in lieu of such revocation, suspend such license. No
portion of the license fee paid to the city shall be refunded upon revocation
or suspension of a license. (Ord. 909, 1-10-2011)
3-2B-10: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code plus the cost of prosecution in any case. (Ord. 909, 1-10-
2011)
3-2B-11: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:
In addition to any criminal penalties, the following administrative penalties
shall apply to any violations of this article:
   A.   Violations And Fines:
      1.   First violation: The licensee shall be charged an administrative
penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and the clerk/seller, if any, shall be
charged an administrative penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Second violation within twenty four (24) months by the same
licensee: A two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty for the license holder and a
fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty for the clerk/seller, if any.
      3.   Third violation by the same licensee within a twenty four (24) month
period: The city council shall suspend the license of that licensee for a
minimum of seven (7) days and impose a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the license holder and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the clerk/
seller, if any.
      4.   Fourth violation by the same licensee within twelve (12) months of
the first violation: The city council shall revoke that licensee's license for
a period of at least six (6) months.
   B.   Penalties: All administrative penalties shall be payable to the city.
If not paid, this shall be grounds for suspension of a license. (Ord. 909, 1-
10-2011)
ARTICLE C. WINE
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Provisions Of State Law Adopted
3-2C-2: Wine Licenses
3-2C-3: Application For License
3-2C-4: License Fees
3-2C-5: Granting Of License
3-2C-6: Persons Ineligible For License
3-2C-7: Places Ineligible For License
3-2C-8: Conditions Of License
3-2C-9: Suspension And Revocation
3-2C-10: Criminal Penalty
3-2C-11: Administrative Penalties
3-2C-1: PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 340A, relating to the definition
of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, conditions of bonds of licensees,
hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale,
distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor insofar as they are
applicable to wine licenses authorizing the sale of wine not exceeding fourteen
percent (14%) alcohol by volume for consumption on the licensed premises only,
in conjunction with the sale of food, are adopted and made a part of this
article as if set out in full. (Ord. 830, 10-7-2002)
3-2C-2: WINE LICENSES:
No person, except a wholesaler, or manufacturer to the extent authorized under
state license, the municipal liquor dispensary and organizations holding club
liquor licenses shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for sale in
the city, any wine not exceeding fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume
without an on-sale wine license. An on-sale wine license authorizes the sale of
wine not exceeding fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume, for consumption on
the licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food. An on-sale
wine license may be issued only to:
   A.   A restaurant having facilities for seating not fewer than twenty five
(25) guests at one time. For purposes of this article, a "restaurant" means an
establishment other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at
tables to the general public. (Ord. 866, 12-18-2006)
   B.   The holder of a wine license who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent
malt liquor at on-sale and whose gross receipts are at least sixty percent
(60%) attributable to the sale of food, may sell intoxicating malt liquors at
on-sale without an additional license. This provision shall not permit sale of
intoxicating malt liquors on Sunday or at other times prohibited by city
ordinances or state law. (Ord. 875, 4-21-2008)
   C.   A licensed bed and breakfast facility. A license under this subsection
authorizes a bed and breakfast facility to furnish wine only to registered
guests of the facility. (Ord. 866, 12-18-2006)
   D.   A charitable, religious or other nonprofit organization may obtain a
temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license under section
3-2A-2 of this chapter for winetastings. (Ord. 873, 1-22-2008)
3-2C-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Form: Every application for on-sale wine license shall state the name
of the applicant, applicant's age, representations as to such applicant's
character, with such references as the council may require, his or her
citizenship, the restaurant in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location (including any outdoor area to be included as part of
the license), whether the applicant is owner and operator of the restaurant,
how long such applicant has been in the restaurant business at that place,
whether or not the applicant desires to serve wine on Sundays after twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon, and such other information as the council may require
from time to time. In addition to containing such information, the application
shall be in the form prescribed by the state commissioner of public safety and
shall be verified and filed with the city clerk. No person shall make a false
statement in an application. (Ord. 883, 10-20-2008)
   B.   Bond: (Rep. by Ord. 899, 7-6-2010)
   C.   Liability Insurance: Prior to the issuance of a wine license, the
applicant shall file with the city clerk proof of liability insurance in the
amounts required by Minnesota statutes section 340A.409, as amended, and shall
comply with the provisions of Minnesota statutes section 340A.409 relating to
liability insurance policies. If a liability insurance policy is made subject
to all the conditions of a bond under that statute, the policy may be accepted
by the council in lieu of the bond required under subsection B of this section.
   D.   Approval Of Security: The security offered under subsections B and C of
this section shall be approved by the city council and the state commissioner
of public safety. Surety bonds and liability insurance policies shall be
approved as to form by the city attorney. Operation of a licensed business
without having on file with the city at all times effective security as
required in subsections B and C of this section is a cause for revocation of
the license. (Ord. 504, 12-6-1976, eff. 1-5-1977; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2C-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Amount: The annual fee for a wine license is:
      1.   Two hundred sixty five dollars ($265.00) for a license permitting
service of wine on all days of the week except Sunday,
      2.   Three hundred thirty five dollars ($335.00) for a license permitting
the service of wine on all days of the week including Sunday after twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon,
      3.   Seventy dollars ($70.00) for a Sunday only wine license,
      4.   Seventy dollars ($70.00) for a bed and breakfast wine license, and
      5.   Forty dollars ($40.00) for a temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor
license for winetasting purposes. (Ord. 873, 1-22-2008)
   B.   Payment: Each application for a wine license shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the city treasurer for payment in full of the license fee. All
fees shall be paid into the general fund. If an application for a license is
rejected, the treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
   C.   Term: Each license shall be issued for a period of one year except that
if the application is made during the license year, a license may be issued for
the remainder of the year. Every license shall expire on December 31. The fee
for any partial year license will not be prorated.
   D.   Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by
statute. (Ord. 504, 12-6-1976, eff. 1-5-1977; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Change In Fees: The council may, by resolution duly adopted at a
regular meeting or a special meeting called therefor, prescribe a different fee
for licenses for each ensuing year. (Ord. 754, 12-5-1994)
3-2C-5: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
   A.   Investigation And Issuance: The city council shall investigate all
facts set out in the application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to
be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation
and hearing, the council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the
application. No wine license shall become effective until it, together with the
security furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the state
commissioner of public safety. (Ord. 504, 12-6-1976, eff. 1-5-1977; amd. 1998
Code)
   B.   Person And Premises Licensed; Transfer: Each license shall be issued
only to the applicant and for the premises described in the application,
including any outdoor area described in the application. No license may be
transferred to another person or place. Any transfer of stock of a corporate
licensee is deemed a transfer of the license and a transfer of stock is grounds
for revocation of the license. (Ord. 883, 10-20-2008)
3-2C-6: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No wine license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for such a
license by state law. No license shall be issued to a person who has delinquent
taxes, assessments or other financial obligations to the city. (Ord. 504, 12-6-
1976, eff. 1-5-1977; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2C-7: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   General Prohibition: No wine license shall be issued for any restaurant
ineligible for such a license under state law.
   B.   Delinquent Taxes And Charges: No license shall be granted for operation
on any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the
city are delinquent and unpaid. (Ord. 504, 12-6-1976, eff. 1-5-1977; amd. 1998
Code)
3-2C-8: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   In General: Every license is subject to the conditions in the following
subsections and all other provisions of this article and of any other
applicable ordinance, state law or regulation.
   B.   Licensee's Responsibility: Every licensee is responsible for the
conduct of his or her place of business and the conditions of sobriety and
order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to
sell intoxicating liquor there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and
the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this article and the
law equally with the employee.
   C.   Inspections: Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health
officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect and search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a
warrant.
   D.   Display During Prohibited Hours: No licensee shall display wine to the
public during hours when the sale of wine is prohibited.
   E.   Federal Stamps: No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor
dealers' special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
   F.   Consumption After Hours: No person shall consume and no licensee shall
permit the consumption of any wine on premises licensed for the sale of such
wine and all persons, except employees of the licensee, shall be off the
premises of a licensee beginning thirty (30) minutes after the sale of such
liquor is prohibited by this chapter.
   G.   Minimum Standards: The requirements of this article are minimum
standards which must be met to have an application considered at all. Beyond
these minimum standards the council retains its discretion to determine the
qualifications of an applicant and the suitability of a location or premises
for which application is made. The council may place restrictions or conditions
on that portion of a license which is an outdoor area, including some or all of
the restrictions or conditions listed in subsection
3-2A-2B of this chapter as are necessary or advisable for the protection of the
neighborhood and the general public. (Ord. 883, 10-20-2008)
3-2C-9: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
The council may either suspend for not to exceed sixty (60) days or revoke any
on-sale wine license upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with
any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to intoxicating
liquor. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has
been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Minnesota statutes
section 14.58. (Ord. 504, 12-6-1976, eff. 1-5-1977)
3-2C-10: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, plus the cost of prosecution in any case. (Ord. 899, 7-6-
2010)
3-2C-11: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:
In addition to any criminal penalties, the following administrative penalties
shall apply to any violations of this chapter:
   A.   Violations And Fines:
      1.   First violation: The licensee shall be charged an administrative
penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and the clerk/seller, if any, shall be
charged an administrative penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Second violation within twenty four (24) months by the same
licensee: A two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty for the license holder and a
fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty for the clerk/seller, if any.
      3.   Third violation by the same licensee within a twenty four (24) month
period: The city council shall suspend the license of that licensee for a
minimum of seven (7) days and impose a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the license holder and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the clerk/
seller, if any.
      4.   Fourth violation by the same licensee within twelve (12) months of
the first violation: The city council shall revoke that licensee's license for
a period of at least six (6) months.
   B.   Penalties: All administrative penalties shall be payable to the city.
If not paid, this shall be grounds for suspension of a license. (Ord. 899, 7-6-
2010)
ARTICLE D. LIQUOR CLUBS
SECTION:
3-2D-1: Definitions
3-2D-2: License Required
3-2D-3: Application For License
3-2D-4: Fees
3-2D-5: Granting Of License
3-2D-6: Conditions Of License
3-2D-7: Hours Of Sale
3-2D-8: Setup (Consumption And Display) Permit
3-2D-9: Revocation Of License
3-2D-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this article shall have the meanings given by Minnesota
statutes section 340A.101, as amended from time to time. (1998 Code)
3-2D-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No club as defined by statute shall sell, lend, deal in, or dispose of by gift,
sale, or otherwise or keep or offer for sale any intoxicating liquor or liquors
within the city without first having obtained a license therefor, as
hereinafter provided. (Ch. 202, 9-9-1948; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2D-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for license hereunder shall be made on forms to be supplied by
the clerk setting forth the name of the applicant, the names and places of
residence of its officers and all other information required thereon. It shall
be unlawful to make any false statements in such application, and any false
statement therein wilfully made shall be the grounds for revocation of the
license. (Ch. 202, 9-9-1948)
3-2D-4: FEES:
The fee for the license herein provided for shall be the sum of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per year or fractional part thereof, and all
applications for license shall be accompanied by such fee. All licenses
hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. (Ord. 572, 11-23-1981, eff.
1-1-1982; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2D-5: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
The council shall cause an investigation to be made of all facts set forth in
the application. After such investigation the council shall grant or refuse any
such application in its discretion. All licensed premises shall have the
license therefor posted in a conspicuous place at all times. (Ch. 202, 9-9-
1948)
3-2D-6: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Sales Restricted To Certain Persons: No club licensed hereunder, nor
any officer, employee, servant or agent thereof, shall sell any intoxicating
liquor or liquors to any person not a bona fide member of said club, or a bona
fide guest, or to any person, male or female, who is a person under the age of
twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person. (Ord. 521, 2-6-1978; amd.
1998 Code)
   B.   Premises Open To Inspection: All premises licensed hereunder shall be
open to inspection by any police or health officer or any other properly
designated officer of the city at any time during which the place so licensed
is open for business.
   C.   License Nontransferable: No license issued hereunder shall be
transferable. (Ord. 521, 2-6-1978)
   D.   Bona Fide Guest Defined: For purposes of this section, the term "bona
fide guest" shall mean a person who is a temporary visitor who is entertained
at the club by a member of the club. Their relationship should be one of
reasonable acquaintance for social or business purposes. A bona fide guest
shall be accompanied by his or her host member and upon entering the premises
where intoxicating liquor is sold, a member who has a guest shall register his
or her name and the name of his or her guest or guests. Members of a club shall
include the members of the auxiliary to the club. The club shall at all times
keep the door for use by the public in entering the premises where intoxicating
liquor is sold locked until open for admission. A buzzer shall be provided for
use by those desiring to be admitted. (Ord. 551, 4-22-1980)
   E.   Consumption After Hours: No person shall consume and no licensee shall
permit the consumption of any intoxicating liquor on premises licensed for the
sale of such liquor and all persons, except employees of the licensee, shall be
off the premises of a licensee beginning thirty (30) minutes after the sale of
such liquor is prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 843, 12-1-2003)
3-2D-7: HOURS OF SALE:
The hours of sale under any license issued hereunder shall be the same as now
are or hereafter may be prescribed by the laws of the state of Minnesota. (Ch.
202, 9-9-1948)
3-2D-8: SETUP (CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY) PERMIT:
   A.   City And State Recipients: There is hereby imposed upon those required
to obtain a permit from the state commissioner of public safety a fee, set by
resolution of the city council, in addition to the fee required to be paid to
the state by law, which fee shall be paid to the city.
   B.   Issuance Of Permit: Upon the payment of said fee, the city shall issue
the permit, to be known as a setup license, which shall expire on March 31 of
the designated year in such permit.
   C.   Permit Prerequisite To License: No setup license shall be issued to any
person or corporation not having a permit under said statute from the state
commissioner of public safety and the setup license shall be revoked upon
revocation of the permit granted by the said state commissioner of public
safety and may be revoked for any violation of the laws of the state or the
ordinances of the city.
   D.   Setup License Required: It shall be unlawful for any "bottle club", as
defined by the laws of the state, or for any business establishment to directly
or indirectly, or upon any pretense, or by any device, to allow the consumption
or display of intoxicating liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose
of mixing of intoxicating liquor in the city, without having obtained from the
city a setup license.
   E.   Issuance: Setup permits may only be issued to a restaurant, hotel,
resort, club, bed and breakfast, or an establishment licensed for the sale of
3.2 percent malt liquor. (Ord. 899, 7-6-2010)
3-2D-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council may revoke or suspend any license granted under this article
pursuant to the provision of Minnesota statutes section 340A.415, as amended.
In addition to the grounds stated therein the city council may revoke or
suspend a license for the following grounds: any falsification of any statement
in the application. No portion of any license fee paid hereunder shall be
refunded upon any revocation or suspension. (1998 Code)
ARTICLE E. MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORE
SECTION:
3-2E-1: Municipal Liquor Store Established
3-2E-2: Location And Operation
3-2E-3: Municipal Liquor Store Fund Created
3-2E-4: Closing Hours
3-2E-5: Sale And Use Of Intoxicating Liquor
3-2E-6: Conditions Of Operating; Restrictions On Consumption
3-2E-7: Enforcement And Penalty
3-2E-1: MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORE ESTABLISHED:
A Municipal liquor store is hereby established to be operated within this City
for the sale at retail of intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, tobacco
products, ice, soft drinks, and beverages for mixing intoxicating liquor. (1998
Code)
3-2E-2: LOCATION AND OPERATION:
The said Municipal liquor store shall be located at such place, or places, as
the Council shall determine by motion and may be either leased or owned by the
City. Said store shall be in the charge of a person known as the liquor store
manager, who shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager, and
who shall be paid such compensation as the Council shall determine. If required
by the Council, the liquor store manager and such other employees subordinate
to said manager as the Council shall determine, shall give surety bonds to be
approved by the Council in such amounts as the Council shall determine,
conditioned that said liquor store manager shall abide by the rules and
regulations established for the operation of said Municipal liquor store and
all laws of the State, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor, and for the
full and true accounting of all monies and properties coming into their hands
in the operation of said Municipal liquor store. Premiums on all bonds
furnished as hereinbefore provided shall be paid by the City from the Municipal
Liquor Store Fund. No minor person shall be employed in the Municipal liquor
store. (Ord. 153, 11-20-1940; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2E-3: MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORE FUND CREATED:
A Liquor Store Fund is hereby set up within the General Fund, into which all
revenues received from the operation of the Municipal liquor store shall be
paid, and from which all operating expenses shall be paid, provided that the
initial cost of rent, fixtures, and stock may be paid for out of the General
Fund of the City, such amounts to be reimbursed to the General Fund out of the
first monies coming into the Liquor Store Fund not needed for carrying on said
business. Any surplus accumulating in this Fund may be transferred to the
General Fund by the Council and expended for any Municipal purpose. (Ch. 153,
11-20-1940; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2E-4: CLOSING HOURS:
The Municipal liquor store shall at all times observe the restrictions and
limitations placed upon the hours for the sale of intoxicating liquor by the
laws of the State as the same now are or may hereafter be amended, and such
other and further restrictions and limitations as the Council may impose by
resolution duly adopted therefor. (Ch. 153, 11-20-1940; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2E-5: SALE AND USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR:
   A.   Peddling Of Liquor Prohibited: No person shall sell, barter, or
otherwise dispose of intoxicating liquor outside of said Municipal liquor store
nor shall any intoxicating liquor be sold, bartered or otherwise disposed of by
any person not employed in said Municipal liquor store.
   B.   Mixing Of Liquor Prohibited In Public Places: It shall be unlawful for
any person, or persons, to mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public
place within the City.
   C.   Selling Or Consumption On Public Ways Prohibited: No intoxicating
liquor shall be sold or consumed on any public highway, street, avenue, or
alley within the City, or in any automobile within the City.
   D.   Sales Allowed By Ordinance: Nothing herein contained shall prohibit or
preclude the sale of intoxicating liquor by any person holding a license
permitting such sale duly issued in conformity with an ordinance of the City
authorizing the same pursuant to the statutes of the State now in force or
which may be hereafter enacted. (Ch. 153, 11-20-1940; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2E-6: CONDITIONS OF OPERATING; RESTRICTIONS ON CONSUMPTION:
   A.   Merchandise Limited: No business other than the sale of liquor and such
other merchandise as permitted by law shall be carried on by or in the
Municipal liquor store or by the persons employed therein, during the time so
employed and in conjunction therewith.
   B.   Right To Refuse Sale: No liquor shall be sold, either for consumption
upon the premises nor for removal therefrom to a person who is in an obviously
intoxicated condition, and the Municipal liquor store may, in its discretion,
refuse to sell any liquor in any manner to a person known to be a habitual
drunkard. (Ch. 153, 11-20-1940; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Age Restrictions: No liquor shall be sold to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 521, 2-6-1978; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Premises To Be Orderly: No disorderly person shall be permitted on such
premises. (Ord. 663, 3-26-1990)
   E.   Discourage Loitering: No person shall be permitted to loaf or loiter
about the Municipal liquor store habitually.
   F.   Premises Free From Incumbrance: No premises shall be leased for a
Municipal liquor store upon which taxes, assessments or other legal public
levies are delinquent and unpaid. (Ch. 153, 11-20-1940; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2E-7: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
It shall be the duty of all police officers of the City to enforce the
provisions of this Article and any person violating any provisions of this
Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ch. 153, 11-20-1940; amd. 1998 Code)
ARTICLE F. BREWER LICENSING
SECTION:
3-2F-1: Provisions Of State Law Adopted
3-2F-2: Licensing Requirements
3-2F-3: Application For License
3-2F-4: License Fees
3-2F-5: Granting Of License
3-2F-6: Persons Ineligible For License
3-2F-7: Places Ineligible For License
3-2F-8: Conditions Of License
3-2F-9: Suspension And Revocation
3-2F-10: Criminal Penalty
3-2F-11: Administrative Penalties
3-2F-1: PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 340A as they may be amended from
time to time. (Ord. 933, 1-20-2015)
3-2F-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: No person may directly or indirectly manufacture or
sell wholesale intoxicating liquor, or 3.2 percent malt liquor without
obtaining an appropriate license from the commissioner, except where otherwise
provided in this article. (Ord. 933, 1-20-2015)
   B.   Classification Of Licenses: The following types of licenses may be
issued in the city:
      1.   Brewpub: "Brewpub" is a brewer who also holds one or more retail on-
sale licenses and who manufactures fewer than three thousand five hundred
(3,500) barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one licensed premises, the
entire production of which is solely for consumption on tap on any licensed
premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from those licensed premises as
permitted in Minnesota statutes section 340A.24, subdivision 2.
         a.   On-Sale License: A brewpub may be issued an on-sale intoxicating
liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor license by the city for a restaurant operated
in the place of manufacture.
         b.   Off-Sale License: Notwithstanding Minnesota statutes 340A.405, a
brewpub that holds an on-sale license issued pursuant to this section may, with
the approval of the commissioner, be issued a license by the city for off-sale
of malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises. Off-sale of malt
liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor
stores in the jurisdiction in which the brewpub is located, and the malt liquor
sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale
closing time at exclusive liquor stores. Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale
under this subsection B1b must comply with Minnesota statutes section 340A.285.
         c.   Total Retail Sales: A brewpub's total retail sales at on- or off-
sale under this section may not exceed three thousand five hundred (3,500)
barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than five hundred
(500) barrels.
      2.   Brewer Taprooms:
         a.   Brewer Taproom License: The city may issue the holder of a
brewer's license under Minnesota statutes 340A.301, subdivision 6(c), (i), or
(j), a brewer taproom license. A brewer taproom license authorizes on-sale of
malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or
adjacent to one brewery location owned by the brewer. Nothing in this
subsection B2a precludes the holder of a brewer taproom license from also
holding a license to operate a restaurant at the brewery. Minnesota statutes
section 340A.409 shall apply to a license issued under this subsection B2a. All
provisions of this chapter that apply to a retail liquor license shall apply to
a license issued under this subsection B2a unless the provision is explicitly
inconsistent with this subsection B2a.
            (1)   A brewer may only have one taproom license under this
subsection B2a, and may not have an ownership interest in a brewpub.
         b.   Sunday On-Sale: Notwithstanding Minnesota statutes section
340A.504, subdivision 3, a taproom may be open and may conduct on-sale business
on Sundays.
      3.   Small Brewer Off-Sale:
         a.   License; Limitations: A brewer licensed under Minnesota statutes
section 340A.301, subdivision 6(c), (i), or (j), or section 340A.29, may be
issued a license for off-sale of malt liquor at its licensed premises that has
been produced and packaged by the brewer. The license must be approved by the
commissioner. A brewer may only have one license under this subsection B3a. The
amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) barrels annually. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to
the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the jurisdiction in
which the brewer is located. The malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from
the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor
stores. Malt liquor in growlers may be sold at off-sale on Sundays. Packaging
of malt liquor for off-sale under this subsection B3a must comply with
Minnesota statutes section 340A.285, as hereinafter adopted and amended.
         b.   Prohibition: The city may not issue a license under this section
to a brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or any person having an economic
interest in the license or exercising control over the brewer seeking the
license, is a brewer that brews more than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000)
barrels of its own brands of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces
more than twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons of wine annually.
      4.   Brewer Temporary On-Sale: Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating
liquor licenses may be issued, with the approval of the commissioner of public
safety, to brewers who manufacture fewer than three thousand five hundred
(3,500) barrels of malt liquor in a year and are licensed for the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored
by the brewer.
      5.   Off-Sale Packaging Requirements For Certain Small Brewers.
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, and in addition to the off-sale of
malt liquor allowed under section subsection B3a, a brewer licensed under
Minnesota statutes section 340A.301, subdivision 6(c), (i), or (j), that
produces 7,500 barrels or less of malt liquor annually may be issued a license
for off-sale at its licensed premises of up to 128 ounces per customer per day
of malt liquor that has been produced and packaged by the brewer, in compliance
with Minnesota Rules, parts 7515.1080 to 7515.1120, The license must be
approved by the commissioner. The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale under
this section must be included in calculating the annual barrel limit imposed in
Section B3a. (Ord. 937, 9-8-2015; amd. Ord. 972, 9-6-2022)
3-2F-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made on forms to be
supplied by the city clerk, setting forth the name of the applicant, the
applicant's age, and all other information required thereon. In addition to
containing such information, the application shall be in the form prescribed by
the state commissioner of public safety and shall be verified and filed with
the city clerk. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in the
application. (Ord. 933, 1-20-2015)
3-2F-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Amount: No license or other fee established by the city council shall
exceed any limit established by Minnesota statutes section 340A.301, as it may
be amended from time to time for a license under this article. The city council
shall, by resolution adopted at a regular or special meeting, set a fee for
licenses under this article for each ensuing year.
   B.   Payment: Each application for a license under this article shall be
accompanied by a receipt from the city treasurer for a payment in full of the
license fee. All fees shall be paid into the general fund. Upon rejection of
any application for a license, the city shall refund the amount paid.
   C.   Term: Each license under this article (excepting that of a temporary
license) shall be issued for a period of one year and expire on December 31. If
however, the application for license is made during the license year, a license
may be issued for the remainder of that year. The fee for any partial year
license, however, will not be prorated.
   D.   Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by the
city council. (Ord. 933, 1-20-2015)
3-2F-5: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
The city council, in its sound discretion, may either grant or deny the
application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No
applicant has a right to a license under this article. The council shall cause
an investigation to be made of all facts set forth in the application, and
opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for, or against the
granting of any license. All licensed premises shall have the license therefor
posted in a conspicuous place at all times. (Ord. 933, 1-20-2015)
3-2F-6: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license under this article shall be granted to any person made ineligible
for such a license by state law. No license shall be issued to a person who has
delinquent taxes, assessments or other financial obligations to the city. (Ord.
933, 1-20-2015)
3-2F-7: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   General Prohibition: No license shall be issued for any place or any
business ineligible for such a license under state law.
   B.   Delinquent Taxes And Charges: No license shall be granted for operation
of any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the
city are delinquent and unpaid. (Ord. 933, 1-20-2015)
3-2F-8: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   In General: Every license is subject to the conditions in the following
subsections and all other provisions of this chapter, and to any other
applicable ordinance, state law or regulation.
   B.   Licensee's Responsibility: Every licensee is responsible for the
conduct of the licensee's place of business and the conditions of sobriety and
order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to
sell intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor there is deemed the act of
the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties
provided by this chapter and the law equally with the employee.
   C.   Inspections: Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health
officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect and search the premises of the licensee during the business hours
without a warrant.
   D.   Display During Prohibited Hours: No licensee shall display intoxicating
liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to the public during the hours when the sale
of such is prohibited.
   E.   Federal Stamps: No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor
dealers' special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
   F.   Consumption After Hours: No person shall consume and no licensee shall
permit the consumption of any intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor on
premises licensed for the sale of such and all persons, except employees of the
licensee, shall be off the premises of a licensee beginning thirty (30) minutes
after the sale of such liquor is prohibited by this article.
   G.   Minimum Standards: The requirements of this chapter are minimum
standards, which must be met to have an application considered at all. Beyond
these minimum standards, the city council retains its discretion to determine
the qualifications of an applicant and the suitability of a location or
premises for which application is made. The council may place restrictions or
conditions on that portion of a license which is an outdoor area, including
some or all of the restrictions or conditions listed in subsection 
3-2A-2B of this chapter as are necessary or advisable for the protection of the
neighborhood and the general public. (Ord. 933, 1-20-2015)
3-2F-9: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
The city council may either suspend for not to exceed sixty (60) days or revoke
any license under this chapter upon a finding that the licensee has failed to
comply with any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to
intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor. No suspension or revocation
shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a
hearing pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 14.58. (Ord. 933, 1-20-2015)
3-2F-10: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, plus the cost of prosecution in any case. (Ord. 933, 1-20-
2015)
3-2F-11: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:
In addition to any criminal penalties, the following administrative penalties
shall apply to any violations of this chapter:
   A.   Violations And Fines:
      1.   First violation. The licensee shall be charged an administrative
penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and the clerk/seller, if any, shall be
charged an administrative penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Second violation within twenty four (24) months by the same
licensee. A two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty for the license holder and a
fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty for the clerk/seller, if any.
      3.   Third violation by the same licensee within a twenty four (24) month
period. The city council shall suspend the license of that licensee for a
minimum of seven (7) days and impose a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the license holder and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the clerk/
seller, if any.
      4.   Fourth violation by the same licensee within twelve (12) months of
the first violation. The city council shall revoke that licensee's license for
a period of at least six (6) months.
   B.   Penalties: All administrative penalties shall be payable to the city.
If not paid, this shall be grounds for suspension of a license. (Ord. 933, 1-
20-2015)
CHAPTER 3
LAWFUL GAMBLING
SECTION:
3-3-1: Purpose
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Provisions Of State Law Adopted
3-3-4: Notice, Approval Or Disapproval
3-3-5: Gambling Prohibited; Exemption
3-3-6: Application For Permit
3-3-7: City Investigation Fees
3-3-8: Location
3-3-9: Acts Prohibited
3-3-10: Expenditures Within City
3-3-11: Filing Of Records; Inspections; Access To Records
3-3-12: Further Regulations Authorized
3-3-13: Grandfathering Of Existing Licensed Organizations
3-3-14: Penalty
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of lawful
gambling and to ensure that profits derived therefrom in the City provide, to
the fullest extent authorized by law, direct benefits to the City's citizens.
(1998 Code)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Section, the terms defined in Minnesota Statutes section 349.12
are incorporated herein by reference.
NET PROFIT: Gross profit from gambling conducted on the licensed premises, less
reasonable sums actually expended for allowable expenses.
TRADE AREA: All area within a twenty five (25) mile radius of the Montevideo
City Hall. (1998 Code)
3-3-3: PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes sections 349.11 through 349.22 are adopted
and made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. In addition, the
regulations of this Chapter shall apply to the conduct of lawful gambling
within the City. (1998 Code)
3-3-4: NOTICE, APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL:
   A.   Notice: The Minnesota Gambling Control Board shall notify the City
Council in writing in the manner required by law of each pending application
for a premises permit. The applicant shall cooperate fully with City officials
in supplying all information provided for in this Chapter. The City Council
shall determine whether the organization meets all the criteria provided for in
this Chapter necessary to approve a premises permit.
   B.   Approval Or Disapproval: Each pending application for a premises permit
shall be approved or disapproved by resolution of the City Council within the
time allowed by State law.
   C.   Failure To Act: Failure of the City Council to take action on an
application within the time allowed by law shall be deemed an approval.
   D.   Basis For Disapproval: The Council may disapprove an application for
any of the following reasons:
      1.   Violation by the applicant or at the premises to be licensed of any
statute, rule, regulation or ordinance relating to gambling or the operation of
the establishment at the premises for which the permit is sought;
      2.   If the applicant is a tenant, violations by the landlord of any
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation regarding operation of the landlord's
establishment;
      3.   Any reason which would justify the Minnesota Gambling Control Board
in denying an application for a license;
      4.   Issuance of the permit would cause the applicant or the premises to
violate this Chapter;
      5.   Gambling at the proposed site would be detrimental to health, safety
or welfare. (1998 Code)
3-3-5: GAMBLING PROHIBITED; EXEMPTION:
No person, except an organization which has a premises permit from the
Minnesota Gambling Control Board pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 349, or
an organization permitted under Minnesota Statutes chapter 349 to conduct
gambling without a permit, shall conduct lawful gambling within the City. (1998
Code)
3-3-6: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Contents Of Application: An organization shall make application for a
premises permit on a form prescribed by the Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
The application shall contain the following:
      1.   The name and address of the applying organization and of the
organization's gambling manager and employees;
      2.   A description of the site for which the license and permit are
sought, including its address and, where applicable, its placement within
another premises or establishment;
      3.   If the site is leased, the name and address of the lessor and such
information about the lease as the City may require, including all rents and
other charges for the use of the site; and
      4.   Other information the City deems necessary to carry out the purposes
of this Chapter.
   B.   Notification Of Change: An organization holding a premises permit must
notify the City Clerk in writing within ten (10) days whenever any material
change is made in the above information. The City Clerk shall forward said
information to the City License Inspector. (1998 Code)
3-3-7: CITY INVESTIGATION FEES:
   A.   Fee Required: Organizations applying for or renewing premises permits
shall pay the City an investigation fee set by resolution of the City Council.
This fee shall accompany the application, and it shall reimburse the City for
its cost incident to conducting a background investigation of the organization,
its employees, and the location from which the organization intends to operate.
   B.   Findings And Recommendations: The City Clerk and City License Inspector
shall investigate each application and report their findings and
recommendations to the City Council through the City Manager. A background
investigation shall not be required of any location for which the City has
issued a liquor license or for any organization, employee or location for which
the City has conducted a previous background investigation under this Chapter.
(1998 Code; amd. Ord. 980, 5-1-2023)
3-3-8: LOCATION:
   A.   One Permit Per Premises: No more than one premises permit shall be
issued at any location in the City.
   B.   Limit On Locations Per Organization: No organization may conduct
gambling in more than two (2) locations within the City. (1998 Code)
3-3-9: ACTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Use By Minors Prohibited: No person under the age of eighteen (18)
years shall be permitted to participate in any lawful gambling, except bingo.
   B.   Participation By Volunteers Or Employees Prohibited: No employee of the
licensed organization or any volunteer providing services connected with
gambling devices or members of the household of such employee or volunteer,
shall be permitted to participate in any lawful gambling by which a prize may
be won provided, however, that members of the household of such employee or
volunteer may participate in bingo. (1998 Code)
3-3-10: EXPENDITURES WITHIN CITY:
An organization that has received a premises permit to conduct lawful gambling
must expend seventy five percent (75%) of its net profits from lawful gambling
on lawful purposes conducted in the City's trade area. Such expenditures shall
be made within the same calendar year that such proceeds are received by the
organization conducting the charitable gambling. Any expenditures made during
January of any year may, at the option of the charitable organization, be
deemed to have been made in a prior calendar year to the extent necessary to
meet the requirements of this Section. (1998 Code)
3-3-11: FILING OF RECORDS; INSPECTIONS; ACCESS TO RECORDS:
   A.   Filing Of Records: Every organization holding a premises permit in the
City shall file with the City Clerk copies of the Schedule C required to be
filed with the Minnesota Gambling Control Board pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
chapter 349 and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, by January 30
of each year.
   B.   Open To Inspection: Every gambling event conducted in the City by an
organization pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 349 shall be open to
inspection by officers of the City Police Department and other City officials
as may be designated from time to time by the City Manager.
   C.   Submit Copies Of Reports: Upon request, every organization holding a
premises permit shall submit a copy of any reports it is required to make to
the State pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 349. (1998 Code)
3-3-12: FURTHER REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED:
If the City Council deems it appropriate, further regulations may be adopted by
resolution of the Council. Copies of any such additional regulations shall be
furnished to all licensees. (1998 Code)
3-3-13: GRANDFATHERING OF EXISTING LICENSED ORGANIZATION:
Organizations currently licensed by the Minnesota Gambling Control Board which
are operating in the City may continue to operate and may renew their premises
permits as long as such premises permits comply with all other provisions of
this Chapter and other laws. (1998 Code)
3-3-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalty for a misdemeanor
as the same is established from time to time by the State (Section
1-4-1 of this Code), plus the costs of prosecution. In addition, any
organization that does not comply with Section
3-3-10 of this Chapter shall donate ten percent (10%) of the net profits from
gambling to the City for each year in which it fails to comply with that
Section. This amount shall be paid to the City by January 31 of each year for
the prior year. The City shall credit the funds to the senior citizens or
Recreation Fund for distribution by the City for lawful purposes as defined by
Minnesota Statutes chapter 349. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: License Required; Applications
3-4-4: License Fees
3-4-5: Granting Of License
3-4-6: Persons And Places Ineligible For License
3-4-7: Building Standards
3-4-8: Conditions Of License
3-4-9: Hours Of Operation
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations governing the licensing
of sexually oriented businesses classified as "adult uses" in the City and to
prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. (Ord. 756, 2-6-1995)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT USES: Any of the activities and businesses described below constitute
"sexually oriented businesses" which are subject to the regulations of this
Chapter:
   Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the
service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or
nontransparent to the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially
nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas".
   Bookstore: A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental
or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio
tape, videotape or motion picture film, if such building or portion of a
building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of
the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, and if a substantial or
significant portion of such items are distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
   Cabaret: A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or
other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes
minors by virtue of age and if such dancing or other live entertainment is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
   Companionship Establishment: A companionship establishment which excludes
minors by reason of age, and which provides the service of engaging in or
listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
   Conversation/Rap Parlor: A conservation/rap parlor which excludes minors by
reason of age, and which provides the services of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
   Escort: Any person who receives financial consideration for consorting with
or escorting another person in any public or private place within the City of
Montevideo.
   Escort Bureau: Any person who offers to furnish an escort for financial
consideration.
   Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of
age, and if such club is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   Hotel Or Motel: Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which
minors are specifically excluded from patronage and where material is presented
which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexually activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
   Massage Parlor, Health Club: A massage parlor or health club which restricts
minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such
service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a
capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such
building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by
virtue of age, and if said material is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area" for
observation by patrons therein.
   Modeling Studio: An establishment whose major business is the provision, to
customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in
"specified sexual activities" or display "specified anatomical areas" while
being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by such customers.
   Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". A motion picture
arcade includes one or more coin-operated machines or coin-operated amusement
devices where the operator deposits a coin for the opportunity of playing a
game of skill.
   Motion Picture Theaters: A building or portion of a building with a capacity
of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material if such building or
portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of
age, and if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation
by patrons therein.
   Novelty Business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale of
devices which simulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual
stimulation.
   Sauna: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides a
steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or
reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent,
if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used for
providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure,
bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building restricts
minors by reason of age and if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse
facility is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct:
anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
   B.   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence; or
   C.   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or
masturbation; or
   D.   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or
female breast; or
   E.   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in
undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any such persons; or
   F.   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact
with an animal by a human being; or
   G.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
(Ord. 756, 2-6-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
3-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall operate a sexually oriented business
classified as "adult use-principal" defined in this Chapter without having
first secured a license as hereinafter provided. The owner(s) of a sexually
oriented business in operation as of the effective date hereof, shall be
required to file an application for a license as required by this Chapter on or
before the effective date, provided, however, that the City shall not be
permitted to enforce this Chapter against such owners until the City renders
its decision on the application.
   B.   Applications; Content: An application for the license required by this
Section shall require the following information:
      1.   The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the applicant,
if an individual; and if a corporation, the names, residences, phone number and
birth dates of those owners holding more than five percent (5%) of the
outstanding stock of the corporation.
      2.   The name, address, phone number and birth date of the manager of
such operation, if different from the owners.
      3.   The premises wherein the adult use is to be located.
      4.   A statement detailing each gross misdemeanor or felony relating to a
sex offense and/or the operation of adult uses and related activities of which
the applicant or, in the case of a corporation, the owners of more than five
percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation, have been convicted,
and whether or not the applicant has ever applied for or held a license to
operate a similar type of business in other communities.
      5.   The activities and types of business to be conducted.
      6.   The hours of operation.
      7.   The provisions made to restrict access by minors.
      8.   A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations
and activities.
      9.   A description of merchandise, services or entertainment for sale in
the premises.
      10.   The means of restricting access by minors.
      11.   The property owner's name and address and business owner's name and
address.
   C.   Renewal Applications: Applications for renewal licenses required by
this Chapter shall be completed and filed with the City Clerk no later than
November 30 of the year preceding the year for which application is made. Any
renewal application not completed and filed by that date shall be treated as a
nonrenewal application. (Ord. 756, 2-6-1995)
3-4-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Payment Of Fee: Each application for a license shall be accompanied by
a receipt from the City for payment in full of the required fee for the
license. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund of the Municipality. Upon
rejection of any applications for a license, the City shall refund the license
fee paid, minus the amount of costs necessary for application, investigation
and review, including but not limited to costs related to administration,
planning, legal, inspection and police investigation.
   B.   Term Of License; Pro Rata Fee: All licenses shall expire on December 31
in each year. Each license shall be issued for a period of one year, except
that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is made,
a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In
computing such fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one
month.
   C.   Annual Fee: The annual fee for an adult use-principal license shall be
as set by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall not set this
fee arbitrarily, but shall determine the amount in relation to its best
estimate of actual costs of administration, planning, legal, inspection and
police investigation related to the application and the ongoing operation of
the business.
   D.   Refunds: No part of the fee paid by any licensee shall be refunded.
(Ord. 756, 2-6-1995)
3-4-5: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
   A.   Hearing; Issuance Of License: The City Manager or his or her designated
representatives shall investigate all facts set out in the application. A
public hearing shall be held before the City Council prior to any action taken
on the license application. Such public hearing shall be set within thirty (30)
days of the receipt of the application. The purpose of the public hearing shall
be to consider public input on the criteria for granting a license. Criteria
for investigating and evaluating a license shall be limited to the following:
      1.   Application shall be completed in full.
      2.   A license shall not be issued to a person who is ineligible for a
license under subsection
3-4-6A of this Chapter.
      3.   A license shall not be issued to an applicant whose place of
business is ineligible for license under subsection
3-4-6B of this Chapter.
      4.   A license shall not be issued to an applicant if the applicant or
the place of business does not comply with Section
3-4-7 of this Chapter.
      5.   A license shall not be issued to an applicant if applicant does not
comply with Sections
3-4-8 and
3-4-9 of this Chapter.
      6.   The adult use shall be in compliance with all applicable City Code
regulations.
      7.   The place of business shall meet the City's Building and Fire Code
regulations 1  in effect as of the date of application. (Ord. 773, 12-18-1995)
   B.   Decision To Grant Or Deny: The City shall investigate and notify the
applicant, in writing, of the City's decision to grant or deny the license
within thirty (30) days of the date the application is received by the City.
      1.   The City Council shall issue a license within that period of time to
any applicant who, on completion of the City's investigation, is found to have
met all of the criteria defined in subsection A of this Section.
      2.   If an application is denied, the City's notice shall specify in
writing the reason(s) for the denial.
   C.   License Nontransferable: License(s) shall be issued to the applicant
only and shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be
issued only for the premises described in the application. No license shall be
transferred to another place without the approval of the City Council.
   D.   Right Of Judicial Review: Any applicant who has received notice that
his/her/its application for a license has been denied shall have the right of
prompt judicial review without the need to first appeal to the City. (Ord. 756,
2-6-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10, Chapters 1 and 4 respectively of this Code.
3-4-6: PERSONS AND PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Ineligible Persons: No license shall be granted to or held by any
person:
      1.   Under twenty one (21) years of age;
      2.   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license
is issued;
      3.   Who has been convicted of violating any law of this State or any
other state or any local ordinance relating to sex offense and/or adult use.
(Ord. 773, 12-19-1995)
   B.   Ineligible Places:
      1.   No license shall be granted for adult uses on any premises where a
licensee or applicant has been convicted of a violation of this Chapter, or any
crime that would constitute a violation of this Chapter, or where there have
been convictions for activities on the premises such as would cause the
building to constitute a "public nuisance" under Minnesota Statutes sections
617.80 through 617.87, until one year has elapsed after the conviction(s)
related to such events.
      2.   Except for uses lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of the
Ordinance codified in this Chapter, no license shall be granted for any adult
use which is not in compliance with the City's zoning regulations.
      3.   No sexually oriented business shall locate in any place which is
also used to dispense or consume alcohol. (Ord. 756, 2-6-1995)
3-4-7: BUILDING STANDARDS:
   A.   Specific Uses Prohibited: No commercial building, structure, premises
or part thereof, or facilities therein used by a sexually oriented business
classified as an "adult use-principal" shall be so constructed, used, designed
or operated for the purpose of engaging in, or permitting persons to engage in
sexual activities as defined in this Code.
   B.   Certain Structural Modification Prohibited: No person shall own,
operate, manage, rent, lease or exercise control of any commercial building,
structure, premises or portion or part thereof, which contains:
      1.   Partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a
building, structure or premises having an aperture which is designed or
constructed to facilitate sexual activity between persons on either side of the
partition.
      2.   Booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room, or individual
rooms, used for adult uses, having doors, curtains or partial partitions,
unless such booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms
so used shall have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that
the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room. Such areas
shall be lighted in a manner that the persons in the area used for adult uses
are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be of
such intensity as to prevent the viewing of motion pictures or other offered
adult uses.
   C.   Viewing Areas And Booths:
      1.   All viewing areas or booths in movie arcades shall be accessible
from a continuous main aisle.
      2.   All viewing areas or booths shall be located together along a
continuous main aisle to eliminate the possibility of secluded booths elsewhere
on the premises.
      3.   No more than one person shall be permitted to enter or remain in a
viewing area or booth at any time.
      4.   The viewing areas or booths shall be maintained at all times in a
clean and sanitary manner.
   D.   Entrances, Windows, Door: All entrances to the business, with the
exception of emergency fire exits not usable to enter the business, shall be
visible from a public right of way. In addition, all windows and doors shall be
so blocked or covered to prohibit viewing of the interior of the premises from
outside of the premises.
   E.   Location Of Performances: All performances shall be on a raised stage.
The stage must be raised from the surrounding floor by at least two feet (2')
and no patrons may be on the stage at any time during any performance.
   F.   Patron Proximity To Performance: All patrons shall be at least ten feet
(10') from the stage.
   G.   Interaction Prohibited: No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and
no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer.
   H.   Gratuity Prohibited: No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity
to any dancer and no dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
(Ord. 756, 2-6-1995)
3-4-8: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Generally: Every license shall be granted subject to all of the
conditions of this Code, and of any other applicable County, State or Federal
law.
   B.   License Posted: All licensed premises shall have the license posted in
a conspicuous place at all times.
   C.   Minors Prohibited: No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises
and the licensee shall not employ any minors. Provisions to restrict access by
minors shall prohibit any entry or view into the portion of the premises in
which the sexually oriented business is carried on.
   D.   Right To Enter: Any designated inspection officer of the City shall
have the unqualified right to enter and inspect all public areas of the
premises of a licensee during regular business hours and during nonbusiness
hours to determine compliance with this Chapter.
   E.   Responsibility For Conduct: Every licensee shall be responsible for the
conduct of the place of business and shall maintain conditions of order.
   F.   Intoxicated Persons: No person to whom a license has been issued shall
permit to be or remain in any adult entertainment establishment any obviously
intoxicated person. (Ord. 756, 2-6-1995)
3-4-9: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Sexually oriented businesses adult use-principal operations shall be restricted
from operating between the hours of one minute after one o'clock (1:01) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. The licensee shall not permit any patron to be in
the place of business between the hours of one thirty o'clock (1:30) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 756, 2-6-1995)
CHAPTER 5
TOBACCO RELATED PRODUCTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License Required
3-5-3: Application And Issuance
3-5-4: License Fee
3-5-5: Licenses Shall Be Displayed
3-5-6: Restrictions
3-5-7: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-5-8: Employee Notification
3-5-9: Compliance Checks
3-5-10: Appeal
3-5-11: Revocation Of License
3-5-12: Administrative Penalties
3-5-13: Criminal Penalty
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open display of tobacco related products which are
accessible to the public without the intervention of an employee. Included are
single packs, multiple packs, half cartons, full cartons, individual or
multiple bags of tobacco for rolling, and individual or multiple containers of
tobacco for chewing, smoking, sniffing and other tobacco related activities.
TOBACCO RELATED PRODUCT: Cigarettes, including e-cigarettes, cigars, cheroots,
stogies, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready, rubbed or other
smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flower, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine
cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scrips, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing,
sniffing or smoking in a pipe, rolling paper or other tobacco related devices.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device, appliance or
any other medium or object designated or used for vending purposes which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco
products. (Ord. 762, 4-3-1995; amd. Ord. 957, 7-6-2020)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall directly or indirectly or by means of any device keep for
retail sale, sell at retail or otherwise dispense any tobacco related product
at any place in the City unless a license therefor shall first have been
obtained as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 762, 4-3-1995)
3-5-3: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
Application for such license shall be made to the Clerk on a form supplied by
the City. Such application shall state the full name and address of the
applicant, the location of the building and the part intended to be used by the
applicant under such license, the kind of business conducted at such location
and such other information as shall be required by the application form. Upon
the filing of such application with the Clerk, and payment of the required fee,
it shall be presented to the Council for its consideration, and if granted by
the Council, the license shall be issued by the Clerk. (Ord. 762, 4-3-1995)
3-5-4: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for every such license shall be a sum fixed by resolution of the
Council. Every such license shall expire on December 31, next, after its
issuance. Licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another. (Ord.
762, 4-3-1995)
3-5-5: LICENSES SHALL BE DISPLAYED:
Every such license shall be kept conspicuously posted about the place for which
the license is issued and shall be exhibited to any person upon request. (Ord.
762, 4-3-1995)
3-5-6: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to each licensee, and the premises
licensed hereunder:
   A.   Age Limit: No person or licensee shall sell or give away any Tobacco
Related Product, tobacco paper or tobacco wrapper to any person below the legal
age for sale of Tobacco Related Products established by Minnesota Statutes.
   B.   Specific Location For Sales: No license shall be issued to an applicant
for the sale of Tobacco Related Products at any place other than at the
applicant's established place of business.
   C.   Permanent Location: No license shall be issued for the sale of Tobacco
Related Products at any moveable place of business.
   D.   Self-Help Prohibited: All sales of tobacco related products must be
made in such a manner that requires the purchaser to specifically ask a clerk
for the tobacco related product in compliance with subsection G of this
Section. All other sales of tobacco related products, including self-service
merchandising vending machines and other mechanical devices, are unlawful.
   E.   Use Of Vending Machine Illegal: No person shall install, set up or keep
any vending machine or other mechanical device for the sale of tobacco related
products with the intent to sell said items by such method.
   F.   Customers To Provide Proof Of Age: Every person selling any tobacco
related products to any person who appears to be under the legal age must
require proof of age by one of the following: a valid driver's license or
identification card issued by Minnesota, another state, or a province of Canada
and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; a valid
military identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense
or; in the case of a foreign national, from a nation other than Canada, a valid
passport.
   G.   Compliance Date For Self-Help Products: All self-service tobacco
products shall be located behind a service counter or locked doors by July 1,
1995, provided that for cartons of tobacco products, all self-service shall be
so located by October 1, 1995. (Ord. 762, 4-3-1995; amd. Ord. 957, 7-6-2020)
3-5-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission constituting a violation of the provisions of this
Chapter by an officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any
licensee shall be deemed and held punishable in the same manner as if the
licensee personally committed the act or omission. (Ord. 762, 4-3-1995)
3-5-8: EMPLOYEE NOTIFICATION:
Annually, and for each new hire, every licensee shall provide all clerks who
sell tobacco related products for that licensee a summary of State laws and
penalties related to sales of tobacco. The licensee shall maintain record of
compliance with this provision containing signatures of all such clerks. (Ord.
762, 4-3-1995)
3-5-9: COMPLIANCE CHECKS:
The license holder will be subject to compliance checks. At least two (2) times
every year law enforcement personnel or persons designated by law enforcement
shall conduct random, unannounced inspections of licensees to test compliance
with age-of-sale laws. These inspections shall include, but not be limited to,
surveillance including persons under the legal age in Minnesota to purchase
Tobacco Related Products who attempt to purchase tobacco products. A finding of
noncompliance during such unannounced inspection shall constitute a violation
of this Section. Additional compliance checks during the license year shall be
required following a violation by any licensed retail tobacco outlet. (Ord.
762, 4-3-1995; amd. Ord. 957, 7-6-2020)
3-5-10: APPEAL:
   A.   Notice: If the City Council suspends or revokes a license, or the City
imposes an administrative penalty, the City Clerk shall send to the licensee,
or clerk/seller, as the case may be, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, written notice of the action and the rights of the appeal. The
notice shall be sent to the licensee, or clerk/seller, at least ten (10) days
in advance of the effective date of any such suspension or revocation and shall
specify the ordinance or statutory violation alleged. The aggrieved party may
appeal the decision within ten (10) days of receiving notice of the City's
action. The filing of an appeal stays the action until the appeal is heard. If
no appeal is filed within ten (10) days, the action of the City Council shall
be final.
   B.   Procedure: The City Council may appoint a committee of the Council or
an independent hearing officer to hear the appeal, report the findings of fact
and make a recommendation for the disposition to the Council. Hearings on the
appeal shall be open to the public and the licensee or clerk/seller may be
represented by legal counsel and offer evidence on its behalf. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a final decision. (Ord.
762, 4-3-1995)
3-5-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Every such license may be revoked by the Council for violation of any provision
of this Chapter or for the violation of any of the laws of the State governing
the sale of Tobacco Related Products, if the licensee has been given a
reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard as set out in this Chapter.
(Ord. 762, 4-3-1995; amd. Ord. 957, 7-6-2020)
3-5-12: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:
In addition to any criminal penalties, the following administrative penalties
shall apply to any violations of this Chapter:
   A.   Violations And Fines:
      1.   First violation: the licensee shall be charged an administrative
penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and the clerk/seller shall be charged
an administrative penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Second violation within twenty four (24) months by the same
licensee: a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty for the license holder and a
fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty for the clerk/seller.
      3.   Third violation by the same licensee within a twenty four (24) month
period: the City Council shall suspend the license of that licensee for a
minimum of seven (7) days and impose a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the license holder and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the clerk/
seller.
      4.   Fourth violation by the same licensee within twelve (12) months of
the first violation: the City Council shall revoke that licensee's license for
a period of at least six (6) months.
   B.   Violation By Underage Person: A twenty five dollar ($25.00) penalty to
anyone who possesses, smokes, chews, or otherwise ingests, purchases or
attempts to purchase any tobacco related product and is under the legal age to
purchase Tobacco Related Products in the State of Minnesota. This Section does
not apply to a person under such legal age who purchases or attempts to
purchase tobacco or tobacco related devices while under the direct supervision
of a responsible adult for training, education, research or enforcement
purposes.
   C.   Lending Identification: A one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty to
anyone who lends any identification required by subsection
3-5-6F of this Chapter to another person, who uses such identification for
purposes of purchasing or attempting to purchase any tobacco related product.
   D.   Timely Compliance: The City Council shall suspend the license of any
licensee who fails to timely comply with subsection
3-5-6G of this Chapter until the tobacco has been placed behind a counter or
locked doors.
   E.   Correspondence: Any correspondence concerning compliance with this
Chapter will be sent to the vendor's place of business by registered mail.
   F.   Penalties: All administrative penalties shall be payable to the City.
If not paid, this shall be grounds for suspension of a license. (Ord. 762, 4-3-
1995; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 793, 5-17-1999; Ord. 957, 7-6-2020)
3-5-13: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 762, 4-3-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Licensing Requirements
3-6-3: Practices Prohibited
3-6-4: Exemptions To Requirements
3-6-5: Permit Requirements
3-6-6: Persons Ineligible For License Or Permit
3-6-7: Revocation Of License Or Permit
3-6-8: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the
meanings ascribed to them:
PEDDLER: Any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from
street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares, or merchandise and
offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and deliveries to
purchasers.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or
from street to street soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for any
goods, wares, or merchandise, including books, periodicals, magazines, or
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery. "Solicitor"
does not include any person taking or attempting to take orders to be filled by
goods, wares, or merchandise delivered to the purchaser from other states.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, firm or corporation who engages temporarily in
the business of selling and delivering goods, wares, or merchandise within the
city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies
any building, structure, vacant lot, motor vehicle, trailer, or railroad car.
(1998 Code)
3-6-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall
sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise within the city unless
a license therefor shall first be secured as provided in this chapter. (1998
Code)
   B.   Application And Issuance:
      1.   Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk on a
form supplied by the city. The application shall state:
         a.   The name, address, date of birth and driver's license number and
state of issuance of the applicant and of all persons associated with the
applicant in the business;
         b.   The type of business for which the license is desired;
         c.   In case of transient merchants, the place where the business is
to be carried on;
         d.   The length of time for which the license is desired;
         e.   A general description of the thing or things to be sold;
         f.   The places of residence of the applicant for the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of application;
         g.   Whether the applicant complies with subsections
3-6-6A through D of this chapter;
         h.   For transient merchants, a copy of the merchant's county
transient merchant license;
         i.   Such other information as the city may reasonably request.
All applications shall be submitted to the city clerk at least seven (7)
business days prior to the requested effective date of the license. (Ord. 854,
10-17-2005)
      2.   Every application shall bear the written report and recommendation
of the chief of police after an investigation of the background of the
applicant. The investigation of the chief of police shall include a criminal
background check. If issuance of the license would not violate any city
ordinance or state law, and the chief of police recommends issuance of the
license, the license shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of the
required fee. (Ord. 809, 1-16-2001)
   C.   License Fees: Fees for licenses shall be set by resolution of the city
council.
   D.   Duration Of License: Each license shall be valid only for the period
specified therein and no license may extend beyond December 31 of the year in
which it is granted.
   E.   License Not Transferable: All licenses shall be nontransferable. No
refunds shall be made on unused portions of licenses. Each peddler, solicitor,
or transient merchant shall secure a separate license.
   F.   License To Be Available For Inspection: All licenses shall be carried
by the licensee or conspicuously posted in the licensee's place of business and
the license shall be exhibited to any officer or citizen upon request. (1998
Code)
3-6-3: PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
Peddlers, solicitors, or transient merchants shall not call attention to their
business or to their merchandise, by crying out, by blowing a horn, by ringing
a bell, or by any loud or unusual noise. (1998 Code)
3-6-4: EXEMPTIONS TO REQUIREMENTS:
The license requirements of this chapter do not apply to the following:
   A.   Any sale under court order;
   B.   Any bona fide auction sale;
   C.   A sale at wholesale to a retail dealer;
   D.   Any sale of the products of a farm or garden;
   E.   Any person soliciting money, donations, or financial assistance of any
kind for any religious, charitable, nonprofit, educational, or political
organization or selling merchandise for a fee on behalf of such an
organization;
   F.   Any person calling upon householders in connection with a regular route
service for the sale and delivery of products;
   G.   Any person calling upon householders at the request of said
householders;
   H.   Garage sales.
   I.   Food trucks licensed under Title 3, Chapter 12 of the Montevideo City
Code. (1998 Code; amd. Ord. 977, 3-20-2023)
3-6-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No person or organization taking or attempting to take orders to be filled by
goods, wares, or merchandise delivered to the purchaser from other states shall
sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise within the city unless
a permit therefor is obtained from the city clerk. The permit shall be obtained
by providing the information required by subsection
3-6-2B of this chapter. No fee shall be charged for a permit. All permits shall
be carried by the permittee or conspicuously posted in the permittee's place of
business, and the permit shall be exhibited to any officer or citizen upon
request. (1998 Code)
3-6-6: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
No permit or license shall be issued if the applicant:
   A.   Is not legally allowed to work under state or federal law;
   B.   Has been convicted of a crime that directly relates to the occupation
sought to be registered and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the occupation;
   C.   Has been the subject of an investigation by a consumer protection
agency or state attorney general office and such investigation has indicated a
pattern of disregard of consumer rights in the conduct of the business;
   D.   Has had a registration, license or permit for any activity subject to
this chapter revoked by the city or any other governmental body within three
(3) years before the application date;
   E.   Has falsified any information or omitted material information required
by the application. (1998 Code)
3-6-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Any license or permit may be revoked by the council for a violation of any
provision of this chapter if the licensee has been given a reasonable notice
and an opportunity to be heard. (1998 Code)
3-6-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the laws of
the state of Minnesota for misdemeanors 1 . (1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-4-1 of this code.
CHAPTER 7
CONTRACTORS
ARTICLE A. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
3-7A-1: Permit Required
3-7A-2: Application
3-7A-3: Permit Fee
3-7A-4: Inspection
3-7A-5: Penalty
3-7A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the constructing of any cement sidewalks, curbs or
gutters along or upon any street, avenue or alley within the city which shall
be open to public traffic unless such person obtains a permit to do so as
herein provided. (Ord. 864, 8-21-2006)
3-7A-2: APPLICATION:
   A.   Procedure: Every person desiring to engage in the business of
constructing cement sidewalks, curbs or gutters along or upon any street,
avenue or alley within the city, open to public traffic shall first procure a
permit therefor from the building inspector. Application for such permit shall
be made to the building inspector who may grant or reject the same.
   B.   Issuance Of Permit: Upon approval of the application, the building
inspector shall issue the permit to the applicant for the particular project
applied for. A separate permit shall be required for each project. All permits
shall expire upon the completion of the project for which the permit was
issued. (Ord. 864, 8-21-2006)
3-7A-3: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for said permit shall be a sum fixed by resolution of the council,
which shall be paid by the applicant before issuance of the permit. (Ord. 864,
8-21-2006)
3-7A-4: INSPECTION:
The permit holder shall notify the building inspector upon completion of the
project. The building inspector will inspect the project to verify compliance
with the provisions of this code and with the conditions of any permit issued.
The permit holder shall immediately correct any deficiencies. (Ord. 864, 8-21-
2006)
3-7A-5: PENALTY:
Any violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 864, 8-21-2006)
CHAPTER 8
HOUSE MOVERS
SECTION:
3-8-1: State License And City Permit Required
3-8-2: Application For Permit
3-8-3: Conditions Of Permit
3-8-4: Permit Fee
3-8-5: Hours And Speed Of Moving
3-8-6: Parking
3-8-7: Wires; Notice To Owner
3-8-8: Trees; Shrubbery; Notice To Public Works Director
3-8-9: Building Movers Responsible
3-8-10: Penalties For Violations
3-8-1: STATE LICENSE AND CITY PERMIT REQUIRED:
No "building mover", as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 221.81, shall
operate on any street or road within the City unless such building mover is
licensed as a building mover by the State and has obtained a building mover
permit from the City pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 548, 11-19-1979)
3-8-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a building mover permit shall be made to the City Clerk upon
forms provided by the Clerk which shall require a description of the structure
to be moved and the route over which it will be moved; no permit shall be
issued until the route has been approved by the City Engineer or the City
Manager. (Ord. 548, 11-19-1979)
3-8-3: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
The permit, when issued, shall prescribe the conditions of the permit, set the
route over which the structure is to be moved and the time for the same. (Ord.
548, 11-19-1979)
3-8-4: PERMIT FEE:
A permit fee shall accompany each application for a building mover permit, and
such fee shall be as set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 548, 11-19-
1979; amd. 1998 Code)
3-8-5: HOURS AND SPEED OF MOVING:
No building mover shall cause any structure to be moved upon the streets or
roads within the City after one hour before sunset, or before one hour after
sunrise, and no structure shall be moved upon such streets or roads at a speed
greater than ten (10) miles per hour. (Ord. 548, 11-19-1979)
3-8-6: PARKING:
No structure shall be permitted to be parked or remain in any one place on any
street or road within the City for more than forty eight (48) hours and when so
parked or permitted to remain on any such street or road, it shall be so
positioned as to permit traffic to pass, and at all times lights or other
warnings shall be placed so as to provide ample warning to those using the
street or road. (Ord. 548, 11-19-1979)
3-8-7: WIRES; NOTICE TO OWNER:
Whenever it shall become necessary to cut or remove any wires for the
convenience of the building mover in the pursuance of such business, all
expenses connected therewith shall be paid by such building mover. Before any
such wires are cut or removed, all owners of overhead wires and other
structures that may be affected by the moving of any building shall be notified
by the building mover. Such notice shall be given in ample time for the owners
to make necessary arrangements, removals and repairs. (Ord. 548, 11-19-1979)
3-8-8: TREES; SHRUBBERY; NOTICE TO PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
Whenever the moving of any building over any public thoroughfare within the
City shall interfere with trees or shrubs growing upon any boulevard adjacent
to such public thoroughfare, notice of such intended moving shall be given by
the building mover to the Public Works Director in ample time to permit such
Director to do the necessary trimming of trees and shrubs upon such boulevards,
and to take such other precautions as may be advisable to prevent damage
thereto. (Ord. 548, 11-19-1979; amd. 1998 Code)
3-8-9: BUILDING MOVERS RESPONSIBLE:
The building movers shall be responsible for all damages, claims, repairs, and
other costs occasioned by the pursuit of this work, including those caused by
negligence or otherwise, and shall save the City from all claims, damages and
costs of whatsoever nature and description. (Ord. 548, 11-19-1979)
3-8-10: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a petty misdemeanor punishable
as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 548, 11-19-1979; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 9
TREE TRIMMERS AND REMOVERS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definition
3-9-2: License Required
3-9-3: Application For License
3-9-4: Bond And Insurance
3-9-5: Renewal Or Revocation
3-9-6: License Fees
3-9-7: Conditions Of License
3-9-8: Penalty
3-9-1: DEFINITION:
"Tree trimming", for purposes of this Chapter, shall mean to cut, lop, clip or
prune trees, shrubs, bushes or growth of any kind, unless done solely while
standing on the ground. (1998 Code)
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall remove or trim trees in the City for compensation without first
obtaining a tree removal and tree trimming license from the City. (Ord. 571, 7-
20-1981)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Licenses shall be granted by the City Clerk. Application for a license shall be
made upon forms provided by the City and filed with the City Clerk. Based upon
the information contained in the application and upon such investigations as
the Clerk or City Manager may deem appropriate, the City Clerk shall grant or
deny the license. (Ord. 571, 7-20-1981; amd. 1998 Code)
3-9-4: BOND AND INSURANCE:
If the application for a license is approved by the City Clerk and a surety
bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned that the
licensee shall abide by all rules and regulations of the City pertaining to all
work to be done under the license and that the licensee will comply strictly
with all conditions of the license together with proof of public liability
insurance for the sum of not less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for injury to one person and not less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for injury to property are filed with the City, the City Clerk
shall issue the license for one year. (Ord. 796, 9-7-1999)
3-9-5: RENEWAL OR REVOCATION:
A license may be renewed annually and may be revoked at any time by the City
Council for failure of the licensee to comply with this Chapter or any
condition of the license following notice to the licensee of such violation and
an opportunity to be heard thereon. (Ord. 571, 7-20-1981; amd. 1998 Code)
3-9-6: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for a tree removal and tree trimming license shall be in an amount
fixed by resolution of the City Council, which fee shall be paid before a
license is issued. (Ord. 571, 7-20-1981)
3-9-7: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
The following shall be included as conditions in every tree removal and tree
trimming license issued by the City:
   A.   Diseased Trees: Any diseased trees, or diseased parts of trees, whether
from Dutch elm disease, oak wilt or other disease, shall be disposed of in such
manner and in such place as may be prescribed by the City.
   B.   Stumps Debarked: Any stumps from diseased trees which are not removed,
shall be debarked.
   C.   Barricades; Danger Signals; Flagperson: Where work by a licensee is
carried on in or adjacent to any street, alley or other public place, the
licensee shall, at his or her own expense, furnish and erect such barricades,
fences, lights and danger signals as may be appropriate and shall provide
flagpersons where necessary and shall take such other precautions for the
protection of persons or property as may be appropriate.
   D.   Entry To Private Property; Permission Required: No licensee shall enter
upon any private property for the purpose of doing work thereon without first
obtaining written permission from the proper person in advance of such entry.
   E.   Damage Or Injury To Property Responsibility Of Licensee: The licensee
shall be responsible for all damage or injury to property of any character
resulting from any act or omission by the licensee, whether the same be the
result of negligence or not, and he or she shall restore or have restored at
his or her own expense, any damaged or injured property to a condition similar
or equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done.
   F.   Public Utility To Be Notified: The licensee shall notify the proper
representative of the City or any public utility not less than forty eight (48)
hours before doing any work which may damage streets, utility lines, or
property of any kind belonging to the City or such utility.
   G.   Compliance: Every licensee shall comply with all laws, ordinances and
regulations of the City pertaining to the removal or trimming of trees and with
all conditions set forth in the license. (Ord. 571, 7-20-1981)
3-9-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 571, 7-20-1981; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 10
PAWNSHOPS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Purpose
3-10-2: Definitions
3-10-3: License
3-10-4: Records Required
3-10-5: Daily Reports To Police Department
3-10-6: Receipt To Be Issued
3-10-7: Redemption Period
3-10-8: Required Holding Period
3-10-9: Police Order To Hold Property
3-10-10: Miscellaneous Requirements
3-10-11: Prohibited Acts
3-10-12: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses Issued
3-10-13: One Business Location
3-10-14: Penalties
3-10-1: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that use of services provided by pawnbrokers provides an
opportunity for the commission of crimes and their concealment because pawn
businesses have the ability to receive and transfer property stolen by others
easily and quickly. The city council also finds that consumer protection
regulation is warranted in transactions involving pawnbrokers. The purpose of
this chapter is to prevent pawn businesses from being used as facilities for
the commission of crimes and to assure that such businesses comply with basic
consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city.
To help the police department better regulate current and future pawn
businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the
pawn industry and increase identification of criminal activities in the pawn
industry through the timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction
information, this chapter also implements and establishes the required use of
the automated pawn system (APS). (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words shall mean:
BILLABLE TRANSACTION: Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker is
a billable transaction, except renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing
pawns on items previously reported and continuously in the licensee's
possession, voided transactions and confiscations.
PAWNBROKER: Any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as principal
or agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property, or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again
at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker's business includes buying personal
property previously used, rented or leased, or selling it on consignment, the
provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION: Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which
merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in
which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, or for which a unique
transaction number or identifier is generated by their point of sale software,
or an item is confiscated by law enforcement, is reportable except:
   A.   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a
merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of
business, and the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must
maintain a record of such purchase or consignment which describes each item,
and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction
record.
   B.   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn
or purchase and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have
expired. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-3: LICENSE:
   A.   License Required: No person shall engage in or carry on the business of
pawnbroker without first obtaining a license to carry on such business in
compliance with the provisions of this section.
   B.   Completion Of Application: An application form provided by the city
clerk's office must be completed by every applicant for a new license or for
renewal of an existing license. Every new applicant must provide all the
following information:
      1.   If the applicant is a natural person:
         a.   The name, place and date of birth, street residence address and
telephone number of the applicant.
         b.   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or
resident alien.
         c.   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant's name and, if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places used.
         d.   The name of the business, if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name or style other than the name of the applicant and a certified
copy of the certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes Annotated section
333.01.
         e.   The street address at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding five (5) years.
         f.   The type, name and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five (5) years and
the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if
any, for the preceding five (5) years.
         g.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime
or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the
applicant must furnish information as to the time, place and offense of all
such convictions.
         h.   The physical description of the applicant.
         i.   Applicant's current personal financial statement and true copies
of the applicant's federal and state tax returns for the two (2) years prior to
application.
         j.   If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information
concerning each of them required in subsections B1a through B1h of this
section.
      2.   If the applicant is a partnership:
         a.   The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners
and all information concerning each general and limited partner.
         b.   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each
partner in the licensed business.
         c.   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with
the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 333.01, a certified
copy of such certificate must be attached to the application.
         d.   A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for the
partnership for the two (2) years prior to application.
         e.   If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information
concerning each of them required in subsections B1a through B1h of this
section.
      3.   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
         a.   The name of the corporation or business form and, if
incorporated, the state of incorporation.
         b.   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement and bylaws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required by Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 303.06, must be
attached.
         c.   The name of the manager(s) or the person(s) in charge of the
business and all information concerning each manager, proprietor or agent
required in subsections B1a through B1h of this section.
         d.   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of
five percent (5%) in such organization or business form or who are officers of
the corporation or business form and all information concerning said persons
required in subsection B1a of this section. This subsection B3, however, shall
not apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange
and is applying for a license to be owned and operated by it.
      4.   For all applicants:
         a.   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal
dealer or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit.
         b.   Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked
or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer or secondhand dealer license
from any other governmental unit.
         c.   The location of the business premises.
         d.   If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and
complete copy of the executed lease.
         e.   The legal description of the premises to be licensed.
         f.   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due
and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid.
         g.   Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under
construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application must be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed
premises to be licensed.
         h.   Such other information as the city council or issuing authority
may require.
   C.   Changes In Business: When a licensee places a manager in charge of a
business, or if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes,
the licensee must complete and submit the appropriate application within
fourteen (14) days. The application must include all appropriate information
required in this section.
      1.   Upon completion of an investigation of a new manager, the licensee
must pay an amount equal to the cost of the investigation to assure compliance
with this chapter. The investigation fee shall be set by resolution of the
city.
   D.   Signature And Oath: All applications for a license under this chapter
must be signed and sworn to under oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the
application is that of a natural person, it must be signed and sworn to by such
person; if that of a corporation or other similar entity, by an officer
thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that
of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
   E.   Investigation Of Statements In Application: The police department must
investigate into the truthfulness of the statements set forth in the
application and shall endorse the findings thereon and perform a background
check of the applicant. The applicant must furnish to the police department
such evidence as the inspector may reasonably require in support of the
statements set forth in the application and to enable the police department to
perform a background check.
   F.   License Not Issued To Certain Applicants: No licenses under this
chapter will be issued to an applicant who is a natural person, a partnership
if such applicant has any general partner or managing partner, a corporation or
other organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor or agent in
charge of the business to be licensed, if the applicant:
      1.   Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;
      2.   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation
licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 364.03,
subdivision 2 and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under this chapter as
prescribed by Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 364.03, subdivision 3; or
      3.   Is not of good moral character or repute.
   G.   Bond: Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a
five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) bond on the forms provided by the city. All
bonds must be conditioned that the principal will observe all laws in relation
to pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that the
principal will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled any goods
which have come into the principal's business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu
thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the person. The bond shall
contain a provision that no bond may be canceled except upon thirty (30) days'
written notice to the city, which shall be served upon the city.
   H.   Fees:
      1.   The annual license fee for licenses issued under this chapter shall
be set by resolution of the city council.
      2.   The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of
processing transactions and other related regulatory expenses as determined by
the city and shall be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary, annually. Licensees
shall be notified in writing thirty (30) days before any adjustment is
implemented.
      3.   Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and
payable within thirty (30) days. Failure to do so is a violation of this
chapter.
   I.   Termination: The license year shall terminate on the December 31
following the date of issuance of such license. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-4: RECORDS REQUIRED:
   A.   At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals,
extensions, redemptions or confiscations, every licensee must immediately
record in English the following information by using ink or other indelible
medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the police department:
      1.   Description: A complete and accurate description of each item
including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial
number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.
      2.   Transaction Information: The purchase price, amount of money loaned
upon or pledged therefor.
      3.   Maturity Date And Amount Due: The maturity date of the transaction
and the amount due, including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn
fees and charges.
      4.   Distinguishing Information: Date, time and place the item of
property was received by the licensee and the unique alpha and/or numeric
transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the
licensee's records.
      5.   Required Information: Full name, current residence address, current
residence telephone number, current cellular telephone number, date of birth
and accurate description of the person from whom the item of property was
received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of
hair.
      6.   Forms Of Identification: The identification number and state of
issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller:
         a.   Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
         b.   Current valid Minnesota identification card.
         c.   Current valid photo identification card issued by another state
or province of Canada.
      7.   Signature: The signature of the person identified in the
transaction.
      8.   Color Photograph Or Video Recording: Effective sixty (60) days from
the date of notification by the police department of acceptable video
standards, the licensee must also take a color photograph or color video
recording of:
         a.   Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
         b.   Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches (2") in length by two
inches (2") in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the
photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the
chief of police or the chief's designee, upon request. The major portion of the
photograph must include an identifiable facial image of the person who pawned
or sold the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee
must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a
sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. If a video
photograph is taken, the video camera must focus on the person pawning or
selling the item so as to include an identifiable image of that person's face.
Items photographed by video must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must
be electronically referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched
and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate.
The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being videotaped by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises.
The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for ninety (90) days.
      9.   Digitized Photographs: Effective sixty (60) days from the date of
notification by the police department, licensees must fulfill the color
photograph requirements in subsection A8 of this section by submitting them as
digital images, in a format specified by the issuing authority, electronically
cross referenced to the reportable transaction they are associated with.
Notwithstanding the digital images may be captured from required video
recordings, this provision does not alter or amend the requirements in
subsection A8 of this section.
      10.   Renewals, Extensions, Redemptions And Confiscations: For renewals,
extensions, redemptions and confiscations, the licensee shall provide the
original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction and the
type of transaction.
      11.   Inspection Of Records: The records must at all reasonable times be
open to inspection by the police department. Data entries shall be retained for
at least three (3) years from the date of transaction. Entries of required
digital images shall be retained a minimum of ninety (90) days. (Ord. 939, 5-2-
2016)
3-10-5: DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   The licensee shall submit daily reports to Montevideo police department
containing the following information:
      1.   Reportable Transaction Information: Effective no later than sixty
(60) days after the police department provides licensees with the current
version of the automated pawn system interchange file specification, licensees
must submit every reportable transaction to the police department daily in the
following manner:
         a.   Licensees must provide to the police department all reportable
transaction information by transferring it from their computer to the automated
pawn system via modem using the current version of the automated pawn system
interchange file specification. All required records must be transmitted
completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance
with standards and procedures established by the issuing authority. Any
transaction that does not meet the automated pawn system interchange file
specification must be corrected and resubmitted the next business day. The
licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place on the
premises, which informs patrons that all transactions are reported to the
police department daily.
      2.   Billable Transaction Fees: Licensees will be charged for each
billable transaction reported to the police department.
         a.   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required
reports by modem, the licensee must provide the police department, upon
request, printed copies of all reportable transactions along with the videotape
(s) for that date, by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the next business day.
         b.   If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and
is not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure,
the licensee must continue to provide the required reports as detailed in
subsection A2a of this section and shall be charged a reporting failure
penalty, daily (as determined by the city to be reviewed and adjusted, if
necessary, annually) until the error is corrected; or
         c.   If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system,
the licensee must continue to provide the required reports in subsection A1a of
this section and resubmit all such transactions via modem when the error is
corrected.
         d.   If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the
photographs required in subsection
3-10-4A9 of this chapter, the licensee must immediately take all required
photographs with a still camera, cross reference the photographs to the correct
transaction and make the pictures available to the police department upon
request.
         e.   Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that
prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon
correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable
transaction from every business day the problem had existed.
         f.   Subsections A2a through A2c of this section notwithstanding, the
police department may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay
the implementation of the daily reporting penalty. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-6: RECEIPT TO BE ISSUED:
   A.   Each licensee shall issue a receipt as follows:
      1.   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in
every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for
three (3) years. The receipt must include at least the following information:
         a.   The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business.
         b.   The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
         c.   Whether the item was pawned or sold or the nature of the
transaction.
         d.   An accurate description of each item received including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name or other identifying mark on such an item.
         e.   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee
who conducted the transaction.
         f.   The amount advanced or paid.
         g.   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees
and charges.
         h.   The last regular day of business by which the item must be
redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold and the amount
necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date.
         i.   The full name, current residence address, current residence
telephone number, current cellular telephone number and date of birth of the
pledger or seller.
         j.   The identification number and state of issue from any of the
following forms of identification of the seller:
            (1)   Current valid Minnesota driver's license; or
            (2)   Current valid Minnesota identification card; or
            (3)   Current valid photo driver's license or identification card
issued by another state or province of Canada.
         k.   Description of the pledger or seller, including approximate
height and weight, sex, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
         l.   The signature of the pledger or seller.
         m.   All printed statements as required by Minnesota Statutes
Annotated section 325J.04, subdivision 2 or any other applicable statutes.
(Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-7: REDEMPTION PERIOD:
Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a
minimum of ninety (90) days from the date of that transaction to redeem the
item before it may be forfeited and sold. During the ninety (90) day holding
period, items may not be removed from the licensed location. Licensees are
prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the
receipt was issued, or to any person identified in a written and notarized
authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a person
identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial transaction and
signed by the pledger, or with approval by the chief of police or chief's
designee. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than
the original pledger must be maintained along with the original transaction
record in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-8: REQUIRED HOLDING PERIOD:
Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold or
otherwise transferred for twenty one (21) days from the date of the
transaction. An individual may redeem an item seventy two (72) hours after the
item was received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 939,
5-2-2016)
3-10-9: POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY:
   A.   Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies a licensee
not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises.
The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency
within seventy two (72) hours and will remain in effect for fifteen (15) days
from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is
canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to
subsection B of this section, whichever comes first.
   B.   Whenever the chief of police, or the chief's designee, notifies a
licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the
licensee's premises until authorized to be released by the chief of police or
the chief's designee. The order to hold shall expire ninety (90) days from the
date it is placed, unless the chief of police, or the chief's designee,
determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
   C.   If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the
chief of police or the chief's designee may:
      1.   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop pursuant to a
written order from the chief of police or the chief's designee; or
      2.   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in subsection
B of this section and leave it in the shop.
When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification
upon request of the licensee and shall provide the licensee with the name and
telephone number of the confiscating agency and investigator and the case
number related to the confiscation.
When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the chief of police or
chief's designee shall so notify the licensee. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-10: MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS:
Licensees must label items and allow inspection as follows:
   A.   At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow
law enforcement officials to enter the premises where the licensed business is
located, including all off site storage facilities as authorized in section
3-10-13 of this chapter, during normal business hours, except in an emergency,
for the purposes of inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, ware and
merchandise and records therein to verify compliance with this chapter or other
applicable laws.
   B.   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently
recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the
transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the name of the item
and the description or model and serial number of the item as reported to the
police department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of
pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be reused. (Ord. 939, 5-2-
2016)
3-10-11: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   The following acts are prohibited:
      1.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may pawn or sell or
attempt to pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive
any goods from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
      2.   No licensee may receive any goods from a person under the influence
of drugs or alcohol.
      3.   No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a current valid Minnesota driver's license, a
valid state of Minnesota identification card, or current valid driver's license
or identification card issued by the state or province of residency of the
person from whom the item was received.
      4.   No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an
altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification number or any
item of property that has had its serial number removed.
      5.   No person shall pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit the
property of another, whether with permission or without; nor shall any person
pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any article of property in which
another has a security interest; with any licensee.
      6.   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit
any article of property with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious
name; a false date of birth; a false or out of date address of residence or
telephone number; nor present a false or altered identification or the
identification of another; to any licensee. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-12: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES ISSUED:
   A.   Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for
one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   The proposed use does not comply with any applicable zoning code.
      2.   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building
maintenance or other provisions of this code or state law.
      3.   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more
provisions of this chapter.
      4.   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or
financial investigation due to the unavailability of information.
      5.   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a
license.
      6.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application
and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.
      7.   Violation within the preceding five (5) years of any law relating to
theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance or
operation of a business.
      8.   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter.
      9.   The property on which the licensee operates has unpaid real estate
taxes. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-13: ONE BUSINESS LOCATION:
A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its business
only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. However,
upon written request, the chief of police or chief's designee, may approve an
off site locked and secured storage facility. The licensee shall permit
inspection of the facility in accordance with section
3-10-10 of this chapter. All provisions of this chapter regarding recordkeeping
and reporting apply to the storage and its contents. Property shall be stored
in compliance with all provisions of this code. The licensee must either own
the building in which the business is conducted, and any approved off site
storage facility, or have a lease on the business premises that extends for
more than six (6) months. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
3-10-14: PENALTIES:
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 939, 5-2-2016)
CHAPTER 11
GENERAL BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Unpaid Obligations
3-11-1: UNPAID OBLIGATIONS:
The City shall not issue any permit or license required by Title 3 of the
Montevideo City Code to any applicant or for any premises which has delinquent
real estate taxes, special assessments or other financial obligations to the
City. (Ord. 957, 7-6-2020)
CHAPTER 12
MOBILE FOOD TRUCKS/VENDORS
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: Licensing Requirements
3-12-3: Restrictions On Vending Activity
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the
meanings ascribed to them:
 
                  Any self-propelled vehicle or fully contained trailer,
MOBILE FOOD       licensed by the State of Minnesota to operate on public
TRUCK/MOBILE FOOD streets and roadways, which vends food (either prepackaged,
VENDOR/MOBILE     prepared in the Food Truck, or at a commissary) at retail for
FOOD UNIT:        immediate consumption by the customer. Said vehicle and/or
                  trailer may be referred to herein as “Food Truck”.
                  The process of the transfer of a food product from the Food
                  Truck operator to a customer. Vending begins when the Food
VEND/VENDING:     Truck initially stops in a location at which customers can
                  access the Food Truck and continues until the Food Truck
                  leaves that location. (Ord. 975, 3-6-2023)
 
3-12-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall vend from a Mobile Food Truck without
first having obtained a license to do so from the City, except as follows:
      1.   Food vendors on the Chippewa County Fairgrounds while participating
in the Chippewa County Fair;
      2.   Mobile Food Trucks operating as part of a Community Event; and
      3.   Mobile Food Trucks operating as part of a one-time occurrence on
private property for events such as birthday parties and similar events.
   B.   Application and Issuance: Licenses shall be granted by the City Clerk.
Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk on a form supplied
by the city. The application shall state:
      1.   The name, address, date of birth and driver’s license number and
state of issuance of the applicant and of all persons associated with the
applicant in vending.
      2.   A general description of the food products to be sold.
      3.   Vehicle information for the Mobile Food Truck, including dimensions
of the Mobile Food Truck.
      4.   Hours and duration of sales.
      5.   Proof of current licensing of the Mobile Food Truck from the
appropriate authority.
      6.   For Mobile Food Trucks on City Property, proof of liability
insurance in which the City is named coinsured which shall provide a limit of
coverage as established from time-to-time by the City Council for both bodily
injury and for property damage. Written notice of cancellation of such
insurance must be given to the City not less than thirty (30) days prior to
actual cancellation.
      7.   Such other information as the city may reasonably request.
All applications shall be submitted to the city clerk at least seven (7)
business days prior to the requested effective date of the licensee.
   C.   License Fees: Fees for licenses shall be set by resolution of the city
council.
   D.   Duration of License: Each license shall expire December 31 of each
year.
   E.   License Not Transferable: All licenses shall be nontransferable. No
refunds shall be made on unused portions of licenses. Each Mobile Food Truck
shall secure a separate license.
   F.   License To Be Available For Inspection: All licenses shall be carried
by the licensee or conspicuously posted in the licensee’s place of business and
the license shall be exhibited to any officer or citizen upon request. (Ord.
975, 3-6-2023)
3-12-3: RESTRICTIONS ON VENDING ACTIVITY:
   A.   Location or Placement: Mobile Food Trucks must adhere to the following
location and placement provisions:
      1.   No Mobile Food Truck may occupy more than two (2) parking spaces on
public streets and in City public parks.
      2.   No Mobile Food Truck may vend while occupying a traffic lane, parked
on a sidewalk, or in any location which obstructs or impedes traffic.
      3.   The Mobile Food Trucks shall only vend from the side of the vehicle
away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb side of the street
and shall not vend to any person standing in the traveled portion of any public
road.
      4.   While on public streets, no Mobile Food Truck shall vend within
sixty (60) feet of the intersection of two or more public streets, unless
authorized by the City or the street is blocked off with City permission.
      5.   No Mobile Food Truck shall vend while the Food Truck is in motion.
      6.   Connection of any Mobile Food Truck to public utilities is not
permitted.
      7.   There shall be no parking of a Mobile Food Truck overnight on the
public right of way.
      8.   Mobile Food Trucks are permitted in all Districts within the City
with the following exceptions:
         a.   Mobile Food Trucks operating in any Residential District may only
vend between the hours of 7 a.m. and 10 p.m.
         b.   In Residential Districts only one Mobile Food Truck is allowed at
a time on each property unless authorized by the City considering the size and
location of the lot and location of the Food Truck.
         c.   In Business or Industrial Districts there will be no limit on
hours of operation or to the number of Mobile Food Trucks vending, so long as
the minimum parking requirements of the property are complied with.
   B.   Prohibited Locations: Mobile Food Trucks are prohibited from vending
activity in the following locations:
      1.   Any portion of any State or US Highway that is located in the City.
      2.   Any municipal parking lot, street, park or other municipal property
without prior express permission for use of City property.
      3.   Any private property without being first authorized by the owner/
manager/agent of the private property.
      4.   Within three-hundred (300) feet of a community event unless
specifically authorized by the event sponsor to participate in the event.
      5.   At any location that may cause a safety hazard for other vehicles,
pedestrians, or the general public.
   C.   Dimensions: No Mobile Food Truck shall exceed thirty-two (32) feet in
length (meaning overall length for a self-propelled vehicle and trailer length
including the towing vehicle for self-contained trailers) or ten (10) feet in
height.
   D.   Signs and Appurtenances:
      1.   Mobile Food Trucks shall not employ, utilize or affix to the vehicle
any signs that project above the Food Truck, nor more than six (6) inches from
the side of the Food Truck. No flashing, strobing or intermittent lighting is
allowed.
      2.   No external seating shall be provided or utilized except as may be
provided by the owner/manager/agent of any private property on which the Food
Truck may be properly located.
      3.   While vending, operator may not call attention to the Food Truck by
crying out, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, or playing music or other sounds
discernible beyond the Food Truck. Amplified sound is not permitted outside of
the Food Truck.
      4.   Waste receptacle(s) must be provided by the Food Truck operator and
the vending site must be cleaned of all litter and garbage generated by the
Food Truck and customers before the Food Truck leaves the location.
   E.   Food Trucks may not sell or vend intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent Malt
Liquor, Edible Cannabinoid Products or any other product requiring a license
from the State of Minnesota or City of Montevideo. The terms in this section
shall be defined according to the definitions set out in Minnesota state law.
(Ord. 975, 3-6-2023)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Public Nuisance Defined
4-1-2: Public Nuisances Affecting Health
4-1-3: Public Nuisances Affecting Peace And Safety
4-1-4: General Abatement Procedure
4-1-5: Abatement For Weeds, Grass
4-1-6: Nuisances Requiring Immediate Action
4-1-7: Penalty
4-1-1: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
A nuisance is a thing, act or use of property which:
   A.   Unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort,
morals, or repose of the public;
   B.   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right of way, or waters used by the public;
   C.   Shall in any way render the public insecure in life or in use of
property. (Ord. 108, 3-9-1933; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Any continuous or repeated violation of any provision of this code.
(1998 Code)
4-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   A.   Unwholesome Food: All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to
the public.
   B.   Diseased Or Dead Animals:
      1.   All diseased animals running at large.
      2.   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within twenty four (24)
hours. (Ord. 108, 3-9-1933)
      3.   The body of any dead animal, or the offal, or garbage of any dead or
slaughtered animal; or any other animal, vegetable or other offensive or putrid
matter that may be or become injurious to public health. (Ch. 4; amd. 1998
Code)
   C.   Accumulations: Accumulations of trash, garbage or debris. (Ord. 108, 3-
9-1933; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Overgrowth Of Grasses Or Weeds: All noxious weeds and other rank
growths upon public or private property, including tall weeds, tall grass and
unmown lawns in excess of twelve inches (12") in length. (Ord. 665, 5-21-1990;
amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Polluted Air: Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in
unreasonable quantities.
   F.   Vermin Infestations: Providing a breeding ground for mice, rats or
other rodents. (Ord. 108, 3-9-1933; amd. 1998 Code)
   G.   Disturbances: Excessive noise and vibrations.
      1.   Any noise in excess of the noise levels set forth in the regulations
and standards of the PCA unless such noise be reasonably necessary to the
preservation of life, health, safety or property.
      2.   Any vibration resulting in any combination of amplitudes and
frequencies beyond the safe range of most current standards of the United
States bureau of mines.
      3.   Any use producing heat or light transmission that is not in
conformance with the minimum standards as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota
pollution control agency.
   H.   Unused Refrigerators Or Containers With Doors: The ownership,
possession or control of any unused refrigerator or other container with doors
which fasten automatically when closed, are sufficient size to retain any
person, to be exposed and accessible to the public without removing the doors,
lids, hinges or latches or providing locks to prevent access by the public.
(1998 Code)
   I.   Other: All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of
property which are deemed by the board of health to be a menace to the health
of the inhabitants of this city or any considerable number thereof.
   J.   Any use of adult-use cannabis flower or other cannabis products, which
is injurious to health, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free
use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property.
(Ord. 108, 3-9-1933; amd. Ord. 983, 8-21-2023)
4-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
   A.   Snow Removal: All snow not removed from public sidewalks by eleven
o'clock (11:00) A.M. after the snow has ceased to be deposited thereon.
   B.   Sight Obstruction: All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions
which prevent persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching an
intersection from cross streets in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle
driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop before the intersection is reached.
   C.   Right Of Way Obstruction: All limbs of trees which are less than seven
feet (7') above the surface of any public sidewalk or eight feet (8') above the
surface of any street.
   D.   Low Strung Wire: All wires which are strung less than fifteen feet
(15') above the surface of any street or alley.
   E.   Dangerous Structures: All buildings, walls and other structures which
have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half
(1/2) their original value, and which are so situated as to endanger the safety
of the public.
   F.   Hazardous Substances: All explosives, inflammable liquids and other
dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount other than that
provided by provisions of this code.
   G.   Fireworks: All use or display of fireworks except as provided by
provisions of this code. (Ord. 108, 3-9-1933; amd. 1998 Code)
   H.   Unnecessary Disturbances: All unnecessary noises and annoying
vibrations, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Noisy Gatherings: No person shall congregate at or participate in
any party or gathering of people from which noise emanates of a sufficient
volume or of such a nature to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of other
persons. Noise of such volume as to be clearly audible at a distance of fifty
feet (50') from the structure or building in which the party or gathering is
occurring, or in the case of apartment buildings, in the adjacent hallway or
apartment, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. No
person shall knowingly remain at such a party or gathering.
      2.   Sound Systems: No person shall operate or permit operation of, a
sound system in or on a vehicle so that the sound system is audible within
fifty feet (50') of the vehicle. This does not include the vehicle horn when
used as a warning device. No person shall operate or permit operation of a
radio, sound system, public address system, loudspeaker or other noise
amplifier on public or private property if the sound produced by the same is
audible within fifty feet (50') of the speakers producing the sound.
      3.   Noise Disturbance Violation By Property Owner Or Lessor: If three
(3) violations of this subsection H occur at or in the same property or
structure within a six (6) month period, the city manager or police department
may provide written notice of such violation to the property's owner, or to a
lessor of rental property. During the twelve (12) months after sending such
notice, any subsequent violation of this subsection at, in, or on that property
shall also be a violation by the owner or by the lessor. Notice under this
subsection is sufficient if sent by certified mail to an owner or to a lessor,
or the lessor's property manager at their respective address shown in the
records of the city. Notice is effective upon mailing.
      4.   Exemptions: The following are exempt from violations of this
subsection H:
         a.   Activities which are duly authorized, licensed or sponsored by
the city of Montevideo, the Montevideo public schools, Chippewa County or any
other governmental entity, provided the activity is conducted pursuant to the
conditions established by the authorizing government entity.
         b.   Church bells, chimes or carillons.
         c.   School bells.
         d.   Antitheft devices. (Ord. 880, 8-18-2008)
   I.   Obstructing Use Of Public Ways: Obstructions and excavations affecting
the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds
except under such conditions as are provided by provisions of this code.
   J.   Unsightly Accumulations: The piling or keeping of old machinery, junk
or debris upon any lot within the city.
   K.   Hampering Movement Upon Public Ways: Any use of property abutting on a
public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which
causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use
of the streets or sidewalks.
   L.   Abandoned, Derelict Buildings: Broken and unboarded windows in any
building.
   M.   Deteriorated Buildings Or Structures: Deteriorated buildings or
structures of any kind that are in danger of collapse, permit entry by
children, vagrants and animals is or are in such poor state of repair that they
cause a devaluation of the properties in the neighborhood.
   N.   Open Vaults: Uncapped cisterns.
   O.   Dangerous Signs: All hanging signs, awnings and other similar
structures over the streets or sidewalks, or so situated as to endanger public
safety, not constructed and maintained as provided by provisions of this code.
   P.   Unsafe Sidewalks: Allowing rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any
building on any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk. (Ord. 108,
3-9-1933; amd. 1998 Code)
   Q.   Uncontrolled Discharges On Grounds: A discharge across the boundaries
of any lot or through percolation into the atmosphere or subsoil beyond the
boundaries of a lot of any toxic or noxious matter in such concentration as to
be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare or
cause injury or damage to property or business.
   R.   Emissions Into Air: The emission of odor, smoke or particulate matter
to a degree that is detrimental to or shall endanger the public health, safety,
comfort or general welfare of the public.
   S.   Industrial Waste: Waste material resulting from use in industrial or
commercial manufacturing, fabricating, servicing, processing or trimming which
is washed into the public storm sewer system or into the sanitary sewer system
or disposed of in a manner which is not consistent with the policies and
standards of the Minnesota pollution control agency.
   T.   Radioactive Emissions: Activities that emit radioactivity that do not
comply with the minimum requirements of the Minnesota pollution control agency.
   U.   Electric Emissions: Electric emissions which do not comply with the
minimum requirements of the federal communications commission.
   V.   Effluent: The effluence from any cesspool, septic tank, drain field or
human sewage disposal system discharging upon the surface of the ground, or
dumping the contents thereof at any place except as authorized.
   W.   Water Pollution: The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or
lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances.
(1998 Code)
   X.   Other: All other conditions or things which are liable to cause injury
to the person or property of anyone. (Ord. 108, 3-9-1933)
4-1-4: GENERAL ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Notice To Abate; Hearing: If any nuisance described above exists
causing a condition which is judged to be harmful or dangerous to the health,
morals or safety of any considerable number of people, the council by
resolution may describe the same and require either the owner or occupant of
such premises, or both, to take reasonable steps within a reasonable time,
which shall both be set out in the resolution, to abate the nuisance. The
resolution shall also fix a time and place when the person or persons upon whom
the resolution is served may appear before the council and be heard as to any
objections concerning the proposed action of the council. Such resolution shall
be served upon the person or persons therein required to abate the nuisance, in
person or by certified mail (restricted delivery), and if the address of the
owner is unknown, service on the owner may be had by posting a copy of the
resolution on the premises. Service may be proved by filing in the office of
the clerk setting forth the manner and the time thereof. (Ord. 888, 2-17-2009)
   B.   Abatement By City; Expense Responsibility Of Owner: If, after such
service of the resolution, the party or parties served fails to abate the
nuisance in accordance with the terms of the resolution, and after having heard
the objections thereto, if any, the council does not determine otherwise, the
council may cause such nuisance to be abated at the expense of the city and
recover such expenditure, either by civil action against the person or persons
served or, if service has been had upon the owner, by ordering the clerk to
extend such sum plus twenty five percent (25%) thereof as a special tax against
the property upon which the nuisance existed and to certify the same to the
county auditor for collection in the manner as taxes and special assessments
are collected. (Ord. 428, 7-24-1972)
4-1-5: ABATEMENT FOR WEEDS, GRASS:
As an alternate to the abatement process under section
4-1-4 of this chapter, when a nuisance exists as defined by subsection
4-1-2D of this chapter, the city may abate the nuisance by following the
procedure described in this section. If the city manager determines that a
nuisance exists under subsection
4-1-2D of this chapter, the city manager shall notify the property owner by
mailed notice of the existence of such a nuisance. Such notice shall give the
property owner five (5) days from the date of mailing to abate the nuisance. If
the nuisance is not abated within that time, the city may cause the weeds,
grasses or other rank growths to be cut, sprayed or otherwise removed and may
recover the expenses thereof, either by civil action against the owner or by
ordering the city clerk to extend such sum plus twenty five percent (25%)
thereof as a special assessment against such lot, to be collected with other
city taxes. The city shall mail the property owner notice of the amount of such
expenses. The property owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of such
notice to appeal to the city council. After the first notice as to the
existence of a nuisance, no further notice in that calendar year shall be
required for a recurring nuisance. It shall be sufficient notice for the city
to send one notice per calendar year containing the total expenses proposed to
be recovered by the city for such recurring nuisance. (Ord. 867, 2-20-2007)
4-1-6: NUISANCES REQUIRING IMMEDIATE ACTION:
Nuisances requiring immediate action shall be abated as provided in this
section.
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms or
words shall be interpreted as follows:
   CHEMICAL DUMP SITE: Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials used in a clandestine drug lab have been located.
   CHILD: Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB: The unlawful manufacture or attempt to manufacture
controlled substances.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE: Any place or area where law enforcement has
determined that conditions associated with the operation of an unlawful
clandestine drug lab exist. A clandestine drug lab site may include dwellings,
accessory buildings, accessory structures, a chemical dump site or any land.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug, substance or immediate precursor in schedules
I through V of Minnesota statutes section 152.02. The term shall not include
distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTES: Waste generated from a clandestine drug lab.
Such wastes shall be treated, stored, transported or disposed of in a manner
consistent with Minnesota department of health, Minnesota pollution control and
Chippewa County health department rules and regulations.
   MANUFACTURE: In places other than a pharmacy, shall mean and include the
production, cultivation, quality control, and standardization, by mechanical,
physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means, packing, repacking, tableting,
encapsulating, labeling, relabeling, filling, or by other process, of drugs.
   OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation who owns, in whole or in part, the
land, buildings, or structures associated with a clandestine drug lab site or
chemical dump site.
   PROPERTY: Any real estate or personal property, including, but not limited
to, motor vehicles and motor homes.
   PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE: All dwellings, accessory structures and buildings or
adjacent property associated with a clandestine drug lab site are potentially
unsafe due to health hazards and are considered a public health nuisance. (Ord.
847, 6-21-2004; amd. Ord. 848, 9-20-2004)
   B.   Law Enforcement Notice To Other Authorities: Law enforcement
authorities that identify conditions associated with a clandestine drug lab
site or chemical dump site that places neighbors, visiting public, or present
and future occupants of the dwelling at risk for exposure to harmful
contaminants and other associated conditions must promptly notify the
appropriate municipal, child protection, and public health authorities of the
property location, property owner if known, and conditions found.
   C.   Declaration Of Property As A Public Health Nuisance: If law enforcement
determines the existence of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site,
the property shall be declared a public health nuisance.
   D.   Notice Of Public Health Nuisance To Concerned Parties: Upon
notification by law enforcement authorities, the city building official shall
promptly issue a declaration of public health nuisance for the affected
property and post a copy of the declaration at the probable entrance to the
dwelling or property. The building official shall also notify the owner of the
property by mail and notify the following parties:
      1.   Occupants of the property;
      2.   Neighbors at probable risk;
      3.   The city of Montevideo police department; and
      4.   Other state and local authorities, such as MPCA and MDH, which are
known to have public and environmental protection responsibilities that are
applicable to the situation.
   E.   Property Owner's Responsibility To Act: The building official shall
also issue an order ordering the property owner to abate the public health
nuisance, including the following:
      1.   Immediately vacate those portions of the property, including
buildings or structure interiors which may place the occupants or visitors at
risk. (Ord. 847, 6-21-2004)
      2.   Promptly contract with appropriate environmental testing and
cleaning firms to conduct an on site assessment, complete cleanup and
remediation testing and follow up testing, and determine that the property
risks are sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy of the property.
The property owner shall notify the city of actions taken and reach an
agreement with the city on the cleanup schedule. The city shall consider
practical limitations and the availability of contractors in approving the
schedule for cleanup. (Ord. 848, 9-20-2004)
      3.   Provide written documentation of the cleanup process, including a
signed, written statement that the property is safe for human occupancy and
that the cleanup was conducted in accordance with Minnesota department of
health guidelines.
   F.   Property Owner's Responsibility For Costs: The property owner shall be
responsible for all costs of vacation or cleanup of the site, including
contractor's fees and public costs for services that were performed in
association with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site cleanup.
Public costs may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Posting of the site;
      2.   Notification of affected parties;
      3.   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment
process;
      4.   Laboratory fees;
      5.   Cleanup services;
      6.   Administrative fees; and
      7.   Other associated costs.
   G.   Recovery Of Public Costs:
      1.   If, after service of notice of the declaration of public health
nuisance, the property owner fails to arrange appropriate assessment and
cleanup, the city building official is authorized to proceed in a prompt manner
to initiate the on site assessment and cleanup.
      2.   If the city is unable to locate the property owner within ten (10)
days of the declaration of public health nuisance, the city is authorized to
proceed in a prompt manner to initiate the on site assessment and cleanup.
(Ord. 847, 6-21-2004)
      3.   The city may abate the nuisance by removing the hazardous structure
or building, or otherwise, according to Minnesota statutes chapter 463. The
city may also abate the nuisance by impounding any motor vehicle according to
Minnesota statutes section 168B. (Ord. 848, 9-20-2004)
      4.   If the city abates the public health nuisance, in addition to any
other legal remedy, the city may recover its costs pursuant to section
4-1-4 of this chapter.
   H.   Authority To Modify Or Remove Declaration Of Public Nuisance:
      1.   The building official is authorized to modify the declaration
conditions or remove the declaration of public health nuisance.
      2.   Such modifications or removal of the declaration shall only occur
after documentation from a qualified environmental or cleaning firm stating
that the health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and potential
dwelling occupants, are sufficiently abated or corrected to allow safe
occupancy of the dwelling. (Ord. 847, 6-21-2004)
4-1-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall knowingly cause or create a nuisance, or permit any
nuisance to be created or placed upon or to remain upon any premises owned or
occupied by such person, shall upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 108, 3-9-1933; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 847, 6-21-2004)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Collection System Established
4-2-3: Deposits Prohibited; Exception
4-2-4: Receptacle Requirements
4-2-5: Burning Of Garbage, Rubbish
4-2-6: Rules And Regulations
4-2-7: Designation Of Municipal Garbage And Rubbish Collector
4-2-8: Collection Charges
4-2-9: Refuse Fund
4-2-10: Permit To Dump; Dumping Fee
4-2-11: Damage Or Loss Of Containers
4-2-12: Unauthorized Use Of Garbage Services
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
given herein:
GARBAGE: Shall include organic refuse attending the preparation of food,
decayed and spoiled food, and other combustible refuse such as rags, waste
paper, floor sweepings and old shoes and rubbers, and tin cans.
RESIDENCE OR RESIDENTIAL: Any one- or two-family dwelling or any multi-family
dwelling in which the occupants of the individual units are responsible for
their own garbage removal; provided, however, that each dwelling that has a
utility meter shall be considered a separate residence.
RUBBISH: Shall include inorganic and noncombustible refuse and waste matter,
such as glassware, crockery, scrap iron, ashes, and manure. (Ord. 781, 7-21-
1997)
4-2-2: COLLECTION SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Council Authority: There is hereby established a Municipal garbage and
rubbish collection system, and the Council is hereby empowered to engage and
employ a garbage and rubbish collector, and furnish such helpers and tools and
equipment as may be necessary to accomplish the collection and disposal of
garbage and rubbish in an efficient and sanitary manner.
   B.   Service By City Or By Contract: Such services may be provided directly
by the City or through private persons under a contract with the City. Garbage
and rubbish collection services shall be provided to all residences, commercial
and industrial establishments and institutions within the City and charges
shall be made for such services as provided herein. (Ord. 408, 5-17-1971, eff.
7-1-1971)
4-2-3: DEPOSITS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall hereafter deposit or cause to be deposited, any garbage or
refuse upon any street, avenue, vacant lot, or upon any yard, back yard or
other ground or place appurtenant to any building in the City, except in
suitable receptacles and in the manner herein provided. (Ch. 178, 2-20-1946;
amd. 1998 Code)
4-2-4: RECEPTACLE REQUIREMENTS:
Every owner or occupant or persons in control or in possession of any residence
shall provide at that person's own expense, put and keep on the grounds, back
yard or other rear or side part of the lot appurtenant to any such building and
in a convenient place, a plastic garbage bag with a capacity of not more than
thirty three (33) gallons or, a garbage can, weighted, and with a tight cover,
of the capacity of not more than thirty two (32) gallons, and with handles on
the side; which container shall be kept clean; and every person shall deposit
or cause to be deposited in such can or bag all garbage which shall accrue on
their premises or on premises in their control or possession and shall deposit
in said can or receptacle the same drained of water or other fluid, said
garbage to be bagged or wrapped in paper in parcels and shall keep said
container covered. Each dwelling unit for which a residence charge is made for
collections shall be permitted to have one such can or plastic garbage bag for
garbage and rubbish without additional charge. Such cans may exceed the
capacity of thirty two (32) gallons if the person uses containers provided by
the collector. On the days scheduled for garbage and rubbish collection from
residences, the containers shall be placed for collection at the curb or alley
line as may be directed by the collector. After collection has been made, empty
containers shall be removed from the boulevards or front yards of the
residences and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit a container to
remain on a boulevard or in a front yard for more than twenty four (24) hours
after it has been emptied. The city may provide a system for collection of
additional bags or containers at an additional charge to residents. (Ord. 675,
10-1-1990, eff. 1-1-1991; amd. 1998 Code)
4-2-5: BURNING OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH:
No garbage or refuse shall be collected or disposed of except through the
municipal garbage collection system; provided, however, that combustible refuse
and combustible waste materials may be burned by commercial establishments in a
refuse burner constructed in accordance with the provisions of this code and
approved as to construction and location by the fire marshal of the city who
shall be the sole judge as to the sufficiency of such burner and its location
so as to provide against fire hazards. (Ch. 178, 2-20-1946)
4-2-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Council Authority; Licensing Of Collectors: The council may make, by
resolution, such administrative regulations and rules as may be necessary and
proper to regulate, enforce and carry out the provisions of this chapter. The
council may as they deem it necessary, license a person or persons to collect,
remove and haul garbage and rubbish from premises within the city to a place of
disposition operated according to applicable rules and regulations and the laws
of the state.
   B.   Application For License; Requirements: Any person or persons desiring a
license as such garbage and rubbish collector shall file an application
therefor in writing with the clerk, which application shall state the
applicant's name, age and residence, the type of equipment to be used in
collecting, hauling and removing such garbage and rubbish, and a schedule of
rates to be charged for such service. The council may require of such applicant
as a condition to the issuance of such license that the applicant furnish a
bond in an amount to be determined by the council, for the performance of such
service in accordance with the provisions of this code and the rules and
regulations of the board of health and may also require such garbage and
rubbish collector to have and file with the clerk public liability and property
damage insurance in such sums as the council shall determine. In the event that
there shall be no licensed garbage and rubbish collector, the city may cause
such garbage and rubbish to be collected and removed, and make such charges for
such services as shall be determined by the council to be reasonable. No person
or agent or employee thereof shall collect or remove any garbage and rubbish or
haul or transport the same over the streets, alleys or public places of the
city except a licensed garbage and rubbish collector or the municipal garbage
and rubbish collector. (Ord. 408, 5-17-1971, eff. 7-1-1971)
   C.   Rental Residences: The following provisions shall apply to nonowner
occupied residences:
      1.   Every occupant of a rental unit shall store and dispose of all
garbage, refuse, and any other organic waste which might provide food for
insects and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary, and safe manner.
      2.   All garbage cans and refuse containers shall be ratproof,
insectproof, watertight, structurally strong to withstand handling stress,
easily filled, emptied, and cleaned; shall be provided with tight fitting
covers or similar closures; and shall be maintained at all times in a clean,
sanitary condition. Plastic bags may be used as garbage and refuse container
liners, but shall not be used without the container for on site storage of
garbage or refuse. (Ord. 824, 5-6-2002)
4-2-7: DESIGNATION OF MUNICIPAL GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTOR:
The council may, by resolution, designate a garbage and rubbish collector
having a proper license from the city as the municipal garbage and rubbish
collector. (Ord. 408, 5-17-1971, eff. 7-1-1971)
4-2-8: COLLECTION CHARGES:
   A.   System Of Service Charges: The council shall make and establish, by
resolution, a system of service charges for the removal and disposal of garbage
and rubbish under the garbage and rubbish collection system and shall fix and
declare the maximum charges, including any special charges for extra hauling or
trips to be made; and shall classify said removal and disposal according to the
type of service required and given based on the type of residence or dwelling,
type of business conducted, and the number of collections and removals each
week, fixing and establishing the service charge for each class.
   B.   Billing Procedure: The service charge for each building or
establishment shall be entered, shown and placed on the city water bill for
same, and shall be indicated thereon as for garbage and rubbish collection
service, except in cases where there is no water meter in the premises and then
separate bills shall be rendered by the clerk. All service charges shall be due
and payable at the office of the clerk. (Ord. 408, 5-17-1971, eff. 7-1-1971)
   C.   Unpaid Bill Procedure: Service charges for the removal and disposal of
garbage and rubbish shall be utility charges and shall be collected in the
manner provided for the collection of utility charges when not paid when due as
billed by the city. (Ord. 426, 7-24-1972)
   D.   Manner Of Increasing Charges: Before any increase in the charges to be
made for the collection of garbage and rubbish are put into effect, there shall
be a public hearing thereon after notice published at least once ten (10) days
prior to the time of such hearing. Notice may be mailed to each person affected
by the proposed increase in charges at least ten (10) days prior to such
hearing instead of publishing such notice. No such public hearing shall be
required for any increase in charges due solely to a fee or tax imposed by
another governmental entity. (Ord. 675, 10-1-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-2-9: REFUSE FUND:
All income from the operation of the municipal garbage and rubbish collection
system, and all license fees from independent licensed collectors and haulers
of rubbish and refuse shall be kept and maintained in a fund known and
designated as the refuse fund. All expenses of operation shall be paid from
such fund and any net revenue shall be used for the improvement and extension
of the garbage and refuse disposal system. In the event that the revenues
credited to such fund shall not be sufficient for the maintenance and operation
of the system, the council is authorized to transfer additional funds for such
purpose from the general fund. (Ch. 178, 2-20-1946; amd. 1998 Code)
4-2-10: PERMIT TO DUMP; DUMPING FEE:
No person except a licensed garbage and rubbish collector or the municipal
garbage and rubbish collector shall deposit any garbage or rubbish upon any
dumping ground, owned, used or controlled by the city, unless such person has
obtained a dumping permit from the city or has paid a dumping fee. The council
shall by resolution fix the annual fee to be paid for a dumping permit and the
fee to be paid for dumping by those not having such permit. (Ch. 178, 2-20-
1946)
4-2-11: DAMAGE OR LOSS OF CONTAINERS:
No person shall intentionally and without claim of right take, transfer,
conceal or retain possession of any garbage containers owned by the city or any
person holding a contract with the city for garbage and rubbish collection, and
no person shall intentionally cause damage to such containers. (Ord. 675, 10-1-
1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-2-12: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF GARBAGE SERVICES:
No person shall deposit any garbage or rubbish in a dumpster or garbage can
owned by another without that person's permission. (Ord. 677, 12-27-1990)
CHAPTER 3
SHADE TREE DISEASE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Nuisances Declared
4-3-2: Nuisances Prohibited
4-3-3: Public Works Director To Inspect
4-3-4: Abatement
4-3-5: Costs
4-3-6: Bringing Diseased Wood Into City
4-3-7: Penalty For Violation
4-3-1: NUISANCES DECLARED:
The following tree diseases are hereby declared to be public nuisances wherever
they may be found within the city:
   A.   Infected Living Or Standing Tree: Any living or standing elm tree or
part thereof infected with Dutch elm disease (ceratocystis Ulmi), or which
harbors any of the elm bark beetles (scolytus multistriatus or hylurgopinus
Rufipes) and any living or standing ash tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the insect emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis).
   B.   Infected Tree Refuse Containing Bark: Any dead elm or diseased ash tree
or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm or ash
material from which the bark has not been removed and destroyed.
   C.   Other: Any other living or standing tree or part thereof infected with
any disease or source thereof which is contagious and fatal to other trees, as
well as parts thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other
material from which the bark has not been removed and destroyed. (Ord. 917, 5-
7-2012)
4-3-2: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall permit any "public nuisance" as defined in section
4-3-1 of this chapter to remain on any premises owned or controlled by such
person within the city. (Ord. 917, 5-7-2012)
4-3-3: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO INSPECT:
   A.   The city public works director is empowered to inspect, or cause to be
inspected, all premises and places within the city whenever necessary to
determine whether any "public nuisance" as defined in section
4-3-1 of this chapter exists thereon, and shall also inspect any elm tree
reported or suspected to be infected with Dutch elm disease or any elm bark
bearing material reported or suspected to be infested with the elm bark beetle,
or any ash tree reported or suspected to be infected with emerald ash borer, or
any ash bark bearing material reported or suspected to be infested with the
emerald ash borer or any other tree reported or suspected to be infested with a
contagious disease that is fatal to other trees.
   B.   The city public works director or appointed employee shall have the
authority to enter upon private premises at all reasonable times for carrying
out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 917, 5-7-2012)
4-3-4: ABATEMENT:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the city public works director, or other appointed
employee, shall find with reasonable certainty any "public nuisance" as defined
in this chapter, said public works director shall cause it to be removed,
burned or otherwise abated in such manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as
possible the spread of Dutch elm disease, emerald ash borer, or the insects
known to carry these diseases or other disease causing a nuisance pursuant to
section
4-3-1 of this chapter.
   B.   Notice To Owner: A notice shall be given the owner that the nuisance
shall be abated within a specified time, which shall not be less than ten (10)
days from the date of such notice, unless the public employees shall find that
immediate action is necessary to prevent the spread of infection. If the owner
fails to comply, the public works director shall cause the abatement thereof.
   C.   Owner Not Entitled To Damages: No damage shall be awarded the owner for
destruction of any tree, wood or material or any part thereof pursuant to this
section, except as provided by the city and state shade tree programs.
   D.   Preventive Spraying Of Neighboring Trees; Notice: Whenever the public
works director shall determine that any tree or tree material is infected with
disease as set forth above, said public works director may cause to be sprayed
all at risk trees within a five hundred foot (500') radius thereof with an
effective destroying insecticide. Before spraying of any tree on private
property the owner shall be notified. (Ord. 917, 5-7-2012)
4-3-5: COSTS:
   A.   Property Owner Responsible: The entire cost of abating any "public
nuisance" as defined in section
4-3-1 of this chapter in accordance with section
4-3-4 of this chapter may be charged to or assessed against the parcel or lot
on which the nuisance exists. The cost of abating such nuisance which is
located in or upon any boulevard, park or public grounds shall be borne by the
city.
   B.   Strict Accounting Required; Monthly Report: The city public works
director shall keep strict account of the costs of work done under this chapter
and shall report monthly to the city manager all work done for which
assessments are to be made. This shall be included in the report to the city
council. (Ord. 917, 5-7-2012)
4-3-6: BRINGING DISEASED WOOD INTO CITY:
The stockpiling of bark bearing elm wood within the city limits shall be
permitted during the period from September 15 through April 1 of any given
year. Any such wood not utilized by April 1 of any year must then be removed
and disposed of as provided by this chapter and the regulations incorporated
thereby. No diseased ash or other tree wood may be imported into the city.
(Ord. 917, 5-7-2012)
4-3-7: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 917, 5-7-2012)
CHAPTER 4
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
4-4-1: Prohibited Generally
4-4-2: Permitted Burning
4-4-3: Restrictions On Burning
4-4-4: Applicability Of Other State And Local Regulations
4-4-1: PROHIBITED GENERALLY:
Except as permitted in this chapter, all open burning is prohibited within the
city limits. (Ord. 851, 2-22-2005)
4-4-2: PERMITTED BURNING:
The following types of burning shall be permitted:
   A.   A campfire set for cooking, warming, recreational or ceremonial
purposes, which is not more than three feet (3') in diameter by three feet (3')
high and no closer than fifty feet (50') from a building, provided the grounds
surrounding the fire have been cleared of all combustible material for a
distance of five feet (5') from the base of the fire.
   B.   A fire contained in a charcoal grill, camp stove, or other devices
designed for purposes of cooking, heating or recreation.
   C.   Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of fire personnel,
provided the appropriate permits are obtained.
   D.   Fires pursuant to permits issued by the state fire marshal and/or the
department of natural resources for burning off of vegetation in rural/
agricultural areas, rural road ditches or conservation areas. (Ord. 851, 2-22-
2005)
4-4-3: RESTRICTIONS ON BURNING:
Any permitted burning is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   Fires may not be used for the burning of litter, refuse, garbage,
leaves or paper.
   B.   All fires shall be attended by a competent person until such fire is
extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply
or other extinguishing equipment readily available for use.
   C.   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning during a burning
ban put into effect by a local authority, county or state agency.
   D.   Charcoal burners and other open flame cooking devices, and LP gas
burners having an LP gas container with a water capacity greater than 2.5
pounds shall not be located on combustible balconies or within ten feet (10')
of combustible construction of any building except one- and two-family
dwellings. (Ord. 851, 2-22-2005)
4-4-4: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER STATE AND LOCAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permission to conduct fires under this chapter does not excuse a person
from consequences, damages or injuries which may result therefrom, nor does it
exempt any person from regulations promulgated by the Minnesota pollution
control agency or any other governmental unit exercising jurisdiction in
matters of pollution or fire hazard regulations.
   B.   No permitted fire shall be allowed to burn in such a manner as to
create a nuisance under either this code or state law. (Ord. 851, 2-22-2005)
CHAPTER 5
PERMANENT, STAND-BY OR EMERGENCY POWER GENERATION
SECTION:
4-5-1: Requirements For Emergency Or Stand-By Generators
4-5-2: Exceptions
4-5-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR EMERGENCY OR STAND-BY GENERATORS:
Emergency or stand-by generators attached to or used in residential, commercial
or industrial structures or uses must be served by a 3-wire, 120/240 volt,
single phase electrical service having a rating of not less than sixty (60)
amps. 120 volt-60 amp service requires a generator to be at least seven
thousand two hundred (7,200) watts, 240 volt-60 amp service requires a minimum
fourteen thousand four hundred (14,400) watt generator, connected by a transfer
switch. All units must meet all Building Code, State Electrical and Fire Code
requirements and all generators must meet noise limits set by State Statute or
Minn. R. 7030.0040, or any replacement regulation, for all areas of service.
(Example, the statutory limits for a residential location are L10 = 65 dBA and
L50 = 60 dBA during the daytime (7:00 A.M. - 10:00 P.M.) and L10 = 55 dBA and
L50 = 50 dBA during the nighttime (10:00 P.M. - 7:00 A.M.). This means that
during the 1-hour period of monitoring, daytime noise levels cannot exceed 65
dBA for more than 10 percent of the time or 60 dBA more than 50 percent of the
time.) (Ord. 947, 5-7-2018)
4-5-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The requirements of section
4-5-1 of this chapter, except the noise limitations, shall not apply:
During emergencies declared by the Montevideo City Council, for periods of less
than two (2) weeks approved by the City Manager, or during temporary
construction work approved by the City Manager. (Ord. 947, 5-7-2018)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION:
5-1-1: State Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
5-1-2: Firearm Restrictions
5-1-3: Disturbing The Peace
5-1-4: Posting Bills
5-1-5: Refusal To Aid Officers
5-1-6: Theaters; Smoking Restricted (Rep. by Ord. 896, 12-21-2009)
5-1-7: Bicycles, Skateboards, Scooters, Rollerblades, Roller Skates;
Restrictions
5-1-1: STATE CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the state criminal code 1  as amended, are hereby adopted by the
city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this
chapter, and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty
provisions under this chapter if proceeded hereunder. (1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 609.01 et seq.
5-1-2: FIREARM RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Discharging Firearms: It shall be unlawful for any person (except
police officers in the discharge of their duties) to shoot or discharge any
firearm of any kind or description, whether the same be loaded or blank, or any
kind of explosive whatever, or any kind of fireworks or explosive dangerous to
persons or property, within or into the limits of the city. For purposes of
this section, firearms shall include BB guns, airsoft guns (except when used on
a permitted airsoft course) and other similar guns.
   B.   Minors: No minor under the age of fourteen (14) shall handle, possess
or have control of any firearm of any kind for hunting or target practice or
any other purpose except while accompanied by or under the immediate control of
the minor's parent or guardian. No parent or guardian shall knowingly permit a
minor to violate this subsection.
   C.   Launching Projectiles: It shall be unlawful for any person to launch,
by means other than by hand, any projectile not banned by subsection A of this
section, anywhere within or into the confines of the city limits without the
express permission of the property owner of all properties where the activity
is taking place. Projectiles shall include, but not be limited to: paintball
guns, bows and arrows, crossbows, blowguns, and slingshots. (Ord. 926, 11-4-
2013)
5-1-3: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person shall use abusive or obscene language, nor wilfully engage in any
quarrel, brawling or fighting in any public place. (1998 Code)
5-1-4: POSTING BILLS:
No person shall put up any handbills, advertisements, posters, show bills, or
other sign on any property without permission from the owner thereof. (Ch. 105)
5-1-5: REFUSAL TO AID OFFICERS:
No person, after having been lawfully commanded to make or aid in an arrest, or
in executing any legal process, shall wilfully neglect or refuse to do so. (Ch.
105)
5-1-6: THEATERS; SMOKING RESTRICTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 896, 12-21-2009)
5-1-7: BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, ROLLERBLADES, ROLLER SKATES;
RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall ride a skateboard or scooter, or rollerblade or rollerskate, in
the downtown business district of the city, described as between State Road and
the south line of Eureka Avenue and vacated Eureka Avenue and between the west
line of 3rd Street right of way and the west line of 1st Street West in the
city of Montevideo. Bicycles which comply with section
6-1-6 of this code may be ridden on the streets, avenues or alleys in the
downtown business district, but no person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk
in such area. This section will apply to other, similar, nonmotorized devices,
even if not specifically named herein. (Ord. 807, 1-8-2001)
CHAPTER 2
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
5-2-1: Findings; Statement Of Intent
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Creation Of Graffiti; Possession Of Graffiti Materials
5-2-4: Limited Entry Upon Land; Interference With Official Duties
5-2-5: Unlawful Conduct; Owner's Responsibility
5-2-6: City Police To Identify
5-2-7: Hearing
5-2-8: Costs To Be Assessed
5-2-9: Graffiti Abatement Civil In Nature
5-2-1: FINDINGS; STATEMENT OF INTENT:
   A.   Detrimental To Youth: The City Council finds that exposure to gang type
graffiti adversely affects the emotional well-being of City youth and creates
peer pressure on these youth to join these undesirable and detrimental
organizations. The Council finds that quick removal of graffiti may assist in
preventing the entrenchment of gangs.
   B.   Devalued Property: The Council further finds that graffiti creates a
condition of blight which can result in the deterioration of property values,
and is inconsistent with the City's property maintenance goals and aesthetic
standards. Unless graffiti is quickly removed, other properties soon become
targets of graffiti.
   C.   Declared Public Nuisance: The Council hereby declares its intentions to
minimize and to quickly remove graffiti to limit its adverse impact on City
youth and neighborhoods. Graffiti is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and a public health/safety hazard for purposes of Minnesota Statutes section
429.101, subdivision 1(c). (1998 Code)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms defined in this Section shall have the following meanings ascribed to
them:
GRAFFITI: Any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs,
inscriptions or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn or
otherwise placed on any exterior surface of a building, wall, fence, sidewalk,
curb or other permanent structure on public or private property, and which have
the effect of defacing such property.
GRAFFITI MATERIALS: Include paint, aerosol or pressurized containers of paint,
indelible markers, ink, dye or other substance capable of defacing property.
(1998 Code)
5-2-3: CREATION OF GRAFFITI; POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI MATERIALS:
   A.   Graffiti On Public Or Private Property: It shall be unlawful for any
person to intentionally place graffiti on any exterior surface located on
public or private property.
   B.   Possession Of Graffiti Materials: It shall be unlawful for any person
to possess graffiti materials for the purpose of placing graffiti on any
exterior surface located on public or private property. (1998 Code)
5-2-4: LIMITED ENTRY UPON LAND; INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL DUTIES:
   A.   Probable Cause; Warrant: Police Department and other City personnel
that have probable cause to believe a violation of this Chapter exists may
enter upon private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying
out any of the duties assigned to them under this Chapter. However, prior to
entry upon private property to verify the existence of a violation of this
Chapter, an appropriate warrant authorizing the contemplated search or other
necessary actions shall be first obtained from a court of competent
jurisdiction. If a property owner or person in possession of private property
consents to entry by police or other City personnel onto the property, no
warrant shall be required.
   B.   Right Of Entry: Upon a finding by the Council that graffiti exists or
with the consent of the property owner, members of other City departments
authorized by the Council may enter upon private premises at any reasonable
time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to them under
this Chapter.
   C.   Interference Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay or interfere with representatives of the City Police Department
or other City departments while they are engaged in the performance of duties
imposed by this Chapter.
   D.   Abatement By City; Reimbursement By Owner: A property owner may ask the
City to remove graffiti from the owner's property before being ordered to do
so, following the abatement procedure set forth in Sections
5-2-5 through
5-2-8 of this Chapter. If the City agrees to remove the graffiti, the City
shall have the property owner or designated agent sign a consent form
authorizing the City or its agents to enter onto the property and a release of
liability form. The property owner shall be liable for any costs which the City
incurs in removing graffiti. The City may collect the costs as a special
assessment pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 429.101, subdivision I(c), if
property owner fails to reimburse the City upon request. (1998 Code)
5-2-5: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT; OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow graffiti to be
placed or remain on any external surface of the owner's property. The owner of
any such property shall remove any graffiti which has been placed there. (1998
Code)
5-2-6: CITY POLICE TO IDENTIFY:
   A.   Response To Complaints On Observation: Based upon information received
from the public or upon police observation, City police shall investigate and
identify graffiti. After the Police Department has verified the existence of
graffiti, the City shall send a letter to the property owner by certified mail
informing the property owner about the graffiti and requesting the property
owner to remove the graffiti within a reasonable period of time, based upon
consideration of weather conditions and other relevant factors. A copy of the
letter shall be sent to the City Council. The Police Department shall verify
whether the graffiti has been removed.
   B.   Timely Removal Required; Costs Assessed To Owner: If the Police
Department finds that graffiti has not been removed within the time allotted,
the City shall be contacted. The City Clerk shall schedule a public hearing and
shall notify the affected property owner of the hearing date and the
preliminary findings that graffiti exists on the owner's property, and that
City Council may, after the hearing, order the removal of graffiti by either
the property owner or the City's Public Works Department, and if said
Department has to remove the graffiti, the costs will be assessed against the
owner's property. (1998 Code)
5-2-7: HEARING:
   A.   City Council Conducts Hearing: At a hearing before the Council, the
Council shall receive evidence from the Police Department and from any other
persons with knowledge as to the existence of graffiti. The property owner
shall be entitled to be heard on all matters relating to graffiti and the
process of removal. The existence of graffiti must be proven by a preponderance
of the evidence.
   B.   Council Directs Removal: If the Council finds that graffiti exists, the
Council shall notify the Public Works Department and direct its removal
following the time period allowed in subsection C of this Section. the Public
Works Department may authorize private contractors to handle graffiti removal.
   C.   Notice To Property Owner: In the event the Council finds that graffiti
exists, the City Clerk shall mail a written order to the owner of subject real
property, addressed to the owner's last known address. The written order shall
contain the following:
      1.   Description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
      2.   That the City Council has found graffiti exists on the owner's
property.
      3.   A request that the owner remove or obliterate the graffiti within a
reasonable time as determined by City Council.
      4.   Inform the owner that unless corrective action is taken within the
time allotted, the Public Works Department may remove the graffiti and charge
all costs incurred therein against the real estate as a special assessment to
be collected in the same manner as taxes against real estate. (1998 Code)
5-2-8: COSTS TO BE ASSESSED:
   A.   Recoverable Expenses: In the event the City removes and/or abates the
graffiti, an accurate record of the costs incurred shall be kept by the Public
Works Department and reported to the City Clerk. The total costs of this
abatement, including the administrative costs incurred by City staff in
processing the abatement, and costs incurred by the Police Department in
investigating the graffiti, shall be considered a tax on real property. This
amount may be assessed against the affected property and collected as provided
in Section
4-1-4 of this Code.
   B.   Recovery From Perpetrator: In the event the person or persons
responsible for the graffiti are convicted and the court orders the offender(s)
to pay restitution for the costs of cleanup, and either the City or a private
property owner have expended funds to clean up the graffiti, the restitution
shall be directed to either the City or the private property owner as
reimbursement for the cost of cleanup. (1998 Code)
5-2-9: GRAFFITI ABATEMENT CIVIL IN NATURE:
A violation of Sections
5-2-5 through
5-2-8 of this Chapter, relating to the abatement of graffiti, shall not be
treated as misdemeanors nor shall they be criminal in nature. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Animals At Large
5-3-2: Certain Animals Prohibited In Certain Areas
5-3-3: Definitions
5-3-1: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned by such person,
or in his or her charge, to run at large within the city. (Ord. 806, 1-8-2001)
5-3-2: CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS:
   A.   Illegal Animals Identified:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in the city in any area
other than that which is zoned as AO agriculture-open space district, one or
more farm animals. An exception shall be made to this subsection for those
animals specifically trained for and actually providing assistance to the
handicapped or disabled, and for those brought into the city as part of an
operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or a
licensed show or exhibition.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in the city in any area
one or more nondomestic animal. An exception shall be made to this prohibition
for animals specifically trained for and actually providing assistance to the
handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into the city as part of
an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or a
licensed show or exhibition.
   B.   Deemed Violation Of Code: If any farm animal remains in any area other
than that which is zoned as AO agriculture-open space district, or any
nondomestic animal remains in any area, for a period of more than twelve (12)
hours, such shall be deemed to be kept in violation of this section. (Ord. 806,
1-8-2001)
5-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
words shall be defined to mean:
ANIMAL: Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and
poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
Animals shall be classified as follows:
   A.   Domestic: "Domestic animals" shall mean those animals commonly accepted
as domesticated household pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall
include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated
rabbits, fish, nonpoisonous, nonvenomous and nonconstricting reptiles or
amphibians, and other similar animals.
   B.   Nondomestic: "Nondomestic animals" shall mean those animals commonly
considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or
which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety,
and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include:
      1.   Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions,
tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated house cats.
      2.   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae)
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs.
      3.   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
      4.   Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those
members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
      5.   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
      6.   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can
be reasonably defined by the terms of this subsection, including, but not
limited to, bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
   C.   Farm: "Farm animals" shall mean those animals commonly associated with
a farm or performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined,
such animals shall include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules),
bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks,
geese), swine (including Vietnamese potbellied pigs), goats, bees, and other
animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.
AT LARGE: Intended to mean off the premises of the owner and not under the
custody and control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain,
or otherwise restrained or confined.
OWNER: Intended to mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping, or harboring an animal. (Ord. 806, 1-8-2001)
CHAPTER 4
DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definitions
5-4-2: License Required
5-4-3: Requirements For License
5-4-4: Dogs And Cats Under Restraint
5-4-5: Obligation To Prevent Nuisances
5-4-6: Impoundment
5-4-7: Notice Of Impoundment
5-4-8: Redemption
5-4-9: Disposition Of Unclaimed Dogs Or Cats
5-4-10: Permissible Return Of Unrestrained Animal
5-4-11: Confinement Of Certain Animals
5-4-12: Owner Obligation For Proper Care
5-4-13: Quarantine Of Certain Dogs
5-4-14: Proceedings For Destruction Of Certain Dogs Or Cats
5-4-15: Summary Destruction Of Certain Dogs
5-4-16: Kennels
5-4-17: Dogs And Cats Belonging To Nonresidents
5-4-18: Dogs Disturbing The Peace
5-4-19: Penalty
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
DANGEROUS DOG: Dangerous dogs shall be defined and regulated by Minnesota
statutes section 347.50 et seq.
HABITUALLY OR FREQUENTLY BARK OR CRY: Habitually or frequently barking or
crying means barking or crying intermittently for at least ten (10) minutes,
which barking or crying is audible off the premises where the dog is located at
the time of the incident.
KENNEL: Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling or
boarding dogs; provided, that such person customarily owns or boards more than
three (3) dogs over six (6) months of age.
OFFICER: Any police officer of the city or persons designated by the city
manager to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. Such persons shall have
police powers insofar as is necessary to enforce this chapter, and no person
shall interfere with, hinder or molest them in the exercise of such powers.
OWNER: Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
   A.   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public
or private property;
   B.   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a
bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property, other
than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
   C.   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked,
causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
POUND: Any premises designated by the city council for the purpose of
impounding and caring for dogs and cats held under the authority of this
chapter.
RESTRAINT: A dog, under fifty (50) pounds or a cat, shall be deemed to be under
restraint if it is on the premises of its owner or if accompanied by a
responsible person and under that person's effective control. A dog of fifty
(50) pounds or more shall be deemed to be under restraint if it is in a kennel,
an enclosed or fenced yard, or if on a leash accompanied by a responsible
person. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any dog or cat over six
(6) months of age without first obtaining a license therefor from the police
department. Applications for the license shall be made on forms prescribed by
the police department. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Fee: Licenses shall be valid for the lifetime of the dog or cat for
which it was issued and shall be issued only upon payment of a fee to the
police department, which fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Rabies Immunization Required: Every application for a dog license shall
be accompanied by a certificate from a qualified veterinarian showing that the
dog to be licensed has been given a vaccination against rabies within the time
hereinafter specified. The owner shall keep the rabies vaccination current for
any dog licensed hereunder and shall furnish proof thereof upon request to the
city. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-4: DOGS AND CATS UNDER RESTRAINT:
All dogs and cats shall be kept under restraint. Any dog or cat running at
large is hereby declared to be a nuisance subject to the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-5: OBLIGATION TO PREVENT NUISANCES:
It shall be the obligation and responsibility of the owner or custodian of any
animal in the city, whether permanently or temporarily therein, to prevent such
animal from committing any act which constitutes a nuisance. It shall be
considered a nuisance for any animal to habitually or frequently bark or cry,
to frequent school grounds, parks, or public beaches, to chase vehicles, to
molest or annoy any person if such person is not on the property of the owner
or custodian of such animal, or to molest, defile or destroy any property,
public or private. Because keeping more than four (4) cats and/or dogs on the
same premises, unless that premises is a licensed kennel, is subject to great
abuse, causing discomfort to persons in the area by way of smell, noise,
hazard, and general aesthetic depreciation, the keeping of more than four (4)
cats and/or dogs (not more than 3 of which can be dogs), on the premises for
more than four (4) consecutive days is hereby declared to be a nuisance; except
that a fresh litter of puppies or kittens may be kept for a period of six (6)
months before that keeping shall be deemed a nuisance. Failure on the part of
the owner or custodian to prevent such animal from committing an act of
nuisance shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter provided. (Ord. 897, 4-5-
2010)
5-4-6: IMPOUNDMENT:
Unrestrained dogs or cats may be taken by any "officer" as hereinbefore defined
and impounded in the city pound and there confined in a humane manner.
Impounded dogs and cats shall be kept for five (5) business days unless
reclaimed prior to that time by their owner as provided hereafter. A business
day is one during which the city offices are open for business to the public.
(Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-7: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Upon taking up and impounding any dog or cat, the poundmaster shall, within one
day thereafter, post for three (3) days in two (2) or more conspicuous places
in the city a notice of impounding and mail a copy of these to the owner if the
name and address of the owner is known. Impoundment records shall be preserved
for a minimum of six (6) months and shall show:
   A.   The description of the animal by species, sex, approximate age, and
other distinguishing traits;
   B.   The location at which the animal was seized;
   C.   The date of seizure;
   D.   The name and address of the person from whom any animal three (3)
months of age or over was received; and
   E.   The name and address of the person to whom any animal three (3) months
of age or over was transferred. If unclaimed, such animal shall be humanely
destroyed and the carcass disposed of, unless it is requested by a licensed
educational or scientific institution under authority of Minnesota statutes
section 35.71, or a suitable home is found for the dog or cat. (Ord. 897, 4-5-
2010)
5-4-8: REDEMPTION:
Any dog or cat may be reclaimed from the city pound by its owner within the
time specified in the notice by the payment to the police department of the
license fee with an impounding fee and a boarding fee for each day or fraction
of a day that said dog or cat has been confined as the cost of boarding, both
of which fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. Notwithstanding
this section, the owner shall remain subject to all other penalties contained
in this chapter. (Ord. 911, 3-7-2011)
5-4-9: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS OR CATS:
Any dog or cat which is not claimed as provided in section
5-4-8 of this chapter, within five (5) days after impounding, may be sold with
the proceeds applied to the cost of confinement and sale, and the balance
returned to the city. If, after making reasonable efforts to sell the dog or
cat, no sale is obtained, the dog or cat may be humanely destroyed or given
away. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-10: PERMISSIBLE RETURN OF UNRESTRAINED ANIMAL:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
5-4-6 of this chapter, if an animal is found unrestrained and its owner can be
identified and located, such animal need not be impounded but may, instead, be
taken to the owner. In such case, however, proceedings may be taken against the
owner for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-11: CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN ANIMALS:
Every female animal in heat shall be confined in a building or other secure
enclosure, in such manner that such female animal cannot come into contact with
another animal, except for planned breeding. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-12: OWNER OBLIGATION FOR PROPER CARE:
No owner shall fail to provide any animal with sufficient good and wholesome
food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. No person
shall beat, treat cruelly, torment or otherwise abuse any animal, or cause or
permit any dogfight. No owner of a dog or cat shall abandon such animal. (Ord.
897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-13: QUARANTINE OF CERTAIN ANIMALS:
Any animal which bites a person shall be quarantined for such time as may be
directed by the city health officer. During quarantine the animal shall be
securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal. At the
discretion of the health officer the quarantine may be on the premises of the
owner; however, if the health officer requires other confinement, the owner
shall surrender the animal for the quarantine period to the city pound or shall
at the owner's own expense, place it in a veterinary hospital. (Ord. 911, 3-7-
2011)
5-4-14: PROCEEDINGS FOR DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS OR CATS:
   A.   Sworn Complaint; Issue Summons: Upon sworn complaint to a court of
proper jurisdiction that any one of the following facts exist:
      1.   That any dog or cat at any time has destroyed property or habitually
trespasses in a damaging manner on the property of persons other than the
owner;
      2.   That any dog is a "potentially dangerous dog" as heretofore defined;
      3.   That any dog or cat is a public nuisance as heretofore defined; or
      4.   That any dog or cat is running at large in violation of this
chapter;
the presiding officer of said court shall issue a summons directed to the owner
of said dog or cat commanding such owner to appear before said court to show
cause why said dog or cat should not be seized by any police officer, or
otherwise disposed of in the manner authorized in this chapter.
   B.   Hearing; Court Order: Such summons shall be returnable not less than
two (2) nor more than six (6) days from the date thereof and shall be served at
least two (2) days before the time of appearance mentioned therein. Upon such
hearing and finding the facts true as complained of, the court may either order
the dog or cat killed or order the owner or custodian to remove it from the
city, or may order the owner or custodian to keep it confined to a designated
place. If the owner or custodian violates such order, any police officer may
impound any dog or cat described in such order. The provisions of this section
are in addition to and supplemental to other provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Costs Of Proceedings: Costs of the proceeding specified by this section
shall be assessed against the owner or custodian of the dog or cat, if the
facts in the complaint are found to be true; or to the complainant, if the
facts are found to be untrue. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-15: SUMMARY DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS:
Whenever a police officer or a person designated by the city manager has
reasonable cause to believe that a particular dog presents a clear and
immediate danger to residents of the city because it is infected with rabies
(hydrophobia) or because of a clearly demonstrated vicious nature, the officer,
after making reasonable attempts to impound such dog, may summarily destroy
said dog. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-16: KENNELS:
No person shall maintain in this city a kennel without securing a license
therefor from the city council. The license fee shall be as set by resolution
of the city council. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-17: DOGS AND CATS BELONGING TO NONRESIDENTS:
The sections of this chapter requiring a license shall not apply to
nonresidents of the city; provided, that dogs and cats of such owners shall not
be kept in the city longer than thirty (30) days without a license and shall be
kept under restraint. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-18: DOGS DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in possession, or harbor
any canine which frequently or habitually howls, yelps or barks to the
reasonable annoyance of another person. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
5-4-19: PENALTY:
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor,
and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 897, 4-5-2010)
CHAPTER 5
CURFEW
SECTION:
5-5-1: Curfew Hours
5-5-2: Parent's Responsibility
5-5-3: Establishment Owner's Responsibility
5-5-4: Compliance With Other Laws
5-5-1: CURFEW HOURS:
   A.   Under Fifteen Years: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of fifteen (15) years to be on or present at any public place, street, road,
alley, park, playground or any vacant property or unsupervised place in the
City between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
of the following day, unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or
adult person having the lawful custody or control of such person, or unless
there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact that said minor person
not accompanied by said parent, guardian or other person having legal custody
or control is found upon any public place, street, road, alley, park,
playground or any vacant property or unsupervised place after ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. or before five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day shall be prima
facie evidence that said minor person is there unlawfully and that no
reasonable excuse exists therefor.
   B.   Between Fifteen And Eighteen Years: It shall be unlawful for any minor
person between the ages of fifteen (15) years and eighteen (18) years of age to
be on or present at any public place, street, alley, road, park, playground or
any vacant property or unsupervised place between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day unless
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or adult person having the lawful
custody or control of such person or unless there exists reasonable necessity
therefor, except that the curfew laws relating to said minors shall be from
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following
day on Friday nights and Saturday nights. The fact that said minor person not
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having legal
custody or control is found upon any public place, street, road, alley,
playground or any vacant property or unsupervised place during the curfew hours
as set forth above in this Section shall be prima facie evidence that said
minor person is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse exists therefor.
(Ch. 276, 3-17-1959)
5-5-2: PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the lawful
care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
allow or permit such person to violate the provisions of section
5-5-1 of this Chapter. (Ch. 276, 3-17-1959)
5-5-3: ESTABLISHMENT OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any place of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment, or other place of business, to permit
any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter, loaf or idle in such
place during the hours prohibited by this Chapter. Whenever the owner or person
in charge or in control of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment,
or other place of business shall find persons under the age of eighteen (18)
years loitering, loafing or idling in such place of business, said owner shall
immediately order such person to leave, and if such person refuses to leave the
said place of business, the operator shall immediately notify the Police
Department and inform them of the violation. (Ch. 276, 3-17-1959)
5-5-4: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
This Chapter shall not be construed as permitting the presence at any time of
any person under the age of eighteen (18) years in any place where his or her
presence is prohibited by any existing law. (Ch. 276, 3-17-1959; amd. 1998
Code)
CHAPTER 6
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5-6-1: Declarations Of Fair Housing Policy
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Prohibited Acts In Regard To Housing
5-6-4: Enforcement Procedures
5-6-5: Statute Of Limitations
5-6-6: Civil Enforcement Procedure
5-6-1: DECLARATIONS OF FAIR HOUSING POLICY:
Status with regard to public assistance and discrimination with regard to
housing on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or familial status adversely
affects the health, welfare, peace and safety of the community. Persons subject
to such discrimination suffer depressed living conditions and create conditions
which endanger the public peace and order. The public policy of the City is
declared to be to foster equal opportunity for all to obtain decent, safe and
sanitary housing without regard to their status with regard to public
assistance, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status,
disability, sexual orientation, or familial status and strictly in accord with
their individual merits as human beings. It is also the policy of the City to
protect all persons from all unfounded charges of discrimination. (Ord. 530,
11-20-1978; amd. 1998 Code)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms, phrases, words and their
deviations shall have the meanings given in Minnesota Statutes section 363.01,
as amended, unless the context otherwise indicates. (1998 Code)
5-6-3: PROHIBITED ACTS IN REGARD TO HOUSING:
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice to violate any of the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 363 in the sale, lease or rental of
any housing unit or units. (1998 Code)
5-6-4: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Enforcement Agency: The Housing and Redevelopment Authority in and for
the City (hereinafter referred to as "HRA") is designated as the enforcement
agency for this Chapter and shall have the power to receive, hear and determine
complaints as provided herein.
   B.   Investigate Violations; Exercise Criminal Or Civil Procedures: The HRA
shall promptly investigate, upon complaint or upon its own motion, any
violations of this Chapter. If after investigation, it shall have reason to
believe a violation has occurred, it may refer the matter to the City Attorney
for criminal prosecution, initiate civil enforcement procedures as herein
provided, or enter into a settlement agreement which, when approved by the HRA,
shall have the same force as an HRA order. (Ord. 530, 11-20-1978)
5-6-5: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
No action may be brought for civil enforcement or criminal prosecution unless
the charge of alleged discriminatory practice was filed with the City within
one year from the occurrence of the practice. (Ord. 530, 11-20-1978; amd. 1998
Code)
5-6-6: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
Civil enforcement procedures shall be prosecuted by the City Manager for the
HRA in the following manner:
   A.   The City Manager shall serve upon the respondent by certified mail a
complaint, signed by him or her, which shall set forth a clear and concise
statement of the facts constituting the violation, set a time and place for
hearing, and advise the respondent of his or her right to file an answer, to
appear in person or by an attorney, and to examine and cross-examine witnesses.
   B.   The hearing shall not be less than twenty (20) days after service of
the complaint. At any time prior to the hearing the respondent may file an
answer. Facts not denied by answer shall be deemed admitted. If the answer sets
out new matter, it shall be deemed denied by the HRA.
   C.   The complaint or answer may be amended at any given time prior to the
hearing with the consent of the opposing party.
   D.   Hearings shall be before the HRA.
   E.   The HRA may obtain subpoenas from the District Court to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at any hearing.
   F.   If, at hearing, the HRA shall conclude that a violation has occurred,
it shall prepare an order which may contain any provision deemed desirable to
do justice to the complainant or to prevent further violations. It may include
provisions which require the respondent to rent, sell or lease particular
housing to the complainant, or to do any other thing as may be just. The HRA's
findings of fact and order shall be served on the respondent and City Manager
by mail and shall become the findings and order of the HRA unless, within ten
(10) days after mailing of the findings and order, the HRA shall revoke or
amend the order, but any order of the HRA may be modified by the HRA at any
time. (Ord. 530, 11-20-1978)
CHAPTER 7
DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-7-1: Disposal Of Unclaimed Property
5-7-1: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
The Police Department shall have custody of any property lawfully coming into
the possession of the City in the course of Municipal operations and remaining
unclaimed by the owner. The Police Department shall dispose of such property
according to the provisions of this Chapter. After the property has been in the
possession of the City for a period of at least sixty (60) days, such property
may be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale or by a private
sale through a nonprofit organization that has a significant mission of
community service. Any sale by public auction must comply with the procedures
of State law for such sale. The proceeds of any such sale shall be paid into
the General Fund of the City, subject to the right of the former owner to
payment of the sale price from the Fund upon application and satisfactory proof
of ownership within six (6) months of the sale. In the alternative, the City
may retain any such property for public purposes. (Ord. 767, 8-21-1995)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: State Traffic Regulations Adopted
6-1-2: Weight Limitations; Truck Routes
6-1-3: Unreasonable Acceleration
6-1-4: Liquor, Open Bottle Regulations
6-1-5: Inattentive Driving
6-1-6: Bicycles
6-1-7: Penalty
6-1-8: Definitions
6-1-9: School Zone; Speed Limit
6-1-1: STATE TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The state of Minnesota highway traffic regulations act, being Minnesota
statutes chapter 169, together with amendments thereto, is hereby adopted and
shall be in full force and effect in the city insofar as the same is applicable
to cities in the fourth class and is hereby made a part of this title in its
entirety and as fully as though the same were written herein. Three (3) copies
of this chapter, including the state of Minnesota highway traffic regulations
act, shall be filed by the clerk in the clerk's office for inspection and use
of the public and shall be marked with the words "Official Copy, City of
Montevideo". (Ch. 254, 11-27-1956)
6-1-2: WEIGHT LIMITATIONS; TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   Necessity: The city council hereby finds that heavy traffic by vehicles
in excess of five (5) tons per axle is causing extensive damage to the city
streets resulting in inconvenience and expense to the general public, and that
in order to preserve the streets of the city for public use, it is necessary to
restrict their use as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Certain Vehicles Prohibited On City Streets: Except as otherwise
provided in this section, no vehicle with a gross weight of more than five (5)
tons per axle shall be driven or parked upon any street within the city limits.
   C.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to state or county highways
nor to any street designated by a sign as a truck route, and it shall not apply
to school buses, garbage trucks or public utility vehicles when travel on the
streets is required in connection with providing service, and in cases of
emergency or for purposes of making deliveries or providing service, permission
for temporary use of a street may be granted by the city manager or chief of
police. (Ord. 552, 7-22-1980)
   D.   Substandard Streets: On streets designated by the city council as
substandard in size, shape or form, subject to exceptions allowed in subsection
C of this section, no motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors or other
commercial vehicles exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity will be
allowed. The following streets are designated as substandard:
 
Street                               Area          Ord. No.
Coleman Avenue (narrow right of way) Entire length 901
 
(Ord. 901, 9-7-2010)
6-1-3: UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION:
No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an unnecessary
exhibition of speed on any public or private way within the city. Prima facie
evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be squealing or
screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by
tires of said vehicles. (Ord. 452, 11-5-1973)
6-1-4: LIQUOR, OPEN BOTTLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Applicable Premises: No person shall drink or consume intoxicating
liquors, or 3.2 percent malt liquors, in any motor vehicle when such vehicle is
upon a public highway, street or alley within the city or upon a parking lot
within the city which is owned or maintained by the city or by any other
governmental unit or governmental agency.
   B.   Persons In Possession Of Open Containers: No person shall have in his
or her possession or on his or her person whether or not in a motor vehicle
while upon a public highway, street or alley within the city, or upon a parking
lot within the city owned or maintained by the city, or by any other
governmental unit or governmental agency any bottle or receptacle containing
intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor which has been opened or the
seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed.
   C.   Open Containers In Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
private motor vehicle, or the driver if the owner be not then present in the
motor vehicle, to keep or allow to be kept in the motor vehicle when such
vehicle is upon a public highway, street or alley within the city, or upon a
parking lot within the city owned or maintained by the city or by any other
governmental unit or governmental agency, any bottle or receptacle containing
intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquors which has been opened or the
seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed, except when
such bottle or receptacle be kept in the trunk of the motor vehicle when such
vehicle is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not
normally occupied by the driver or passengers if the motor vehicle is not
equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment shall be
deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and passengers. (Ord. 513,
7-5-1977)
6-1-5: INATTENTIVE DRIVING:
Inattentive driving shall be considered a lesser offense than careless driving
and shall be applicable in those circumstances where the conduct of the
operator has been inattentive or imprudent, in light of the circumstances then
existing rather than heedless or wanton, or in those cases where the danger to
persons or property by the motor vehicle operator's conduct is slight. (Ord.
533, 1-2-1979)
6-1-6: BICYCLES:
The provisions of the above entitled traffic act so far as it relates to the
operation and condition of bicycles shall apply to the operation and condition
of bicycles within the city and no person shall use or ride a bicycle upon any
highway, street, alley, sidewalk or other public property within the city
unless the bicycle is registered with the state as provided in Minnesota
statutes section 168C.13; provided, that it shall not be a violation of this
section to use or ride a bicycle within the city if, prior to March 1, 1977,
the bicycle was registered with the city and at the time of the use or riding
of the bicycle the license tag issued by the city is attached to the bicycle.
(Ord. 508, 6-6-1977)
6-1-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter together with any
provision of the traffic act hereby adopted shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and punishable as provided by section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ch. 254, 11-27-1956; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-8: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them:
AVENUE: Any public street, avenue, lane, court, circle, drive or other public
thoroughfare, except alleys, maintained by the city of Montevideo that runs
generally east and west or has an east/west entrance.
STREET: Any public street, avenue, lane, court, circle, drive or other public
thoroughfare, except alleys, maintained by the city of Montevideo that runs
generally north and south or has a north/south entrance. (Ord. 846, 4-5-2004)
6-1-9: SCHOOL ZONE; SPEED LIMIT:
The following streets and avenues are designated as a school zone for purposes
of Minnesota statutes chapter 169:
Hamilton Avenue between 4th Street and 6th Street.
Ost Avenue between 4th Street and 6th Street.
Park Avenue between 13th Street and 17th Street.
William Avenue between 13th Street and 21st Street, except that portion not
adjacent to school property.
4th Street between Hamilton Avenue and Ost Avenue.
6th Street between Hamilton Avenue and Ost Avenue.
13th Street between Nichols Avenue and William Avenue.
17th Street between Buckeye Drive and William Avenue.
21st Street between William Avenue and Park Avenue.
The city council, by resolution, shall designate the speed limit in a school
zone. The speed limit so designated shall be in effect when children are
present, going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours, or during
school recess. The school speed limit shall be effective upon the erection of
appropriate signs designating the speed and indicating the beginning and end of
the reduced speed zone. (Ord. 894, 10-19-2009)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Limited Parking
6-2-2: Certain Vehicles And Parking Restricted
6-2-3: School Zones
6-2-4: Snow Removal; Parking Restricted
6-2-5: Towing
6-2-6: Penalty
6-2-7: Downtown Business District; Parking Restricted
6-2-8: Authorization
6-2-1: LIMITED PARKING:
From October 15 to April 15 of every year, it is unlawful for any person to
continuously park for more than twenty four (24) hours, or cause to remain
continuously for more than twenty four (24) hours, on any street or highway
within the city, any automobile, other motor vehicle whether or not such
vehicle is in a condition permitting it to be operated, trailer, camper, boat
or other similar vehicle. Any such vehicle which is parked or permitted to
remain on any street or highway within the city for more than forty eight (48)
hours may be removed by the city, or someone authorized so to do by a contract
with the city, and impounded and released or disposed of pursuant to Minnesota
statutes section 168B.01 et seq., relating to abandoned vehicles. From April 15
to October 15 of every year it is unlawful for any person to continuously park
for more than forty eight (48) hours, or cause to remain continuously for more
than forty eight (48) hours, on any street or highway within the city, any
automobile, other motor vehicle whether or not such vehicle is in a condition
permitting it to be operated, trailer, camper, boat or other similar vehicle.
Any such vehicle which is parked or permitted to remain on any street or
highway within the city for more than seventy two (72) hours may be removed by
the city, or someone authorized so to do by a contract with the city, and
impounded and released or disposed of pursuant to Minnesota statutes section
168B.01 et seq., relating to abandoned vehicles. Any vehicle so impounded shall
not be released until towing and storage charges have been paid. The payment of
such towing and storage charges shall not relieve any person from paying a fine
for such illegal parking which may be imposed by the court. (Ord. 896, 12-21-
2009)
6-2-2: CERTAIN VEHICLES AND PARKING RESTRICTED:
   A.   Vehicles On City Residential Streets:
      1.   Vehicle Capacity Over One Ton: Except where necessary for loading
and unloading or for construction or other temporary work, no person shall park
or cause to remain on any street or highway within any residential area of the
city any truck- tractor, trailer or any other vehicle with a capacity of more
than one ton, or any commercially licensed truck or trailer during the hours of
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or for a period exceeding
eight (8) hours in any twenty four (24) hour period.
      2.   Trailers: No trailer of any kind, not attached to a vehicle, or any
attached vehicle and trailer exceeding thirty feet (30') in total length, may
remain on any city street or highway within any residential area during the
hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or for a period
exceeding eight (8) hours in any twenty four (24) hour period.
      3.   Motor Homes: No motor home or recreational vehicle exceeding thirty
feet (30') in length or six feet (6') wide, may remain on any city street or
highway within any residential area during the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or for a period exceeding eight (8) hours in any
twenty four (24) hour period. (Ord. 930, 9-15-2014)
      4.   Boat And Trailer: No boat and trailer of any kind not attached to a
vehicle, or any boat and trailer attached to a vehicle exceeding thirty feet
(30') in total length, may remain on any city street or highway within any
residential area during the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. or for a period exceeding eight (8) hours in any twenty four (24) hour
period. (Ord. 935, 2-17-2015)
      5.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to: a) any motor vehicle
being used by a public utility, moving company or similar company while it is
actually being used to service a residence not belonging to or occupied by the
operator of the vehicle; b) any motor vehicle used in conjunction with an
authorized construction site during a period that construction is actually
taking place, including nonworking hours and holidays; c) vehicles in the
process of loading or delivering to a residence not belonging to or occupied by
the operator of the vehicle.
In no case may subsections A5a and A5c of this section remain in place over
forty eight (48) hours without the owner obtaining a right of way permit from
the city. The city has the right to deny or limit the use of these permits.
Subsection A5b of this section may remain in place from sunrise Monday to
sunset Friday so long as there is substantial active construction during that
time. In all events the city's winter parking rules supersede these exceptions.
(Ord. 938, 9-8-2015)
   B.   Commercial Vehicles On Residentially Zoned Private Property: One
commercial vehicle and one commercial trailer, may be parked at the owner's or
operator's residence, on private property, in an approved off street parking
area as provided in section
11-13-20 of this code. Additional commercial vehicles or trailers are allowed
in a permitted, fully enclosed garage or similar permanent structure.
   C.   Other Uses Of City Streets: No city street, highway, park or publicly
owned land or right of way may be used to store any materials, equipment or any
other item without a right of way permit from the city. The city has the right
to deny or limit the use of these permits. (Ord. 930, 9-15-2014)
6-2-3: SCHOOL ZONES:
The chief of police is authorized to designate no parking zones on property
open to the public owned by Independent school district 129, and to have such
zones identified with "No Parking" signs. Such zones shall be at locations
approved by the school district, and shall be where parking would impede the
flow of traffic or obstruct access by fire or other emergency vehicles. (Ord.
473, 2-18-1975)
6-2-4: SNOW REMOVAL; PARKING RESTRICTED:
   A.   Parking Restricted; Avenues And First Street: From October 15 to April
15 of each year, no person shall park any motor vehicle, as such is defined in
the traffic laws of the state, or permit any such motor vehicle to remain on
any avenue or First Street when snow has accumulated and when, as determined by
the city manager, or someone designated by the city manager, the plowing of
snow is required until such avenue or First Street has been plowed to its full
width. (Ord. 811, 3-5-2001)
   B.   Parking Restricted; Streets (Except First Street): In order to
facilitate the removal of snow from the streets of the city, the city manager
is hereby granted authority to declare a snow emergency when the removal of
snow from the streets becomes advisable. During any such snow emergency
declared by the city manager, or someone authorized by the city manager so to
do, no person shall park any motor vehicle, as such is defined in the traffic
laws of the state or permit any such motor vehicle to remain on any street
(except First Street) between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day within any residential area within the city
whether or not such area be zoned as residential; provided, however, that in
any day during such snow emergency in the event streets have been plowed to
their full width cars may be parked on such street during the balance of that
day. In declaring any snow emergency, the city manager or the city manager's
representative shall state the duration of the emergency, but if conditions
warrant, the emergency may be extended by further declarations of snow
emergencies. (Ord. 891, 10-5-2009)
   C.   Vehicle Impounded: Any motor vehicle parked or which is permitted to
remain on any street or avenue in violation of this chapter may be immediately
removed and impounded as provided in section
6-2-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 811, 3-5-2001)
6-2-5: TOWING:
Any vehicle which, within a ninety (90) day period, receives three (3) tickets
for violations of any of the following:
   A.   A posted parking restriction;
   B.   Provisions of this chapter;
   C.   Other provisions of this code regulating parking; or
   D.   Provisions of state statutes regulating parking;
upon receiving the third such ticket for the same offense, may be removed by
the city or someone authorized to do so by a contract with the city, and
impounded and released or disposed of pursuant to Minnesota statutes section
168B.01 et seq., relating to abandoned vehicles. Any vehicle so impounded shall
not be released until towing and storage charges have been paid. The payment of
such towing and storage charges shall not relieve any person from paying a fine
for such parking violation which may be imposed by the court. (Ord. 615, 5-7-
1984)
6-2-6: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a petty misdemeanor punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
6-2-7: DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT; PARKING RESTRICTED:
No person shall park any motor vehicle, as such is defined in the traffic laws
of the state, or permit any such motor vehicle to remain parked, along 1st
Street in the city between State Road and Canton Avenue continuously for more
than two (2) hours, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. No person shall park any motor vehicle along 1st Street
between State Road and Canton Avenue between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 892, 10-5-2009)
6-2-8: AUTHORIZATION:
The chief of police is authorized to forbid parking of all vehicles or close
streets for temporary periods in case of emergency or other temporary need at
any place within the city. (Ord. 853, 10-17-2005)
CHAPTER 3
ONE-WAY STREETS
(REP. Ord. 958, 7-20-2020)
CHAPTER 4
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: County, State And Interstate Highways; Restrictions
6-4-3: Crossing Streets Or Highways
6-4-4: Emergencies
6-4-5: Traffic Laws And Rules Control Operation
6-4-6: Operation Generally
6-4-7: Equipment Required
6-4-8: Unattended Vehicles On Public Property Prohibited
6-4-9: Permission To Enter Private Property Required
6-4-10: Public Lands And Streets
6-4-11: Prohibited In Areas Dangerous To Persons Or Property
6-4-12: Penalty
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the terms defined herein shall have the
meaning ascribed to them as hereinafter set forth:
COMMISSIONER: The commissioner of natural resources acting directly or through
his or her authorized agent.
DAYLIGHT HOURS: Any time except from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-
half (1/2) hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not
sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles at a
distance of five hundred feet (500').
OPERATE: To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
OWNER: A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a
snowmobile entitled to the use or possession thereof.
PERSON: Includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee,
association, the state and its agencies and subdivisions and any body of
persons, whether incorporated or not, and with respect to acts prohibited or
required herein shall include employees and licensees.
REGISTER: The act of assigning a registration number to a snowmobile by the
commissioner of natural resources.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or a
natural terrain steered by skis or runners.
STREETS, ALLEYS OR HIGHWAY: The entire right of way of a public road, including
the traveled portion, banks, ditches, shoulders, boulevards, and medians of a
roadway, that is not privately owned. (Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
6-4-2: COUNTY, STATE AND INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS; RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon the roadway, shoulder or inside bank
or slope of any trunk or county state-aid highway in the city except as
provided in this chapter. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the right
of way of any trunk or county state-aid highway between the hours of one-half
(1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise. No snowmobile
shall be operated at any time within the right of way of any interstate highway
or freeway within the city. (Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
6-4-3: CROSSING STREETS OR HIGHWAYS:
A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway provided:
   A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°)
to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing; and
   B.   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway; and
   C.   The driver yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
   D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway. (Ord. 913,
2-21-2012)
6-4-4: EMERGENCIES:
A snowmobile may be operated upon a public street or highway other than as
provided by sections
6-4-3 and
6-4-10 of this chapter in an emergency during the period of time when and at
locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.
(Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
6-4-5: TRAFFIC LAWS AND RULES CONTROL OPERATION:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all provisions of Minnesota
statutes chapter 169, regulating traffic and the operation of motor vehicles
upon streets or highways shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon
streets and highways, except for those relating to required equipment, and
except those which by their nature can have no application. (Ord. 913, 2-21-
2012)
6-4-6: OPERATION GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile in the
following unsafe or harassing ways:
   A.   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the
surrounding circumstances; but not to exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour or the
legal speed limit if the legal speed limit is less than fifteen (15) miles per
hour;
   B.   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto;
   C.   While under the influence of alcohol or narcotics or habit forming
drugs;
   D.   Without a lighted head and tail light at any time, day or night, when
operating upon the streets or alleys in the city;
   E.   In any tree nursery or any shrub or tree planting, in a manner which
damages or destroys growing stock, or landscaping on private or public
property;
   F.   Other than in single file and on the right hand side of any street and
with spaces between snowmobiles of not less than twenty five feet (25');
   G.   Towing any toboggan or sled upon a street without a rigid connection;
   H.   In failing to yield the right of way to vehicles at intersections and
elsewhere on the streets of Montevideo. (Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
6-4-7: EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a snowmobile within the right of way limits of a
street, highway or alley within the city, unless it is equipped with:
   A.   Brakes: Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold such vehicle under any conditions of operation.
   B.   Headlamp: At least one headlamp so aimed and of sufficient intensity to
reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least one hundred feet (100')
ahead during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. Such
headlamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of
an oncoming driver.
   C.   Rear Lamp: At least one rear lamp exhibiting a red light plainly
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear during hours of
darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
   D.   Mufflers: Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which
reduce the noise of operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for
operating the vehicle, and no person shall use a muffler cut out, bypass or
similar device on said vehicles.
   E.   Safety Throttle: A safety or "dead man" throttle which is defined as a
device which, when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes
the motor to be disengaged from the driving track. (Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
6-4-8: UNATTENDED VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to be
or remain unattended on public property, streets or highways, while the motor
is running or with the keys to start same in the ignition switch. (Ord. 913, 2-
21-2012)
6-4-9: PERMISSION TO ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY REQUIRED:
No person, while operating a snowmobile, shall enter upon the lands of another
unless and until permission is obtained from the owner or lessee, if there be
one. (Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
6-4-10: PUBLIC LANDS AND STREETS:
Snowmobiles may be operated on public lands and streets only as permitted by
this section:
   A.   No person shall operate a snowmobile on any publicly owned land,
including, but not limited to, school grounds, park property, playgrounds and
recreation areas, except areas previously listed or authorized for such use by
the proper public authority, in which case such use shall be lawful and
snowmobiles may be driven in and out of such areas by the shortest route from
the residence of the operator or from the city limits.
   B.   Snowmobiles may be operated on city streets and alleys other than Black
Oak Avenue, Highway 7, First Street from the railroad tracks north to
Washington Avenue, Parkway Drive, and First Street west for the following
purposes only:
      1.   Going to and from a recreational area or the city limits by the
shortest available route from the residence of the operator; or
      2.   Between the city limits and a recreational area, restaurant, gas
station or other similar service provider.
One-way street requirements must be observed in the same manner as required of
other vehicles.
   C.   Snowmobiles may be operated on snowmobile trails designated by the city
through Lagoon and Wildwood Parks for the purpose of going to and from the
Chippewa River. All such designations shall be made with the approval of the
city council.
   D.   No snowmobile may be operated within the city limits between the hours
of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. except in an emergency.
   E.   No snowmobile may be operated on any bike trails within the city
limits. (Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
6-4-11: PROHIBITED IN AREAS DANGEROUS TO PERSONS OR PROPERTY:
No person shall drive a snowmobile within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any
skating rink or sliding area, or in any other area where such operation would
conflict with use or endanger other persons or property, except on streets as
herein provided, which may pass closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') to
such area. (Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
6-4-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code, or the court, in its discretion, may provide for the
impounding of the snowmobile which has been operated in violation of this
chapter for not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 913, 2-21-2012)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Purpose
6-5-2: Definitions
6-5-3: Custody Of Abandoned Vehicles
6-5-4: Immediate Sale (Rep. by Ord. 815, 5-21-2001)
6-5-5: Notice
6-5-6: Right To Reclaim
6-5-7: Public Sale
6-5-8: Disposal Authority
6-5-9: Violations
6-5-1: PURPOSE:
Abandoned motor vehicles constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of the
people of the city in that such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish
shelter and breeding places for vermin, and present physical dangers to the
safety and well being of children and other citizens. Abandoned motor vehicles
and other scrap metals also constitute a blight on the landscape of the city
and, therefore, a detriment to the environment. The abandonment and retirement
of motor vehicles constitutes a waste of a valuable source of useful metal. It
is, therefore, in the public interest that the present accumulation of
abandoned motor vehicles be eliminated and that future abandonment of motor
vehicles be prevented. (Ord. 619, 8-20-1984)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have the
meanings given to them in this section:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE: An unlicensed motor vehicle; a motor vehicle lacking
vital component parts; a motor vehicle which is in an inoperable condition; a
motor vehicle which has remained for a period of more than forty eight (48)
hours on public property illegally; a motor vehicle which has remained on
private property for more than forty eight (48) hours without the consent of
the person in control of such property; or a motor vehicle voluntarily
surrendered by its owner to and accepted by the city. For purposes of this
definition, motor vehicle shall include any automobile, truck, motorcycle,
scooter, race car, demolition derby car, snowmobile or any other motorized
device required to possess a license issued by the state. A vehicle shall not
be determined to be abandoned when kept in an enclosed garage or enclosed
storage building. A vehicle shall not be determined to be abandoned if it is
being actively and consistently worked on and the premises on which the work is
being done is maintained in an orderly manner; provided, that no more than one
such vehicle is in a condition that would otherwise qualify it as abandoned at
any one time and provided repairs do not exceed forty eight (48) hours in any
seven (7) day period. Vehicles on the premises of junkyards and automobile
graveyards, which are defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with
Minnesota statutes section 161.242, or which are licensed and maintained in
accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, shall not be considered
abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning of this definition. A motor vehicle
with pioneer, classic car, collector or street rod license shall be considered
an abandoned vehicle if it meets with the definition of an abandoned vehicle. A
motor vehicle on the lot of a properly zoned automobile dealership, automobile
repair garage, body shop or similar business for purposes related to that
business shall not be an abandoned motor vehicle.
CITY: The city of Montevideo.
VITAL COMPONENT PARTS: Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the
mechanical functioning of the vehicle including, but not limited to, the motor,
drive train, and wheels. (Ord. 619, 8-20-1984; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 862, 8-21-
2006; Ord. 923, 3-18-2013)
6-5-3: CUSTODY OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
The city may take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicle which is
in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 619, 8-20-1984)
6-5-4: IMMEDIATE SALE:
(Rep. by Ord. 815, 5-21-2001)
6-5-5: NOTICE:
   A.   Purpose Of Notice: The city shall give notice of the taking within five
(5) days. The notice shall:
      1.   Set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model
and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if such information can be
reasonably obtained, and place where the vehicle is being held;
      2.   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle under section
6-5-6 of this chapter; and
      3.   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle and contents shall be deemed a waiver by them of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the
sale of the vehicle and contents at a public auction pursuant to section
6-5-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 815, 5-21-2001)
   B.   Procedure Of Serving Notice: The notice shall be sent by mail to the
registered owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lienholders of record. If it is impossible to determine with
reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all
lienholders, the notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. Published notices may be grouped together for
convenience and economy. (Ord. 619, 8-20-1984; amd. 1998 Code)
6-5-6: RIGHT TO RECLAIM:
   A.   Pay Costs Of Impoundment: The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned
motor vehicle shall have the right to reclaim such vehicle from the city upon
payment of all towing and storage charges and other costs resulting from taking
the vehicle into custody within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice
required by section
6-5-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Mechanic's Lien: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair
any lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of a
lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, "garage keeper" is
an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles. (Ord. 619, 8-20-1984)
6-5-7: PUBLIC SALE:
   A.   Rights Of Purchaser: If an abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken
into custody and not reclaimed under section
6-5-6 of this chapter is sold at public auction or sale, it shall be sold to
the highest bidder following reasonable published notice of such auction or
sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the
registrar of motor vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the
vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle
and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   B.   Unsold Vehicles: Abandoned motor vehicles not sold pursuant to
subsection A of this section, shall be disposed of in accordance with section
6-5-8 of this chapter.
   C.   Cost Reimbursement To City: From the proceeds of a sale under this
section of an abandoned motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the
cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative,
notice and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this
chapter. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner
of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days and then shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city. (Ord. 619, 8-20-1984)
6-5-8: DISPOSAL AUTHORITY:
The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of abandoned motor vehicles and, if no bids are
received, may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles; provided, however, that
the city may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection and
storage of not more than five (5) abandoned motor vehicles without advertising
for or receiving bids in any one hundred twenty (120) day period. (Ord. 619, 8-
20-1984)
6-5-9: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private
property, or otherwise violates this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   No person shall permit any abandoned vehicles to remain on his or her
premises at any time. (Ord. 923, 3-18-2013)
CHAPTER 6
GOLF CARTS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Authorization To Use Motorized Golf Carts
6-6-2: Designated Roadways
6-6-3: Permit Required
6-6-4: Conditions
6-6-5: Revocation Or Denial Of Permit
6-6-6: Limitation Of Liability
6-6-1: AUTHORIZATION TO USE MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS:
The operation of motorized golf carts on designated roadways within the city by
persons having a valid permit issued by the city is hereby authorized. (Ord.
816, 8-6-2001)
6-6-2: DESIGNATED ROADWAYS:
All city streets and avenues shall be designated motorized golf cart routes. No
United States, state of Minnesota, or county highway or road shall be a
designated roadway nor shall any city alley be a designated roadway. (Ord. 816,
8-6-2001)
6-6-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every person who operates a motorized golf cart on city streets shall first
obtain a permit from the city clerk. Each application for a permit shall give
the name and address of the applicant, evidence of insurance which meets the
requirements of Minnesota statutes section 65B.48, subdivision 5, and such
other information as the city may require. All permits expire December 31 of
the year in which the permit was issued. The city council shall set the fees
for such permits by resolution. (Ord. 816, 8-6-2001)
6-6-4: CONDITIONS:
Operation of motorized golf carts on city streets is subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated routes from
sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when
visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at any
time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons in vehicles on the
roadway at a distance of five hundred feet (500').
   B.   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow moving vehicle emblem
provided for in Minnesota statutes section 169.522 when operated.
   C.   Every person operating a motorized golf cart under permit on designated
routes has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other
vehicle under the provisions of chapter 169 of Minnesota statutes, except when
those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts and
except as otherwise specifically provided in Minnesota statutes section
169.045, subdivision 7.
   D.   Only persons at least sixteen (16) years of age are eligible for
permits. (Ord. 816, 8-6-2001)
6-6-5: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A permit may be revoked at any time or denied if it is shown the permittee
cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart on the designated routes or if
the permittee has had a valid driver's license revoked for traffic violations.
(Ord. 816, 8-6-2001)
6-6-6: LIMITATION OF LIABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the
city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the
operation of a motorized golf cart by a permit holder or the failure by the
city to revoke said permit. (Ord. 816, 8-6-2001)
CHAPTER 7
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Operation Of ATVs
6-7-3: ATV Crossing Of Public Road Right Of Way
6-7-4: Classes Of ATVs
6-7-5: Permit Required
6-7-6: Operation Prohibited
6-7-7: ATV In Public Place
6-7-8: Penalty
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATVs): Motorized flotation-tired vehicles with at least
three (3), but no more than six (6), low pressure tires that have an engine
displacement of less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) cubic centimeters
and include class 1 and class 2 ATVs.
CLASS 1 ATV: A class 1 ATV as defined by Minnesota statutes.
CLASS 2 ATV: A class 2 ATV as defined by Minnesota statutes.
OPERATE: To ride in or on and control the operation of an ATV.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of an ATV.
OWNER: A person, other than a lienholder, having a property interest in or
title to an ATV entitled to the use and possession thereof.
RIGHT OF WAY: The entire right of way of a public roadway, including the
traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders, and medians of a roadway that is
not privately owned. (Ord. 914, 2-21-2012)
6-7-2: OPERATION OF ATVs:
   A.   Except as herein specifically permitted, class 1 ATVs may not be
operated on any right of way of any street, roadway, trail or alley used for
motor vehicle travel that is under the jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   Consistent with the limitations found in the remainder of this chapter,
class 2 ATVs may be operated on the extreme right hand side of the right of way
of streets, roadways, or alleys that are used for other public motor vehicle
travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 914, 2-21-2012)
6-7-3: ATV CROSSING OF PUBLIC ROAD RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Direct Crossing: An ATV may make a direct crossing of a street or
highway, except an interstate highway or freeway, provided:
      1.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees
(90°) to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
      2.   The ATV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder
or main traveled way of the street or highway;
      3.   The operator yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard;
      4.   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only
at an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or
highway; and
      5.   When crossing between the hours of one-half (1/2) hour after sunset
to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
both front and rear lights must be illuminated.
   B.   Age Restrictions:
      1.   No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall make a direct
crossing of a street or highway as the operator of an ATV.
      2.   The owner of an ATV shall be responsible if the ATV is operated
contrary to these provisions. (Ord. 914, 2-21-2012)
6-7-4: CLASSES OF ATVs:
   A.   Operation Of Class 1 ATVs: Operation of class 1 ATVs is not permitted
in the city except for the following situations:
      1.   Law enforcement acting in an official capacity.
      2.   During city approved parades. Operation of class 1 ATVs are only
allowed from two (2) hours prior to the start of the parade and must conclude
two (2) hours after the conclusion. In addition, class 1 ATVs may only be used
under this provision to directly assist with parade functions. General use is
still prohibited.
      3.   Incidental to snow removal on property owned or occupied by the
operator or owner of the class 1 ATV.
   B.   Operation Of Class 2 ATVs: In addition to the other requirements set
forth in this chapter, operation of class 2 ATVs is permitted provided that any
class 2 ATV:
      1.   Must be primarily designed for off road, rugged terrain and
constitute what is customarily referred to by manufacturers as a class 2 ATV.
      2.   Must be operated at a rate of speed reasonable or proper under all
surrounding circumstances and in no event, at a speed greater than twenty five
(25) miles per hour, or the legal speed limit, whichever is less.
      3.   Must follow the traffic provisions of this code, except for those
provisions relating to required equipment and those which by their nature have
no application.
      4.   May not enter any intersection without yielding the right of way to
any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the
intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
      5.   Is operated by an operator who is at least eighteen (18) years of
age and has a driver's license that would allow operation of a motor vehicle in
the state of Minnesota.
      6.   A person may operate a class 2 ATV while carrying up to the number
of passengers for which the class 2 ATV was designed.
      7.   Is equipped with the following:
         a.   A rearview mirror or left and right side view mirrors, located so
as to reflect to the operator a view of the roadway for a distance of at least
two hundred feet (200') to the rear of the vehicle.
         b.   Standard mufflers as required by Minnesota rule 6102.0040,
subpart 4, which are properly attached and in constant operation, and which
reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for
operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe or
similar device on an ATV motor.
         c.   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold
the ATV under normal operating conditions.
         d.   A safety or so called "dead man throttle" in operating condition.
A safety or "dead man throttle" is defined as a device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving track.
         e.   At least two (2) clear headlamps and two (2) red taillights. Such
headlamps and taillights are to be lit at all times while operating class 2
ATVs.
The headlamps must have sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at
a distance of at least one hundred feet (100') ahead during the hours of
darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. Such headlights shall be aimed so
that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming ATV or other
motor vehicle operator. The taillights must have a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the rear during hours of darkness under normal
atmospheric conditions.
         f.   Reflective material at least sixteen inches (16") square on each
side, forward of the steering wheel, so as to reflect light at a ninety degree
(90°) angle.
         g.   Seatbelts must be worn if provided on ATV. Seatbelts may not be
removed or altered. (Ord. 914, 2-21-2012)
6-7-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a class 2 ATV pursuant to this chapter without a valid
permit from the city. Permit applications shall be available at the police
department.
   A.   The city council shall set fees for such permits by resolution.
   B.   The applicant shall provide the following information in addition to
the application form:
      1.   Proof of registration of the class 2 ATV, if required by state law.
      2.   Proof of insurance, verifying that the applicant maintains liability
insurance for liabilities arising out of the maintenance or use of the class 2
ATV according to state law.
      3.   Driver's license permitting the operation of a motor vehicle in the
state of Minnesota.
   C.   An operator must have possession of a valid permit while operating a
class 2 ATV in the city.
   D.   All permits granted pursuant to this section shall be issued for a
period not to exceed one year and may be renewed annually by complying with the
requirements of this section.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption of
liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result
from: the operation of a class 2 ATV by a permit holder; the grant of such
permit; or the failure by the city to revoke said permit. (Ord. 914, 2-21-2012)
6-7-6: OPERATION PROHIBITED:
Class 2 ATVs must not be operated:
   A.   On state trunk highways and U.S. highways as provided in state law.
   B.   To tow any passengers, except that a disabled vehicle being towed by
any means may contain one human passenger if necessary to steer the vehicle.
   C.   On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel except to remove
snow from the sidewalk adjacent to the owner or operator's own premises or the
premises of another person with the specific permission of that person.
   D.   On boulevards within any public right of way.
   E.   On private property of another without specific permission of the owner
or person in control of the property.
   F.   On any other public place, except as may be specifically permitted by
other provisions of this code.
   G.   Within one hundred feet (100') of any skating rink or sliding area.
   H.   While under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in Minnesota
statute section 169A.20 as it may be amended from time to time. In addition,
open containers of alcohol are not allowed on the ATV while in operation.
   I.   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
surrounding circumstances, but in no event at a speed greater than twenty five
(25) miles per hour or the legal speed limit, whichever is less.
   J.   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard
of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or property.
   K.   So as to intentionally chase, run over, or kill any animal.
   L.   On any school, hospital, city park or cemetery grounds.
      1.   Employees of the city of Montevideo or school district may operate
on grounds as needed in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 914, 2-21-2012)
6-7-7: ATV IN PUBLIC PLACE:
Every person leaving an ATV in a public place shall lock the ignition and
remove the key. (Ord. 914, 2-21-2012)
6-7-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code, or the court, in its discretion, may provide for the
impounding of the all-terrain vehicle which has been operated in violation of
this chapter for not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 914, 2-21-2012)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Limited Parking
6-8-2: Snow Removal
6-8-3: Prohibited Parking
6-8-4: Alcoholic Beverages
6-8-5: Method Of Parking
6-8-6: Speed Limit
6-8-1: LIMITED PARKING:
Parking in municipal parking lots is subject to the following limitations:
   A.   Unless otherwise posted, no person may continuously park for more than
seven (7) days, or cause to remain continuously for more than seven (7) days,
on any municipal parking lot within the city, any automobile, other motor
vehicle, whether or not such vehicle is in a condition permitting it to be
operated, without moving to a new space.
   B.   Any such vehicle which is parked or permitted to remain on any
municipal parking lot within the city, in the same space, for more than seven
(7) continuous days may be removed by the city, or someone authorized so to do
by a contract with the city, and impounded and released or disposed of pursuant
to Minnesota statutes relating to abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 918, 5-21-2012)
6-8-2: SNOW REMOVAL:
In order to facilitate the removal of snow from the municipally owned parking
lots of the city when a snow emergency is declared for the streets, it also
applies as a snow emergency for municipally owned parking lots of the city.
During any such snow emergency, any parked motor vehicle must be moved to a new
spot within twenty four (24) hours of the lot first being plowed. Any motor
vehicle parked in violation of this section may be ticketed and/or towed in the
same manner as provided in subsection
6-2-4C of this title. (Ord. 918, 5-21-2012)
6-8-3: PROHIBITED PARKING:
No person shall permit any boat, trailer, commercial vehicles, equipment, or
other items of tangible personal property other than an unoccupied licensed
motor vehicle, to remain in a municipal parking lot for any time greater than 1
hour between sunset and sunrise. Any such item left on a municipal parking lot
after sunset shall constitute a nuisance and the city may abate the nuisance by
removing such item and placing it in the city's impound lot. It shall be dealt
with in the same manner as an impounded motor vehicle. This section shall not
apply if the city manager has granted written permission for such an item to
remain in a municipal parking lot. (Ord. 918, 5-21-2012; amd. Ord. 991, 7-8-
2024)
6-8-4: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
Except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, no alcoholic beverages and no 3.2
percent malt beverages shall be consumed on any municipal parking lot or kept
in any motor vehicle parked on any municipal parking lot in such a way as to
constitute an open bottle violation under Minnesota statutes. (Ord. 918, 5-21-
2012)
6-8-5: METHOD OF PARKING:
Every person parking a motor vehicle in a municipal parking lot shall park
within the striped parking spaces, if the parking lot is striped. No parked
motor vehicle shall occupy more than one parking space. No attachments to a
motor vehicle shall extend beyond the perimeter of the motor vehicle unless
such attachment is flagged or otherwise marked to prevent hazards to other
vehicles or pedestrians. (Ord. 918, 5-21-2012)
6-8-6: SPEED LIMIT:
The maximum speed limit for all municipal parking lots shall be ten (10) miles
per hour. (Ord. 918, 5-21-2012)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Construction Of Sidewalks
7-1-2: Construction Permit Required
7-1-3: Owner's Responsibility
7-1-4: Notice To Repair
7-1-5: Abatement By City; Recovery Of Cost
7-1-6: Awnings
7-1-7: Temporary Sidewalk Obstruction; Permit
7-1-8: Permit To Obstruct
7-1-9: Owner To Clear Sidewalk
7-1-10: Injury To Sidewalk Prohibited
7-1-11: Barricades And Warning Lights
7-1-12: Removing Barricades
7-1-13: Lug Wheels Prohibited
7-1-14: City Not Liable
7-1-15: Deposits On Streets Prohibited
7-1-16: Obstructing Public Ways
7-1-1: CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS:
All public sidewalks constructed, repaired or altered shall be constructed,
repaired or altered according to specifications provided by the city engineer.
(Ch. 141)
7-1-2: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED:
No sidewalk shall be constructed on any public property including street right
of way, except by a contractor who has obtained a permit from the city clerk as
required by title 3, chapter 7 of this code. (Ord. 870, 4-2-2007)
7-1-3: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
The owner of every lot, or part of a lot, within the limits of the city
fronting or abutting upon any street, avenue or public ground upon which there
is, or hereafter may be constructed a sidewalk, shall keep and maintain such
sidewalk in a good and substantial state of repair, and in a condition for safe
and convenient travel. (Ch. 141)
7-1-4: NOTICE TO REPAIR:
The city manager shall report to the council any sidewalk found to be in a bad
state of repair and dangerous or unsafe for travel, and if the council shall
find and determine that such sidewalk is in bad state of repair and dangerous
and unsafe for travel, said city manager shall mail a written notice to the
owner of the premises upon which said sidewalk is located, setting forth the
condition of said sidewalk, and requiring such owner to repair such sidewalk
and put the same in a condition so as to be safe and convenient for travel
within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of said notice. Service of
such notice may be made by mailing a copy thereof to said owner by regular mail
at said owner's last known address. (Ch. 141; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-5: ABATEMENT BY CITY; RECOVERY OF COST:
If the owner of any property upon which the sidewalk is in a bad state of
repair and unsafe and dangerous for travel shall fail, neglect or refuse to
repair the same and place such sidewalk in a condition safe and convenient for
travel within the time in the notice herein provided for specified, the city
shall cause said sidewalk to be repaired and placed in a condition safe and
convenient for travel, and the expense thereof shall be assessed against the
lot upon which such sidewalk is located; such assessment shall be made,
returned and collected in the manner as provided by law. (Ch. 141)
7-1-6: AWNINGS:
No person shall construct or install or maintain any awning which is supported
in whole or part by posts or other supports set into the sidewalk, street, or
public parking lot, nor which is less than seven and one-half feet (71/2')
above the sidewalk at any point. (Ch. 105; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-7: TEMPORARY SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct sidewalks so as to prevent the
free use thereof by the public; provided, however, that a permit may be
obtained from the city manager to temporarily obstruct a sidewalk for purposes
of constructing, loading or unloading, or other business purposes. (Ch. 34)
7-1-8: PERMIT TO OBSTRUCT:
   A.   Safeguards And Warning Lights Required: The clerk, with the approval of
the city manager, is authorized to grant permission in writing, to place and
keep upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the city, building material, for a
period not exceeding ninety (90) days, when such materials are to be used in
the construction of a new building, or in the repair of an old building; but
such permission shall not authorize the obstruction of more than one- half (1/
2) the width of the sidewalk or more than fifteen feet (15') in width of the
street opposite the lot in which such building material is to be used.
Provided, that no material shall be placed upon the sidewalk which will break
or injure the same; provided, further, that the person to whom such permission
is granted shall erect and maintain during the period of such permit, proper
and sufficient safeguards and warning lights, and such material shall in no
case be placed so as to obstruct the free flow of water in the street gutters.
Such permission may be revoked by the city manager at any time.
   B.   Sidewalks Returned To Original Condition: Every person to whom
permission is granted herein, before the expiration of the time for which such
permission was granted, shall cause all building material and rubbish arising
therefrom to be removed from the place occupied and shall also immediately
repair and put in as good condition as before any sidewalk, street, or alley
that may have been injured by such person. (Ch. 34; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-9: OWNER TO CLEAR SIDEWALK:
   A.   Enforcement; Penalty: The occupant of every store, shop, office,
tenement or building and of every lot, part of a lot or other premises within
the limits of the city, fronting or abutting upon any street, avenue or public
grounds upon which a sidewalk is constructed and the owner of each and every
unoccupied store, shop, office, tenement, building or lot, part of a lot, or
other premises fronting or abutting as aforesaid, shall by eleven o'clock (11:
00) A.M. of each and every day clear the sidewalk in front and upon the side
of, any such store, shop, office, tenement, building, lot, part of a lot or
other premises, as the case may be, of all snow, ice and rubbish then thereon,
and cause such sidewalks at all times to be kept clear of snow, ice and
rubbish. (Ord. 477, 4-7-1975; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Abatement By City: If any such occupant or owner shall refuse or
neglect to remove any such snow, ice or rubbish in the manner as in this
section provided, the city may abate the nuisance by following the procedure
described in this section. If the city manager determines that a nuisance
exists on account of the failure to comply with subsection A of this section,
the city manager shall notify the property owner by mailed notice of the
existence of such a nuisance. Such notice shall give the property owner three
(3) days from the date of mailing to abate the nuisance. If the nuisance is not
abated within that time, the city manager may cause the same to be removed. In
case of removal, the city may recover the expenses thereof, either by civil
action against the owner or occupant or by ordering the city clerk to extend
such sum plus twenty five percent (25%) thereof as a special assessment against
such lot, to be collected with other city taxes. The city shall mail the
property owner notice of the amount of such expenses. The property owner shall
have thirty (30) days from the date of such notice to appeal to the city
council. After the first notice as to the existence of a nuisance, no further
notice in that calendar year shall be required for a recurring nuisance. It
shall be sufficient notice for the city to send one notice per calendar year
containing the total expenses proposed to be recovered by the city for such
recurring nuisance. (Ord. 868, 2-20-2007)
7-1-10: INJURY TO SIDEWALK PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sidewalk or
crossing in any way. (1998 Code)
7-1-11: BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS:
No person who shall have charge of the construction of any excavation or
obstruction adjacent to or under any sidewalk or street shall fail during the
progress of such work to cause such excavation to be securely guarded by
barricades and warning lights from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half
(1/2) hour before sunrise. (1998 Code)
7-1-12: REMOVING BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, throw down, run over, or
interfere with any barricade; or to walk upon, drive or ride over or across any
street or sidewalk construction which has not been opened for travel. (Ch. 105)
7-1-13: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, convey, transport or drive any
vehicle with mudhooks, lugs or spurs on the wheels over any part of a paved
street within the city without providing planks, ramps or some other form of
protection for the street. (1998 Code)
7-1-14: CITY NOT LIABLE:
If any judgment shall be recovered in any action against the city for any
injury or damage caused by an obstruction, excavation, opening or defect in any
sidewalk caused or occasioned by the act or omission of any person, the city
shall have the right to recover the amount of any such judgment from the person
so responsible for such obstruction, opening, excavation or defect, and such
person is hereby declared to be liable to the city in the same amount of such
damages. (Ch. 141, 10-18-1939)
7-1-15: DEPOSITS ON STREETS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sweep, shovel or otherwise deposit any leaves, grass, rubbish
or other materials of any kind in any street or gutter within the city, except
that it shall not be a violation of this section to:
   A.   Rake leaves from the boulevard only into the adjacent gutter in the
fall of each year prior to the city doing the fall street sweeping of such
street, and
   B.   Sweep or shovel snow from sidewalks into the adjacent street on First
Street in the B-1 business district. (Ord. 509, 6-6-1977; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-16: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Refuse Deposits Prohibited: No person shall pile, deposit or place or
cause or permit to be deposited or placed any rubbish, wood, coal or
merchandise, dirt, impediment, or obstruction of any kind upon any sidewalk,
boulevard, or crossing in said city, or to occupy or obstruct any sidewalk,
boulevard, or crossing so as to interfere with the convenient use of the same
by the public or obstruct the vision of any vehicle or pedestrian.
   B.   Selling On Public Ways Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to sell or attempt to sell, or cry for sale at public auctions within the city,
any goods, chattels, or personal property, whatever, to any person upon the
sidewalks or streets within the city, so as to collect a crowd upon the
sidewalks or streets, whereby the free passage thereon is prevented or
hindered. (Ch. 4; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 1A
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Findings, Purpose And Intent
7-1A-2: City To Manage Public Rights Of Way
7-1A-3: Definitions
7-1A-4: Administration
7-1A-5: Registration And Right-Of-Way Occupancy
7-1A-6: Information Provided To City
7-1A-7: Reporting Obligations
7-1A-8: Permit Requirements
7-1A-9: Permit Applications
7-1A-10: Issuance Of Permit; Conditions
7-1A-11: Permit Fees
7-1A-12: Standards During Construction Or Installation
7-1A-13: Right-Of-Way Patching And Restoration
7-1A-14: Joint Applications
7-1A-15: Supplementary Applications
7-1A-16: Other Obligations
7-1A-17: Denial Of Permit
7-1A-18: Installation Requirements
7-1A-19: Inspection
7-1A-20: Work Done Without A Permit
7-1A-21: Supplementary Notification
7-1A-22: Revocation Of Permit
7-1A-23: Mapping Data
7-1A-24: Location And Relocation Of Facilities
7-1A-25: Preexcavation Facilities Location
7-1A-26: Damage To Other Facilities
7-1A-27: Right-Of-Way Vacation
7-1A-28: Indemnification And Liability
7-1A-29: Abandoned And Unusable Facilities
7-1A-30: Appeal
7-1A-31: Severability
7-1A-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT:
To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure
the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of rights of way, the city
strives to keep its rights of way in a state of good repair and free from
unnecessary encumbrances.
Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this chapter regulating right-of-way
permits and administration. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on the
placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its
rights of way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to
complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this
chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights of way will bear
financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this chapter provides for
recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public
rights of way.
This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 session laws, chapter
123, substantially codified in Minnesota Statutes sections 237.16, 237.162,
237.163, 237.79, 237.81 and 238.086 (the "Act") and the other laws governing
applicable rights of the city and users of the right of way. This chapter shall
also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050–7819.9950 where
possible. To the extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted
consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with
the act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter
shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city
to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the public. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-2: CITY TO MANAGE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 237.163, subdivision 2(b), to manage rights of way within
its jurisdiction. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply in this chapter. References hereafter to
"sections" are unless otherwise specified references to sections in this
chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.
ABANDONED FACILITY: A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected
from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is
in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so
by the right-of-way user.
APPLICANT: Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right of
way.
CITY: The city of Montevideo, Minnesota. For purposes of section
7-1A-28 of this chapter, city means its elected officials, officers, employees
and agents.
COMMISSION: The state public utilities commission.
CONGESTED RIGHT OF WAY: A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right of way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with Minnesota Statutes section 216D.04, subdivision 3, over a
continuous length in excess of five hundred feet (500').
CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND: Any of the following forms of security provided
at permittee's option:
   A.   Individual project bond;
   B.   Cash deposit;
   C.   Security of a form listed or approved under Minnesota Statutes section
15.73, subdivision 3;
   D.   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
   E.   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
   F.   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
DEGRADATION: A decrease in the useful life of the right of way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right of way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right of way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
DEGRADATION COST: Subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the permit
is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set
forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
DEGRADATION FEE: The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the
city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the
right of way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost.
DELAY PENALTY: The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-
of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration as established by
permit.
DEPARTMENT: The department of public works of the city.
DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR: Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
DIRECTOR: The director of the department of public works of the city, or her or
his designee.
EMERGENCY: A condition that: a) poses a danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or b) requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
EQUIPMENT: Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities
in any right of way.
EXCAVATE: To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate
any part of a right of way.
EXCAVATION PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained
before a person may excavate in a right of way. An excavation permit allows the
holder to excavate that part of the right of way described in such permit.
EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in section
7-1A-13 of this chapter.
FACILITY OR FACILITIES: Any tangible asset in the right of way required to
provide utility service.
FIVE YEAR PROJECT PLAN: Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five (5) years.
HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR: A designated portion of the public right of way within
which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and competing
facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common conduit
system or other common structure.
HOLE: An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length less
than the width of the pavement.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE: A local person or persons, or designee of such person or
persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for
that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
MANAGEMENT COSTS: The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights of
way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way permit applications;
inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting,
protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the
adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed
after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking
right-of-way permits. Management costs do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right of way, the fees
and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota session laws
1997, chapter 123; Minnesota Statutes section 237.162 or 237.163 or any
ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to
appeals taken pursuant to section
7-1A-30 of this chapter.
OBSTRUCT: To place any tangible object in a right of way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right of way.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right of way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right of way,
for the duration specified therein.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in section
7-1A-13 of this chapter.
PATCH OR PATCHING: A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of: a) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate
base, and b) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet (2') beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch
is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city's
five (5) year project plan.
PAVEMENT: Any type of improved surface that is within the public right of way
and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate
or gravel.
PERMIT: Has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in Minnesota Statutes
section 237.162.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right of way
has been granted by the city under this chapter.
PERSON: An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate or political,
except that, for the purposes of this chapter, a person shall not include the
city of Montevideo.
PROBATION: The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of
this chapter.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD: One year from the date that a person has been notified in
writing that they have been put on probation.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane or trail and public sidewalk in which the city
has an interest, including other dedicated rights of way for travel purposes
and utility easements of the city. A right of way does not include the airwaves
above a right of way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
REGISTRANT: Any person who: a) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right of way, or b) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right of way or place its facilities or equipment in the
right of way.
RESTORATION COST: The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
public utilities commission rules.
RESTORE OR RESTORATION: The process by which an excavated right of way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT: Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or
both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USER:
   A.   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by Minnesota Statutes
section 237.162, subdivision 4; or
   B.   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right of way that is
used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right
under law, franchise or ordinance to use the public right of way.
SERVICE OR UTILITY SERVICE: Includes: a) those services provided by a public
utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes 216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6; b)
services of a telecommunications right- of-way user, including transporting of
voice or data information; c) services of a cable communications system as
defined in Minnesota Statutes chapter 238; d) natural gas or electric energy or
telecommunications services provided by the city; e) services provided by a
cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes chapter
308A; and f) water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services.
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION: An application made to excavate or obstruct more of
the right of way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been
issued.
TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER: A person owning or controlling a facility
in the right of way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right of
way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting telecommunication
or other voice or data information. For purposes of this chapter, a cable
communication system defined and regulated under Minnesota Statutes chapter
238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or
electric energy services whether provided by a public utility as defined in
Minnesota Statutes section 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power
agency organized under Minnesota Statutes chapters 453 and 453A, or a
cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes chapter
308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this
chapter.
TEMPORARY SURFACE: The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city's two (2) year plan, in which case it is
considered full restoration.
TRENCH: An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
TWO YEAR PROJECT PLAN: Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two (2) years. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The director is the principal official responsible for the administration of
the rights of way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto.
The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. The director
shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-5: REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Registration: Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right of way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right
of way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee. The
registration fee shall be established by city council.
   B.   Registration Prior To Work: No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof in any right of way without first being registered with the city.
   C.   Exceptions: Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain
boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right of way between their
property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings or gardens or persons with a sprinkler system agreement with the city
pursuant to section
7-6-1 of this title shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right of way, and
shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements
for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this
chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the Minnesota Statutes chapter 216D, gopher one call law. (Ord.
813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-6: INFORMATION PROVIDED TO CITY:
   A.   Information Required: The information provided to the city at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Each registrant's name, gopher one call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      2.   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      3.   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         a.   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of
Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city. Insurance must
be equal to city's tort liability limits;
         b.   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the: 1) use and occupancy of the right of way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, and 2) placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right of way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities and collapse of property;
         c.   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverages;
         d.   Requiring that the city be notified thirty (30) days in advance
of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
         e.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability
coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage established by the city
in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the
purposes and policies of this chapter.
      4.   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
      5.   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required
to be filed under Minnesota Statutes 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the
secretary of state.
      6.   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota public utilities commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate
from said commission or other state or federal agency.
   B.   Notice Of Changes: The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which the registrant has
knowledge of any change. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-7: REPORTING OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Operations: Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by
December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for
underground facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a
format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by
the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the
frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights of way.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all
projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
"next-year project"); and
      2.   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning
and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five (5) years following
the next calendar year (in this section, a "five-year project").
The term "project" in this section shall include both next- year projects and
five (5) year projects.
By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for inspection in the
city's office a composite list of all projects of which the city has been
informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping
themselves informed of the current status of this list.
Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list
of next year projects and must notify the city and all other registrants of all
such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at
any time join in a next year project of another registrant listed by the other
registrant.
   B.   Additional Next Year Projects: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right of way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.
      1.   Excavation Permit 1 : An excavation permit is required by a
registrant to excavate that part of the right of way described in such permit
and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right of
way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      2.   Obstruction Permit: An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right
of way by placing equipment described therein on the right of way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.
   B.   Permit Extensions: No person may excavate or obstruct the right of way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   C.   Delay Penalty: In accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1000,
subdivision 3 and notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the city shall
establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way
excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration. The delay penalty shall be
established from time to time by city council resolution.
   D.   Permit Display: Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city. (Ord. 813, 4-2-
2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
7-1A-9: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit applications
shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the
requirements of the following provisions:
   A.   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.
   C.   Payment of money due the city for:
      1.   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs (if restoration is to be
done by the city) and other management costs;
      2.   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because
of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights of way or any
emergency actions taken by the city;
      3.   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
   D.   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the amount owing.
   E.   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-10: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Permit Issuance: If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   B.   Conditions: The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance
of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the
health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right of way and
its current use. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-11: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Excavation Permit Fee: The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      1.   The city management costs;
      2.   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   B.   Obstruction Permit Fee: The city shall establish the obstruction permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.
   C.   Payment Of Permit Fees: No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees.
   D.   Nonrefundable: Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in section
7-1A-22 of this chapter are not refundable.
   E.   Application To Franchise: Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise. (Ord. 813, 4-2-
2001)
7-1A-12: STANDARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION:
The permit holder shall comply with the following standards when engaging in
the work:
   A.   Observe and comply with all laws, rules and regulations of the state
and city and take such precautions as are necessary to avoid creating
unsanitary conditions.
   B.   Conduct the operations and perform the work in a manner so as to ensure
the least obstruction and interference to traffic.
   C.   Take adequate precautions to ensure the safety of the public.
   D.   If required by the city, notify adjoining property owners prior to the
start of work which may disrupt the use of and access to adjoining properties.
   E.   Where construction work interferes with the normal flow of traffic,
provide for closing the area to traffic or restrict traffic in the area.
Compliance with MUTCD (manual on uniform traffic control devices) traffic
safety signing requirements.
   F.   Protect excavation and work areas with barricades and flags and, if
necessary, a flagman during daylight hours and by warning lights at night.
   G.   Provide proper trench protection as required by OSHA, when necessary.
   H.   Protect the root growth of trees and shrubbery.
   I.   Not use lugs damaging to roadway surfaces.
   J.   Periodically remove dirt and debris during construction.
   K.   Other reasonable standards and requirements of the city. (Ord. 813, 4-
2-2001)
7-1A-13: RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION:
   A.   Timing: The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right of way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under
subsection
7-1A-16B of this chapter.
   B.   Patch And Restoration: Permittee shall patch its own work. The city may
choose either to have the permittee restore the right of way or to restore the
right of way itself.
      1.   City Restoration: If the city restores the right of way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If, following
such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling,
the permittee shall pay to the city, within thirty (30) days of billing, all
costs associated with correcting the defective work.
      2.   Permittee Restoration: If the permittee restores the right of way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rules 7819.3000.
      3.   Degradation Fee In Lieu Of Restoration: In lieu of right-of- way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   C.   Standards: The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100.
   D.   Duty To Correct Defects: The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Permittee, upon
notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be completed
within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under subsection
7-1A-16B of this chapter.
   E.   Failure To Restore: If the permittee fails to restore the right of way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to
the city, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right
of way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights
under the construction performance bond. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-14: JOINT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Joint Application: Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right of way at the same place and time.
   B.   Shared Fees: Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction
or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the
obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit,
registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and
indicate the same on their applications.
   C.   With City Projects: Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two (2) or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay
the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-15: SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Limitation On Area: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of
the right of way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside
the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee
which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be
obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area: 1) make
application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and 2) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   B.   Limitation On Dates: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs and receive the new permit or
an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-16: OTHER OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Other Laws: Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws, including Minnesota Statutes 216D01-.09 (gopher
one call excavation notice system). A permittee shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right of way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.
   B.   Prohibited Work: Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work. The city may
order a permittee to cease working in a right of way if the city, in its
discretion, determines that unseasonable or unreasonable conditions exist.
   C.   Interference With Right Of Way: A permittee shall not so obstruct right
of way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or
other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work
in the right of way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless
parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading
of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless
specifically authorized by the permit. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-17: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions
of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary, to protect the right
of way and its current use. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-18: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right of way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules
7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, insofar as
they are not inconsistent with the Minnesota Statutes sections 237.162 and
237.163. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-19: INSPECTION:
   A.   Notice Of Completion: When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
with Minnesota Rules 7819.1300.
   B.   Site Inspection: Permittee shall make the work site available to the
city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   C.   Authority Of Director:
      1.   At the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      2.   The director may issue an order to the permittee for any work which
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days
after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director
that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented
within the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to
section
7-1A-22 of this chapter. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-20: WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT:
   A.   Emergency Situations: Each registrant shall immediately notify the
director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to
respond to the emergency. Within two (2) business days after the occurrence of
the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the
fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to
bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the actions it took in
response to the emergency.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities,
the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   B.   Nonemergency Situations: Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right of way must substantially obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double
all the other fees required by this code, deposit with the city the fees
necessary to correct any damage to the right of way and comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-21: SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION:
If the obstruction or excavation of the right of way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known. (Ord. 813, 4-2-
2001)
7-1A-22: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Substantial Breach: The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to
revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial
breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      1.   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      2.   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      3.   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      4.   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit
extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons
beyond the permittee's control; or
      5.   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to section
7-1A-19 of this chapter.
   B.   Written Notice Of Breach: If the city determines that the permittee has
committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   C.   Response To Notice Of Breach: Within twenty four (24) hours of
receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a
plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to
so contact the city, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable
plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee's failure
to so contact the city, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
   D.   Cause For Probation: From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right of way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   E.   Automatic Revocation: If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
   F.   Reimbursement Of City Costs: If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney fees in
connection with such revocation. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-23: MAPPING DATA:
   A.   Information Required: Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-24: LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Placement, location and relocation of facilities must comply with the act, with
other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and
7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available
to cities.
   A.   Corridors: The city may assign specific area within the right of way,
or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facility that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
someday be located within the right of way. All excavation, obstruction or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
Any registrant who has facilities in the right of way in a position at variance
with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the time of
the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are
located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the right of way,
unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon
consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities,
public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
   B.   Nuisance: One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
found in a right of way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right of way to a usable
condition.
   C.   Limitation Of Space: To protect health, safety, and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right of way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right of way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right of
way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right of way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right of way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-25: PREEXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION:
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes
216D.01-.09 ("One Call Excavation Notice System") before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the
area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all
said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than twenty inches
(20") below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with
the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and
the best procedure for excavation. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-26: DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES:
When the city does work in the right of way and finds it necessary to maintain,
support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city shall notify
the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs
associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within
thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right of way which it or its
facilities damages. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the
city's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities.
(Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-27: RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION:
   A.   Reservation Of Right: If the city vacates a right of way which contains
the facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right of
way are governed by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-28: INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY:
By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minnesota Rules 7819.1250. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-29: ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES:
   A.   Discontinued Operations: A registrant who has determined to discontinue
all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide information
satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for its facilities
in the right of way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another
registrant.
   B.   Removal: Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right of
way shall remove it from that right of way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-30: APPEAL:
A right-of-way user that: a) has been denied registration; b) has been denied a
permit; c) has had permit revoked; or d) believes that the fees imposed are
invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon
written request, by the city council. The city council shall act on a timely
written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the city
council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing
and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the
decision. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
7-1A-31: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in
addition to requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 813, 4-2-2001)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS 1
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permits
7-2-2: Backfilling
7-2-3: Restoration
7-2-4: Standards
7-2-5: Sodding And Seeding
7-2-6: Work Done Without A Permit
7-2-7: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 1A of this title.
7-2-1: PERMITS:
It is unlawful for any person, except a city employee acting within the course
and scope of his/her employment, or a contractor acting within the course and
scope of a contract with the city, to make an excavation, opening, or tunnel
in, over, across, or upon a street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or other public
property without first having obtained a written permit from the city as herein
provided.
Permits issued under this section are intended for the repair and maintenance
of existing utilities and their associated hookups or connections.
   A.   Damage Deposit; Bond: In order to protect the city against the costs of
repair, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a bond, certified check or
cash in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such bond or deposit will
remain in effect for one year following the completion of the work.
   B.   Permit Fee: Upon approval of the application for the excavation permit,
the applicant shall be required to pay a fee to the city to cover reasonable
costs for the issuance of the permit and inspections required. The amount of
the fee will be set by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Insurance: The applicant shall furnish the city evidence, in writing,
of liability insurance that meets or exceeds the city's current tort liability
limits.
   D.   Indemnification: The applicant shall, in writing, agree to indemnify
and hold the city harmless from any liability for injury or damage arising out
of the action of the applicant in performance of the work.
   E.   Noncompletion Or Abandonment: Work shall progress in an expeditious
manner until completion in order to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the
public. In the event the work shall not be performed in a timely manner or the
work shall cease or be abandoned without due cause, the city may, after
reasonable notice, correct said work or fill the excavation and repair the
surface and in such event, the entire cost to the city shall be borne by the
person to whom the permit was issued. (Ord. 814, 4-2-2001)
7-2-2: BACKFILLING:
All backfilling must be placed in six inch (6") layers, with each lift
compacted before additional backfill is placed in the excavation. The density
of the backfilled material after completion shall be equal to or shall exceed
the density of the material before it was excavated.
Backfill material shall consist of the excavated soils that have been removed
during excavation. If the backfill material is too wet, then granular material
may be substituted at the direction of the public works director. Backfilling
shall not be done using frozen materials. Unless otherwise directed, compacted
material shall be brought to street grade and crowned at the center. (Ord. 814,
4-2-2001)
7-2-3: RESTORATION:
The general area of work, and the surrounding area, including pavings,
sidewalks and boulevards, must be restored to the condition that existed before
the work began. The city may choose either to have permittee restore the right
of way or to restore the right of way itself.
   A.   Pavement Replacement: Paved bituminous streets shall be replaced with a
minimum of twelve inches (12") of class 5 gravel with full compaction.
Bituminous surface with a minimum of three inches (3") of AC hot plant mix
wearing surface. Three inches (3") is the minimum; the public works director
will determine the depth of bituminous required.
   B.   Restoration Of Other Fixtures: The permit holder shall restore all
shrubbery, fences, poles, sod, etc.
   C.   Pavement Removal: To obtain a straight edge and a neat appearing
opening at the pavement surface, the area shall be saw- cut to full depth.
   D.   Subbase And Base Tests: The city of Montevideo reserves the right to
require the contractor to have a series of density tests made by an independent
testing laboratory. The director will select the location of the tests. If the
tests fail, the contractor shall do additional compaction and repeat the
density tests. Payment for the density tests will be at the contractor's
expense.
   E.   Temporary Surface Material: When weather conditions do not allow for
the replacement of permanent pavement, the city may require the use of a
temporary surface material such as cold mix asphalt or concrete. The expense of
such temporary surface materials is the responsibility of the permit holder.
   F.   Traffic Control And Safety: Work shall be carried on in such a way that
will cause a minimum traffic interference. Adequate guards, warnings, lights
and barricades shall be provided by the contractor. Street intersections shall
be kept open to traffic. Access to private property shall be maintained.
   G.   Permittee To Pay Costs Of Repair: If the city restores the excavation
area, the permittee shall pay all costs for such repair. (Ord. 814, 4-2-2001)
7-2-4: STANDARDS:
The permit holder shall comply with the following standards when engaging in
work pursuant to a permit:
   A.   No lugs or damaging equipment may be used.
   B.   Contractors will notify the city for final inspection and acceptance.
   C.   Street openings are allowed Monday through Thursday only, except in
emergencies. (Ord. 814, 4-2-2001)
7-2-5: SODDING AND SEEDING:
The contractor shall replace all sod which was disturbed in the course of the
work performed. Sod laid on embankments shall be pegged. If approved by the
public works director, the contractor may seed the disturbed area. (Ord. 814,
4-2-2001)
7-2-6: WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT:
   A.   Emergency Situations: Every person shall immediately notify the public
works director of any event regarding its facilities which is considered to be
an emergency. Such person may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to
respond to the emergency. Within one business day after the occurrence of the
emergency, such person shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees
associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to
achieve compliance with this chapter for the actions taken in response to the
emergency. (Ord. 814, 4-2-2001)
7-2-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 814, 4-2-2001)
CHAPTER 3
ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Special Use Permit Required
7-3-2: Termination Of Encroachment Rights
7-3-3: Insurance Requirements
7-3-4: Removal Upon Order
7-3-5: Encroachments To Be Safe
7-3-1: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No portion of a building or other structure including, but not limited to,
steam lines, conduits, lighting standards, areaways, retaining walls, or signs
shall encroach upon or project into, upon, over or under any street, alley,
park or other public property. Any such encroachment existing as of November
12, 1991 may be permitted when authorized by a special use permit by the
Council upon recommendation of the Board of Zoning Adjustment. The owner of any
building, any part of which encroaches on, into, upon, over or under any public
property shall be liable to the City for any damage which may result to any
person or property by reason of such encroachment, whether or not such
encroachment is specifically allowed by this Chapter. (Ord. 691, 10-7-1991)
7-3-2: TERMINATION OF ENCROACHMENT RIGHTS:
Any permission hereunder granted, and all rights of the permittee hereunder
shall cease at any time that said encroachment shall be removed or
modifications made to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the
encroachment value. No such encroachment may be expanded. Such permission shall
in no way be considered a relinquishment by the City of that portion of said
public right of way or be of any force or effect beyond the time herein
provided. Any permit hereunder granted shall continue so long as the
encroachment for which the permit is granted continues to exist subject to the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 691, 10-7-1991)
7-3-3: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Upon compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter, such encroachments
into, upon, over or under any street, alley, park or other public property may
be granted only after filing with the City Clerk by the owner and/or lessee of
the property:
   A.   Evidence Of Public Liability Insurance: Evidence of a public liability
insurance policy in force in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) combined single limit, or more, for bodily injury and property
damage for any one encroachment wherein the City is made additional insured or
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury and property damage for
encroachments on public property which adjoins property used or zoned to be
used for residential purposes, wherein the City is made an additional insured
on a homeowner's policy of insurance. The additional insured endorsement shall
show the date the permit was granted, description and location of the
encroachment, and shall state that the policy does provide the insurance
coverages required by this Chapter. The furnishing and existence of any such
insurance policy shall not limit or abrogate the obligation of the permittees,
their successors or assigns, to secure, indemnify and hold harmless the City
for the full amount of any actions, proceedings, claims, costs, damages and
expenses.
   B.   Exclusion To XCU: On all underground encroachments, such policy of
insurance shall specifically delete any exclusion with regard to "XCU"
(explosion, collapse, underground).
   C.   Permit Revoked: If any permittee, his or her successors or assigns,
allows the insurance policy to lapse without furnishing a new policy in lieu
thereof, the City Clerk shall request the City Attorney to initiate proceedings
to have the permit revoked and the encroachment removed. (Ord. 691, 10-7-1991)
7-3-4: REMOVAL UPON ORDER:
The owner of any building or structure, including, but not limited to those
cited in Section
7-3-1 of this Chapter, any part of which projects into, upon, over or under any
public property shall remove at once any part or all of such encroachment upon
being ordered to do so by the City Council and shall restore such public
property to its condition prior to the encroachment as nearly as is practical,
and the City shall not be liable for any damages resulting to the property
owner by reason of such an order. Such removal will be at the sole expense of
the property owner. Upon failure of the property owner to remove the
encroachment as ordered, or to restore such public property, the reasonable
costs of removing such encroachment, or restoring public property, incurred by
the City shall be billed and levied against the property as a special
assessment, or collected from the owner of the property as permitted by law.
(Ord. 691, 10-7-1991)
7-3-5: ENCROACHMENTS TO BE SAFE:
All such encroachments on public property, including projections over public
property, shall be structurally safe and shall be kept in a safe condition and
maintained in a workmanlike state of repair consistent with the design thereof
and repaired when necessary in the opinion of the City Zoning Administrator and
at the expense of the person having ownership or control of the building. (Ord.
691, 10-7-1991)
CHAPTER 4
NUMBERING LOTS AND BUILDINGS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Streets And Avenues
7-4-2: Houses
7-4-3: Building Numbers Required
7-4-1: STREETS AND AVENUES:
Numbers shall be assigned to the lots or buildings on all streets and avenues
of the City, in accordance with the following plan:
   A.   Base Lines Established: First Street shall be the base line from which
all streets and avenues running east and west shall be numbered, and Sheridan
Avenue shall be the base line from which streets running north and south shall
be numbered; and all streets intersected by said Sheridan Avenue shall have the
word "North" or "South" prefixed to the name of that part of each street lying
north or south of such intersection.
   B.   Numbering Sequence Set: In numbering streets and avenues from said base
lines, the first number shall be one hundred one (101) and numbers for each
succeeding block shall increase in hundred progressively; provided, that the
hundred figure in each house number shall be the same as the number of the
street at the last intersection. The numbers in each block shall increase
progressively, the even numbers to be on the east and south sides, and the odd
numbers to be on the north and west sides of such streets and avenues. (Ch. 21)
7-4-2: HOUSES:
   A.   Streets Assigned Numbers: For the purpose of house numbering, there is
assigned to the various named streets and avenues the following numbers:
Black Oak Avenue  No. 5 N
Canyon Avenue     No. 3 S
Case Avenue       No. 8 S
Division Street   No. 6 S
Eureka Avenue     No. 4 N
Garfield Avenue   No. 6 S
Grove Avenue      No. 6 N
Lincoln Avenue    No. 3 N
McKinley Avenue   No. 7 S
Merriam Avenue    No. 4 S
Miawakon Avenue   No. 8 N
Nichols Avenue    No. 2 S
Park Avenue       No. 5 S
Sheridan Avenue   No. 1
Sherman Avenue    No. 2 N
Washington Avenue No. 7 N
Windom Avenue     No. 9 N
 
   B.   Numbering Of Lots: One number shall be assigned to each lot twenty five
feet (25') or less in width; one number to each lot twenty two feet (22') in
width or twenty five feet (25') in width; one number to each thirty feet (30'),
or fraction thereof, of street frontage of lots having a greater width or
length than fifty feet (50'). Small buildings less than twenty feet (20') in
width standing practically half on two (2) lots may be assigned a half number;
provided, that the lot number has been used for another building. Said numbers
when assigned shall be recorded on a permanent plot to be kept in the Clerk's
office. (Ch. 21)
7-4-3: BUILDING NUMBERS REQUIRED:
Upon the completion of such map and public notice of the same having been
given, it shall be the duty of all owners or occupants of buildings to obtain
from the Clerk the correct numbers of their respective buildings, for which no
fee shall be charged, and to cause said numbers, in figures not less than two
and one-half inches (21/2") high, to be placed on their buildings. (Ch. 21)
CHAPTER 5
PARKS AND PARKWAYS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Duty Of Park Board
7-5-2: Weeds, Tall Grass Prohibited; Abatement
7-5-3: Excavations Prohibited
7-5-4: Injury To Trees
7-5-5: Discharge Of Firearms In Parks Prohibited
7-5-6: Killing Certain Animals Prohibited
7-5-7: Parks Closed During Certain Hours
7-5-8: Liquor In Parks Restricted
7-5-9: Swimming Pool Hours
7-5-1: DUTY OF PARK BOARD:
The Park Board shall advise and make recommendations to the Council and City
Manager relative to the parks, parkways and boulevards of the City. (Ch. 2)
7-5-2: WEEDS, TALL GRASS PROHIBITED; ABATEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot abutting on any street or avenue
to cause that portion of the parkway or boulevard upon which his or her lot
abuts, to be kept free from weeds and tall grasses; and upon failure of the
owner so to do, the City Manager shall cause such weeds and grasses to be cut
thereon whenever the City Manager shall deem it necessary, and shall assess the
expenses thereof against such lot, to be collected with other City taxes. (Ch.
2)
7-5-3: EXCAVATIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, excavate or in any manner injure or
interfere with the ground or sod of any parkway, or of any public park, and to
break, cut or injure any tree, shrub, flower or ornamental plant on any parkway
or within any public park. (Ch. 2)
7-5-4: INJURY TO TREES:
   A.   Pruning Of Trees Supervised: It shall be unlawful for any person, or
any electric light, telephone or other company or corporation, whether it has a
franchise to string wires along any public street, or not, to cut off, injure
or remove any branch or limb of any tree growing upon any parkway or within any
park of the City, unless the same is done under the direction of the City
Manager.
   B.   Contact With Electric Wires Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person or any electric light, power or transmission company to cause or permit
any wire conveying electric energy to come in contact with any tree, shrub or
flower or ornamental plant on any parkway, or within any public park. (Ch. 2)
7-5-5: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS IN PARKS PROHIBITED 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in any public
park. (Ch. 2)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 5-1-2 of this Code.
7-5-6: KILLING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or injure any bird or wildlife of
any kind, or destroy the eggs, the nest of any bird other than the English
sparrow or any wildlife habitat, or to kill or injure any squirrel or chipmunk
within any public park. (1998 Code)
7-5-7: PARKS CLOSED DURING CERTAIN HOURS:
   A.   Park Hours Established; Exception: Except for bona fide campers in
Lagoon Park, all parks of the City, are closed between twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and no person, other than employees of the
City in performance of their duties, and bona fide campers in Lagoon Park,
shall be permitted in any of these parks between the hours of twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
   B.   Violations A Misdemeanor: Any person, other than employees of the City
in performance of their duties, who enters or remains in any park of the City,
other than Lagoon Park, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor punishable as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 553, 7-22-1980; amd. 1998 Code)
7-5-8: LIQUOR IN PARKS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Necessity: Because of the excessive use of alcoholic beverages and 3.2
percent malt beverages in the parks of Montevideo, the litter caused by
drinkers in the parks and the increasing amount of vandalism by drinkers in the
parks, the City Council finds that it is necessary to prohibit the use of
alcoholic beverages and 3.2 percent malt beverages in City parks except as
otherwise provided in this Section.
   B.   Prohibition: Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no alcoholic
beverages and no 3.2 percent malt beverages shall be permitted in any park
within the City and no consumption of alcoholic beverages or 3.2 percent malt
beverages shall be permitted in any such park.
   C.   Exception: Alcoholic beverages and 3.2 percent malt beverages shall be
permitted in the shelter house and log cabin in Smith Park, and drinking of
such beverages shall be permitted by members of groups or organizations which
have reserved the shelter house or log cabin for their use if the following
conditions are met:
      1.   The shelter house or log cabin shall be reserved at the City office
and all fees and deposits required by the City shall be paid.
      2.   The reservation shall contain a notice to the City that alcoholic
beverages or 3.2 percent malt beverages may be used by the organization or
group making the reservation.
      3.   All kegs, cases or accumulations of bottles or cans shall be kept
within the shelter house or log cabin.
      4.   Only members of the organization or group for which the shelter
house or cabin is reserved shall be served alcoholic or 3.2 percent beverages
and all those served shall be served such beverages in the shelter house or log
cabin, but this shall not prevent those who have been served from taking their
beverages outside and drinking in the vicinity of the reserved shelter house or
log cabin.
      5.   All cans and other litter shall be cleaned up and removed from the
premises upon expiration of the reservation time. (Ord. 554, 8-19-1980; amd.
1998 Code)
   D.   Exception (Beer Gardens): A club or a charitable, religious or
nonprofit organization holding a temporary on-sale license pursuant to
subsection
3-2B-2A of this Code may sell 3.2 percent malt liquor in Smith Park upon
approval of the City Council and in compliance with regulations imposed by the
City Council. (Ord. 795, 8-16-1999)
7-5-9: SWIMMING POOL HOURS:
   A.   Swimming Pool Area: No person shall be permitted in the swimming pool
area during hours when the pool is not open, other than persons or groups duly
authorized in writing by the City or employees of the City in performance of
their duties. The swimming pool area is the fenced-in area surrounding the
swimming pool. The pool hours shall be those hours of operation which are
posted at the pool from time to time.
   B.   Penalty: Any person, other than a person so permitted by this Section,
who enters or remains in the swimming pool area when the pool is not open shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 667, 5-21-1990; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
LAWN SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Regulations
7-6-2: Removal; Order By City
7-6-3: Costs; Liabilities
7-6-1: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install a permanent sprinkler system in
City boulevards unless such person meets the following conditions:
   A.   Hold City Harmless Agreement: Any person with an interest in property
which abuts the boulevard in which a sprinkler system is to be installed must
sign an agreement with the City, on a form provided by the City, agreeing to
hold the City harmless from any liability on account of such sprinkler system,
abide by any water conservation plan the City might adopt and abide by such
other rules and regulations as the City might, from time to time, adopt.
   B.   System Must Be Mapped: Any person installing such a sprinkler system
must provide the City with a map showing the location of the sprinkler system
with relation to all other utilities in the boulevard. (Ord. 671, 7-2-1990,
eff. 8-1-1990)
7-6-2: REMOVAL; ORDER BY CITY:
The City shall have the right to require any person installing such a sprinkler
system, or the owner of the property which abuts the boulevard in which such a
sprinkler system is located, at such person's cost, to remove the sprinkler
system at any time if the sprinkler system interferes with or hinders any use
of the boulevard, street or sidewalk by the City. If such person fails to so
remove the sprinkler system, the City Manager shall cause such sprinkler system
to be removed and assess the expenses thereof against such lot, to be collected
with other City taxes. (Ord. 671, 7-2-1990, eff. 8-1-1990)
7-6-3: COSTS; LIABILITIES:
   A.   Responsibility Of Owner: Any person installing a sprinkler system
pursuant to this Chapter shall be responsible for all costs and liabilities
incurred by any person on account of the sprinkler system.
   B.   Recording And Permit Fee: Any person installing a sprinkler system
pursuant to this Chapter shall pay the City the fee for recording the agreement
called for under subsection
7-6-1A of this Chapter and any other expenses incurred by the City in
connection therewith. The City Council may set a fee for a permit to have a
sprinkler system in a boulevard by resolution. (Ord. 671, 7-2-1990, eff. 8-1-
1990)
CHAPTER 7
MONTEVIDEO CEMETERY
SECTION:
7-7-1: Description; Name
7-7-2: Officers And Duties
7-7-3: Lawn System
7-7-4: Landscaping, Planting
7-7-5: Sale Of Cemetery Lots
7-7-6: Conduct In Cemetery
7-7-7: Unlawful To Destroy; Damage Property
7-7-8: Burials And Interments
7-7-9: Charges
7-7-10: Permanent Care And Improvement Fund
7-7-11: Maintenance Of Monuments
7-7-12: Regulations
7-7-13: Permit Required
7-7-1: DESCRIPTION; NAME:
A cemetery has been established and is continued upon land owned by the City,
in Section Six (6), in Township One Hundred Seventeen (117) of Range Forty (40)
as appears by the plat made by L. R. Moyer, Surveyor, as "Montevideo Cemetery"
which shall be known as and called "Sunset Memorial Cemetery". (Ord. 731, 11-
15-1993)
7-7-2: OFFICERS AND DUTIES:
The Council shall be Ex Officio Trustees of said cemetery, and the Treasurer
shall be Ex Officio Treasurer. The Council shall perform all the duties
devolving upon the Trustees of cemetery associations as defined by the laws of
this State. The Clerk shall perform all the duties devolving upon the Secretary
of the cemetery associations as defined by the statutes. The Treasurer shall
perform the duties of cemetery Treasurer. (Ch. 1; amd. 1998 Code)
7-7-3: LAWN SYSTEM:
   A.   No more than one monument shall be placed upon any one lot.
   B.   Grave markers shall be set even with the ground.
   C.   No lot shall be graded higher than the general level of the cemetery.
   D.   No mound shall be built over any grave.
   E.   No fence and no stone or cement coping shall be constructed around any
lot. (Ch. 1)
   F.   No more than one burial or interment, including cremation burials or
interments, shall be permitted on any one burial plot, provided, however, that
any one of the following combinations shall be permitted:
      1.   One non-cremation and one cremation burial;
      2.   Two (2) baby burials;
      3.   One adult and one baby burial;
      4.   Two (2) cremation burials.
If a second burial is made on a burial plot, it shall be marked by a flush
marker and where monuments are permitted in the cemetery, only one monument per
burial plot shall be permitted. In order to compensate for additional work and
record keeping where there is a second burial on a burial plot, an additional
charge of one-half (1/2) the then cost of a burial plot shall be paid to the
City for such second burial on a plot. The City Council may establish rules and
regulations for Sunset Memorial Cemetery, by resolution. (Ord. 946, 3-5-2018;
amd. Ord. 989, 7- 8-2024)
7-7-4: LANDSCAPING, PLANTING:
The City Manager may employ, for such time as it shall deem necessary, a person
skilled in landscape gardening to carry on improvements in said cemetery.
Planting of trees, shrubs, flowers or other plants, by lot owners, shall be
subject to the approval of the City Manager, and in harmony with their plan.
(Ch. 1)
7-7-5: SALE OF CEMETERY LOTS:
The cemetery lots which the Council shall deem advisable to offer for sale,
shall be listed and appraised by said Council, and when the amount of such
appraisal shall have been paid into the City Treasury, and a duplicate receipt
thereof filed with the Clerk, the Mayor and City Manager shall execute a deed,
attested to by the City Clerk, to the purchaser. Said deed shall be for "the
purpose of interment only", and shall be drawn subject to all the laws, rules
and regulations of the City now or hereafter in force. No title to any cemetery
lot or portion thereof, shall be transferred by the owner thereof except as
authorized by Minnesota Statutes section 306.29. Whenever the title to any
cemetery lot, or portion thereof, shall be transferred by the owner thereof,
the City shall have the right to repurchase the same by paying to such owner
the price originally paid to the City therefor, less the portion thereof
allocated to the Permanent Care and Improvement Fund under section
7-7-10 of this chapter; provided, however, that this right of repurchase by the
City shall not apply when a conveyance is made to the City for the purpose of
transferring title to a spouse, sister or brother of the owner, or to a
descendant of the owner or a descendant of the owner's spouse, sister or
brother. (Ord. 946, 3-5-2018)
7-7-6: CONDUCT IN CEMETERY:
   A.   The following conduct is prohibited in the cemetery:
      1.   Shooting of firearms, except in the nature of a military salute.
      2.   Driving more than ten (10) miles per hour.
      3.   Any noisy or boisterous conduct that can be heard or seen from a
distance of fifty feet (50'), except as part of an interment.
      4.   All dogs, cats, or other household pets not kept on a leash secured
by a person of suitable age.
      5.   Failure of a person in control of a dog, cat or other household pet
to immediately pick up all pet droppings and remove them from the cemetery.
       6.   Driving or operating a vechicle of any kind any place in the
cemetery except on designated roadways without the prior written approval of
the cemetery sexton. The sexton shall have the authority to designate the route
and manner of any such access.
      7.   Special private “celebrations” without the approval of the City.
(Ord. 946, 3-5-2018; amd Ord. 989, 7-8-2024)
7-7-7: UNLAWFUL TO DESTROY; DAMAGE PROPERTY:
It shall also be unlawful to destroy, injure, mutilate or remove any tombstone,
monument, gravestone, building, fence, railing, or other structure in the
cemetery, and it shall be unlawful to injure or destroy any tree, shrub or
plant or to injure or interfere with any grounds or parking rules within the
limits of the cemetery. (Ch. 1; amd. 1998 Code)
7-7-8: BURIALS AND INTERMENTS:
No burials, grave openings, vault placements or interments of any kind shall be
made in said cemetery without prior notification to and permission from the
City. Permission shall be granted if this section and all regulations of the
City and State pertaining to the cemetery are complied with. Notice to the City
may be given to the City Sexton. (Ord. 731, 11-15-1993; amd. Ord. 989, 7-8-
2024)
7-7-9: CHARGES:
The City Council, by resolution, may set such other charges for cemetery
services including, but not limited to, burial record fees, grave site fees,
monument fees and grave opening fees, as the Council deems appropriate to
reimburse the City for all or a portion of any such service provided. (Ord.
708, 6-1-1992)
7-7-10: PERMANENT CARE AND IMPROVEMENT FUND:
The City Council shall designate a percentage of the sales price of any
cemetery lot to be set apart as a Permanent Care and Improvement Fund for the
care, maintenance and improvement of the cemetery. The City Council shall
constitute the Board of Directors of the fund and the City Treasurer shall
invest the funds in separate accounts from other City funds as provided by law.
The income from the fund shall be transferred to the City annually on July 1
for use by the City for care, maintenance and improvement of the cemetery. The
members of the Board of Directors shall not be entitled to compensation for
acting as members of the Board of Directors. (Ord. 731, 11-15-1993; amd. Ord.
946, 3-5-2018)
7-7-11: MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS:
It shall be the obligation of the owner of any cemetery lot or plot upon which
a monument is located to maintain and keep such monument in a good state of
repair at all times. In the event a monument creates a danger to public safety
or interferes with maintenance of the cemetery, the City shall:
   A.   Notify the owner, in writing, of the needed repair or maintenance and a
date by which such repair or maintenance must be completed. Such notice shall
be sent by first class mail to the last known address of the owner according to
the official cemetery records maintained by the City.
   B.   If the requested repair or maintenance is not completed by the date
specified, the City may, at its discretion, repair, reset or remove such
monument. The cost for any such repair, resetting or removal shall be billed to
the owner of the cemetery lot or plot.
   C.   The City shall store any monument removed by the City for six (6) years
from the date of removal. If, during that six (6) year period, anyone
establishes that they are the owner of the cemetery lot or plot from which the
monument was removed, the City shall return the monument to such person upon
payment of all costs of the City in connection with removing the monument.
   D.   If no one claims the monument during the six (6) year period, the City
may publish notice of its intent to dispose of the monument after a specified
date in the official newspaper of the City. If no one claims the monument and
pays the City's costs in connection with removing the monument by the specified
date, the City shall offer the monument to the Chippewa County Historical
Society. If the Chippewa County Historical Society does not wish to receive the
monument, the City may dispose of the monument as it deems appropriate.
   E.   Whenever the City removes a monument, the City shall provide an
alternate identification on the cemetery lot or plot. The cost of such
alternate identification shall be included with the City's cost of removal and
billed to the owner. (Ord. 737, 3-7-1994)
7-7-12: REGULATIONS:
The City Council may by resolution adopt additional rules and regulations
governing the use and operation of the cemetery. (1998 Code)
7-7-13: PERMIT REQUIRED:
All burials, grave openings, vault placements and interments must be performed
by a person or entity with a grave digger’s permit from the City. The City
Clerk shall issue the no cost permit upon being provided with proof of
liability insurance naming the City as an additional insured and such other
information as the City may request. Grave digging permits are effective for
one (1) year and will expire December 31 of each year. (Ord. 989, 7-8-2024)
CHAPTER 8
PROHIBITION OF CANNABIS USE IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: Use In Public Places Unlawful
7-8-3: Penalty
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions included in Minnesota
Statutes, Section 342.01, and as the same may abe amended from time to time,
shall apply.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PRODUCTS: A cannabis product that is approved for sale by
the office or is substantially similar to a product approved by the office.
Adult-use cannabis product includes edible cannabis products but does not
include medical cannabinoid products.
PUBLIC PLACE: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "Public Place" shall
mean any and all public places within the City of Montevideo, including but not
limited to any public street, avenue, boulevard, right of way, road, alley,
sidewalk, park, trail, parking lot, building, airport and cemetery. Provided,
however, that the following shall not be considered a Public Place:
   A.   A private residence, including the person's curtilage or yard;
   B.   Private property not generally accessible by the public, unless the
person is explicitly prohibited from smoking cannabis flower or cannabis
products on the property by the owner of the property; or
   C.   The premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit on-site
consumption.
SMOKE/SMOKING: For the purpose of this Chapter the term "Smoking" is inhaling,
exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe or
any other lighted or heated product containing, made or derived from cannabis
or hemp, whether natural or synthetic, that is intended for inhalation. Smoking
will also include using an electronic delivery device.
(Ord. 982, 8-21-2023)
7-8-2: USE IN PUBLIC PLACES UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or smoke cannabis flower or other
adult-use cannabis products in a Public Place.
(Ord. 982, 8-21-2023)
7-8-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this Section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and
fined up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) or the maximum amount for a petty
misdemeanor allowed by state law.
(Ord. 982, 8-21-2023)
TITLE 8
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Public Improvement Assessments
8-1-2: Storm Sewer Improvement District, Assessments
8-1-3: Prepayment Of Special Assessments
8-1-1: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Benefited Property Liable For Costs: The City Council may provide for
the recovery of all or any part of the cost of public improvements through
special assessments against the property benefited by the improvements.
   B.   State Law Compliance; Assessment Due Following Completion: Any such
special assessments shall be levied and collected as provided by Minnesota
Statutes chapter 429, except that the City Council may, in its discretion,
provide for the delay of the commencement of the payment of installments of
principal of special assessments for sewer or water for a period of not to
exceed five (5) years; provided, however, that interest shall be assessed
without any such delay and the commencement of the payment of installments of
principal shall not be delayed beyond the time when the sewer or water is used
for the parcel of property being assessed. (Ord. 429, 10-2-1972)
8-1-2: STORM SEWER IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT, ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Provisions Of State Law Adopted: The provisions of Minnesota Statutes
sections 444.16 through 444.21 relating to storm sewer improvement districts
are adopted and made a part of this Section as if set out in full.
   B.   Creation: A storm sewer improvement tax district is hereby established
for the purpose of assessing the costs of major storm sewer improvement
programs. The City storm sewer improvement district shall consist of all
property within the corporate limits of the City as the same may be located
from time to time.
   C.   Assessments: Assessments for any storm sewer improvements which are
assessed to the City storm sewer improvement district shall be assessed to all
property within the boundaries of the district on an ad valorem basis. Any such
special assessments shall be levied and collected as provided by Section
8-1-1 of this Chapter. (Ord. 599, 4-18-1983)
8-1-3: PREPAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Following the adoption of any Special Assessments for public
improvements pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 429.061, a property owner may pay
all or any part of the Special Assessment, without interest, anytime within
thirty (30) days following the date of the final assessment hearing.
   B.   After that thirty (30) day period and prior to the date such assessment
must be certified to Chippewa County, a property owner may pay all or any part
of the Special Assessment, with interest from the date of final assessment
hearing to the date of payment, with interest at the rate set at the final
assessment hearing. (Ord. 966, 4-18-2022)
CHAPTER 2
UTILITY CHARGES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definition
8-2-2: Delinquency Charge
8-2-3: Utility Charges Liens To Be Collected With Taxes
8-2-4: Charges May Be Collected In Civil Action
8-2-5: Street Lighting System Charge
8-2-1: DEFINITION:
The term “utility charges” as used in this chapter shall include:
   A.   Service charges for the removal and disposal of garbage and rubbish;
   B.   Water charges, including disconnect and reconnect fees, and charges for
closing cuts in streets following work by plumber;
   C.   Sewage service charges, including charges for closing cuts in street
following work by plumber; and
   D.   Delinquency charges.
   E.   Street lighting charge.
   F.   Stormwater drainage charges. (Ord. 426, 7-24-1972; amd. 1998 Code; Ord.
979, 4-17-2023)
8-2-2: DELINQUENCY CHARGE:
A delinquency charge in an amount set by a resolution of the city council shall
be added to any of the utility charges listed in subsections
8-2-1A, B and C of this chapter when the same are not paid on the date
specified for payment in the bill therefor sent by the city; provided, however,
that no more than one such delinquency charge be added to any bill. The city
may, if it so desires, turn off water services for any premises to which there
is a delinquent utility charge after giving ten (10) days' notice of its
intention so to do, together with an opportunity to be heard as to the
delinquency, after such delinquency has continued for at least ten (10) days
from the due date thereof. Utility charges for water service shall commence as
of the date the service is turned on at the street. (Ord. 722, 12-7-1992)
8-2-3: UTILITY CHARGES LIENS TO BE COLLECTED WITH TAXES:
All utility charges are hereby made liens upon the lot, land or premises served
by the service for which a utility charge is made and all such charges shall be
billed directly to the owner or occupant of the real estate provided with the
service. In case of failure to pay such utility charges after the expiration of
fifteen (15) days after the due date, written notice shall be given by mail to
the owner of the real estate provided with the service. Such notice shall state
that if the utility charge is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of
such notice, the amount thereof, together with a sum in an amount set by
resolution of the city council and interest from the due date of the utility
charge until June 1 of the following year at a rate set by resolution of the
city council, shall be certified by the county auditor to be collected with the
taxes on the real estate served. If the water service is to be disconnected
because of a delinquent utility charge, the notice shall state this fact. It
shall also state that during said thirty (30) days an objector may appear at
any regular session of the city council and be heard concerning any objection
he or she might have to such payments. If, during said thirty (30) days an
objector appears before the city council, the council shall hear and pass upon
all objections to the utility charge after affording the objector an
opportunity to be heard. If, after thirty (30) days from the giving of such
notice, the charge has not been paid and the city council has not relieved said
objector from liability therefor, the amount of such charges, together with a
sum in an amount set by resolution of the city council and interest from the
due date of the utility charge until June 1 of the following year at a rate set
by resolution of the city council, shall be certified by the city clerk to the
county auditor of Chippewa County prior to October 10 of each year to be
extended on the tax rolls against such premises in the same manner as other
taxes, and collected by the county treasurer, and paid to the city treasurer
along with other taxes and until so collected shall be a lien upon the real
estate so served. The clerk in so certifying such charges to the county auditor
shall specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises served and
the name of the owner thereof. (Ord. 932, 10-20-2014)
8-2-4: CHARGES MAY BE COLLECTED IN CIVIL ACTION:
Any utility charges which have been properly billed to the occupant of any
premises served, and not paid, may be recovered in a civil action by the city
in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 426, 7-24-1972)
8-2-5: STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM CHARGE:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
    NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: All property except residential property and
property without a water meter.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: All one- and two-family dwellings, all manufactured
homes and all apartments or units in multi- family dwellings except: nursing
homes, hospitals, and assisted living facilities. (Ord. 747, 8-15-1994)
   B.   Imposition Of Charge: The cost of operating the street lighting system
shall be charged to all property owners benefitted by street lighting. The
owner and occupant of property on which or adjacent to which there is a street
lighting system shall be personally liable for such benefit determined as
provided in this section.
   C.   Amount Of Charge: The property owner or occupant shall be charged for
the current benefit to the property. This benefit will be based on the prior
years utility bill for street lighting to the city. The city council shall
annually, by resolution, set the amount of the charge to residential and
nonresidential properties.
   D.   Billing: The city shall monthly prepare a bill based on the rates
established for each property class by the city council as defined by this
section. For nonresidential property, a separate charge shall be made for each
water meter. Such charges shall be added to the water and sewer billing for
each property as determined by the council. The amount billed will thereupon
become due and payable in accordance with water and sewer billing policy;
provided, that the amount due for the entire month shall be due on the first of
a month regardless of actual ownership or occupancy for the remainder of the
month. In the event of nonpayment of such bill, the city clerk shall be
authorized to certify the unpaid portion to the county auditor to be added to
the tax rolls for the property involved as provided in section
8-2-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 736, 2-7-1994; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Underground Installation Of Electric And Telephone Lines
8-3-2: Repair And Maintenance Of Existing Overhead Installations
8-3-3: Exceptions
8-3-4: Penalties
8-3-1: UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC AND TELEPHONE LINES:
   A.   District Designated: The City Council may by resolution, upon receiving
a petition signed by a majority of the owners of real property to be benefited,
or without such petition if it deems appropriate and in the public interest,
designate any area of the City as an underground utility district, and within
such a district all permanent electric and telephone lines, excluding main
feeder lines and high voltage electric transmission lines in excess of fifteen
(15) kilovolts capacity, and all other communication circuits and services as
defined in the National Electric Code shall be required thereby to be placed
underground within a period of time set by the Council. The Council shall also
set the time within which affected property owners must be ready to receive
underground service.
   B.   Cost Of Underground Installation: The cost of such underground
installation may be assessed by the City against benefiting properties as a
public improvement following a public hearing and in full accordance with the
provisions of this Code. In determining the cost of said installation, the
applicable utility companies shall be entitled to amounts sufficient to repay
them for the following as computed and reflected by the existing regulations
and procedures of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and the Federal
Communications Commission, and any regulations of the Minnesota Public Utility
Commission:
      1.   The original cost less depreciation taken of the existing overhead
electric and telephone facilities to be removed;
      2.   The estimated cost of removing such overhead electric and telephone
facilities less the salvage value of the facilities removed;
      3.   The cost difference between the estimated cost of constructing new
overhead facilities and the cost of constructing the underground facilities,
less the cost of betterment; and
      4.   The cost of obtaining new easements when technical considerations
make it reasonably necessary to utilize easements for the underground
facilities different from those used for the overhead facilities.
   C.   Assessment: No assessment levied under this Chapter shall be declared
void nor shall any such assessment or part thereof be set aside in consequence
of any error or irregularity permitted or appearing in any of the proceedings
under this Chapter or any other provision of this Code.
   D.   Responsibility Of Utility Customer: It shall be the responsibility of
any utility customer within an underground utility district to sustain the
expense of rewiring in order to accept an underground service which was
provided pursuant to this Chapter for that portion of the service which is
usually and customarily the responsibility of the customer.
   E.   Agreement For Installation: If underground installation in an
underground utility district is not to be assessed, the City shall provide for
such installation by direct agreement with the applicable utility companies.
(Ord. 562, 11-21-1980)
8-3-2: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING OVERHEAD INSTALLATIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the repair, maintenance,
reconstruction, replacement, or modification of existing overhead utility
lines. (Ord. 562, 11-21-1980)
8-3-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The requirements of this Chapter shall apply unless the City Council
specifically shall find, after study and recommendation by the Planning
Commission, that:
   A.   The placing of utilities underground would not be compatible with the
planned, existing or surrounding development;
   B.   The additional cost of undergrounding such utilities would create an
undue financial hardship; or
   C.   Topographical, soil, or any other conditions make the underground
installation unreasonable or impractical. (Ord. 562, 11-21-1980)
8-3-4: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or any official action taken
under the authority of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 562, 11-21-1980; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER AND WATER
SECTION:
8-4-1: License Required
8-4-2: Application
8-4-3: Inspections
8-4-4: Utilities Superintendent To Direct
8-4-5: Permit To Work
8-4-6: Costs To Be Paid By Landowner
8-4-7: Connection To Sewer Required
8-4-8: Sewer Connection Rules
8-4-9: Water Main Connection Rules
8-4-10: Contract To Excavate
8-4-11: Emergency Excavation
8-4-12: Area Excavated
8-4-13: Drain Pipes Subject To Inspection
8-4-14: Notice For Inspection
8-4-15: Deposits Prohibited
8-4-16: Tapping Water Mains
8-4-17: Pipes Protected
8-4-18: Plumber Not To Turn Water On
8-4-19: Street Stopcocks Under City Control
8-4-20: Pipes And Fixtures; Kept In Good Repair
8-4-21: Street Stopcocks
8-4-22: Service Pipe
8-4-23: Meters To Be Applied
8-4-24: Council May Amend Rules
8-4-25: Fires; Water May Be Shut Off
8-4-26: Fire Chief To Control During Fire
8-4-27: Excessive Or Unreasonable Use Prohibited
8-4-28: Fountains
8-4-29: Taking Water From Another
8-4-30: Turn Off Water Prohibited
8-4-31: Open Fire Hydrant Prohibited
8-4-32: Injury To Apparatus
8-4-33: Specifications
8-4-34: Water Rates
8-4-35: Meters
8-4-36: Use Of Public Sewers
8-4-37: Water Cooled Compressors
8-4-38: Connection Charge
8-4-39: Service Lines
8-4-40: Compliance
8-4-41: Private Wells And Septic Systems
8-4-42: Critical Water Deficiency Declaration
8-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person other than an authorized officer of the City or an employee in the
Office of the Utilities Superintendent of the City shall tap or make any
perforation or opening of any kind in any sewer, water main, or any public or
private sewer drain, or any public or private service pipe, within the
boundaries of any street, avenue, alley or public ground without first having
obtained a license therefor as provided by the Council. (Ord. 200, 5-19-1948)
8-4-2: APPLICATION:
Every person desiring a supply of water must make an application therefor to
the Utilities Superintendent in such form as may be prescribed by the Council
for that purpose. The application must state fully and truly all the uses to
which the water is to be applied. No different or additional use shall be
allowed, except by permission obtained from said Superintendent. Not more than
one house or consumer shall be supplied by one tap, except by special
permission from the Superintendent. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-3: INSPECTIONS:
All sewer drains or water pipes, which shall hereafter be laid, relaid, or
repaired through or on any private premises, shall be subjected to the
inspection of the Utilities Superintendent. Any person who is causing the same
to be laid, relaid, or repaired, as well as any person laying, relaying or
repairing the same, shall give the Utilities Superintendent all reasonable
facilities for so inspecting the laying, relaying or repairing of the same, and
all work in connection therewith. The same shall be laid, relaid, or repaired
according to the direction of the Utilities Superintendent, where the same has
not been prescribed by the Council. (Ord. 200, 5-19-1948)
8-4-4: UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT TO DIRECT:
   A.   Sewer Pipes; Sewer Connection: The work of laying, relaying or
repairing any sewer pipe, or making any sewer connection with any main sewer
for any private person within the limits of any street, avenue, alley or public
ground in the city shall be done under the direction of the utilities
superintendent, or some person under his or her direction. Every person doing
such work shall do the same according to the direction of the utilities
superintendent or said person under said utilities superintendent's direction.
   B.   Water Pipes; Water Connection: The work of relaying, laying, or
repairing any water pipe or making any connection with any water main, for any
private person within the limits of any street, avenue, alley or public ground
in the city, shall be done under the direction of the utilities superintendent,
or under the direction of some other person under the directions of said
utilities superintendent. (Ord. 200, 5-19-1948)
8-4-5: PERMIT TO WORK:
   A.   Permit Required: Before any licensed plumber shall lay, relay or repair
any branch or service sewer or water pipe, or tap or make any connection with
any sewer or water main within any street, avenue, alley, or public ground
within the city, such plumber shall first obtain a permit to do the same as
follows: if a water or sewer pipe or main, said plumber shall obtain the
necessary permits to do the same and to make the necessary openings in the
street, avenue, alley or public ground for the same, from the city.
   B.   Exception; Fee: The city shall grant such permit on application of any
such licensed plumber, if such laying, relaying, repairing, tapping or making
of such connection shall be done, which location must not be departed from by
such plumber in any degree, except on the written consent made on such permit
by the officer giving the same. The amount of the fee, if any, for such permit
shall be fixed by resolution of the council. (Ord. 425, 7-24-1972)
8-4-6: COSTS TO BE PAID BY LANDOWNER:
   A.   Costs Identified: Whenever an opening is made in any street, avenue,
alley or public ground within the City for the purpose of installing or making
repairs of a water line or sewer line for the benefit of any land, the owner
thereof shall pay the following costs:
      1.   The cost of making out the permit and for making the inspection.
      2.   The cost of making the repairs to roadways and sidewalks, made
necessary by the work done and which were not repaired satisfactorily to the
City.
   B.   Collected As Utility Bill: Such charges shall be utility charges and
shall be billed and collected in the same manner as other utility charges.
(Ord. 425, 7-24-1972)
8-4-7: CONNECTION TO SEWER REQUIRED:
The Council may by resolution, in all cases where property abuts on any sewer,
cause the owner of each abutting lot, his or her agent or the occupant, to make
a proper and sufficient sewer connection with the main sewer and their
premises, whenever in their opinion, the same may be necessary, and the Clerk
upon the adoption of the resolution, shall mail or give to such owner, agent or
occupant notice in writing specifying the time said sewer drain must be
completed. If said owner, agent or occupant neglects to complete same within
the time specified, the Council shall cause it to be done, and the expense
thereof may be assessed against the property and, unless paid, shall constitute
a lien against premises, in the same manner as the assessment and collection of
taxes for the construction of sidewalks. (Ch. 78)
8-4-8: SEWER CONNECTION RULES:
The following rules must be observed and carried out in all work relating to
sewer connection:
   A.   Connections with sewers must be made with the slant already put in by
the City.
   B.   Deviations from the foregoing requirements may be made if the Utilities
Superintendent thinks best; but his or her written consent must be obtained
before any such change is made.
   C.   Any new connections made must be made within the middle third of the
interior height of the sewer connected with.
   D.   All connection pipes must be laid in a true line from sewer to the
curb, in an open trench and before refilling is done.
   E.   All the joints of sewer pipes must be made as required by the Plumbing
Code in effect in the City. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
   F.   In order to assure that the filling of cuts in streets, avenues, alleys
and public grounds is done according to City standards, the City shall do such
filling and charge the costs thereof to the owner of the land benefited thereby
as provided in Section
8-4-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 425, 7-24-1972)
8-4-9: WATER MAIN CONNECTION RULES:
The following rules must be observed and carried out in all work relating to
water main connections, or laying, relaying, or repairing water pipes:
   A.   All connections made with the water mains must be made under the
direction of the Utilities Superintendent.
   B.   In excavating for laying service pipe in the streets or alleys, if the
Utilities Superintendent shall consent, it may be done by digging pits and
pushing, boring, or tunneling between. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
   C.   In order to assure that the filling of cuts in streets, avenues, alleys
and public grounds is done according to City standards, the City shall do such
filling and charge the costs thereof to the owner of the land benefited thereby
as provided in Section
8-4-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 425, 7-24-1972)
   D.   All work must be done under the supervision of the Utilities
Superintendent. (Ord. 425, 7-24-1972; amd. 1998 Code)
8-4-10: CONTRACT TO EXCAVATE:
Any person having a contract with the City for laying, relaying or repairing
sewers, water pipes or setting hydrants, shall have the right to excavate in
the streets or alleys for the purpose of laying such water mains or sewers as
may be provided for or needed in the completion of such contract without a
permit from the City; provided, such contract shall provide for indemnifying
the City against any lesser damage caused by neglect or carelessness on the
part of the contractor, his or her agents, employees or servants in the
progress of work done by virtue of said contract. (Ord. 425, 7-24-1972)
8-4-11: EMERGENCY EXCAVATION:
The Utilities Superintendent or any person having authority from said
Superintendent may open any street, avenue, alley or public ground for the
purpose of repairing any water main or service pipe, at any time whenever the
exigencies of the case require immediate action, without any permit from the
City; but such permit must be obtained as soon as possible thereafter. (Ord.
425, 7-24-1972)
8-4-12: AREA EXCAVATED:
The area of pavement to be removed, and the time estimated to be consumed for
any proposed work shall be determined by the Utilities Superintendent or
someone designated by him or her; but if the Utilities Superintendent shall
require it, a larger area shall be relaid, and the expense of relaying and
inspection, whether it be greater or less than the estimate made, shall be the
amount to be paid for. (Ord. 425, 7-24-1972; amd. 1998 Code)
8-4-13: DRAIN PIPES SUBJECT TO INSPECTION:
   A.   Inspection Required: All drain pipes for public sewers, or for private
drains, shall be subject to the inspection of the Utilities Superintendent or
his or her assistant.
   B.   Certain Size Required; Exception: No sanitary drain for any building
shall be connected with a public sewer, unless it be by drain pipe of at least
four inches (4") in diameter, unless specially authorized by the Utilities
Superintendent. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-14: NOTICE FOR INSPECTION:
Forty eight (48) hours' notice must be given at the office of the City Clerk by
the person who is to make the connection with any sewer or drain when such work
will be ready for inspection, previous to making said connection. This notice
must be in writing and so left during normal office hours. In case of an
emergency the notice shall be three (3) hours. (Ord. 425, 7-24-1972; amd. 1998
Code)
8-4-15: DEPOSITS PROHIBITED:
No person shall place, throw or deposit in any catch basin, sewer or drain,
butchers' offal, garbage, dead animals, ashes, shavings, gas drippings or solid
refuse of any kind. (Ord. 200, 5-19-1948)
8-4-16: TAPPING WATER MAINS:
   A.   Rules And Regulations: In tapping water mains the following rules and
regulations must be followed:
      1.   The street must be opened and the excavated material deposited in a
manner which will occasion the least inconvenience to the public, and provide
for the passage of water along the gutters. One-half (1/2) of the street must
be in good and safe condition at all times for the passage of vehicles.
      2.   No tunneling will be permitted except when the exigencies of the
case require such a permit.
      3.   No excavation in any street or public place shall be left open over
night, except thoroughly barricaded or railed off, and properly lighted so as
to secure public safety.
      4.   If any openings be made for any purpose whatsoever, and water mains
and service pipes exposed, measures must be taken to protect them from frost.
      5.   Any refusal to permit such inspection, or any interference with the
Utilities Superintendent or his or her designee in the performance of his or
her duty, shall be immediately followed by a suspension or forfeiture of the
license or permit. (Ord. 200, 5-19-1948; amd. 1998 Code)
      6.   Any plumber who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the rules
adopted by the Council, may be liable to have his or her permit revoked, or
subjected to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 425, 7-25-1972; amd. 1998 Code)
      7.   For any misrepresentation or omission in the statement of the work
done or appurtenances set, through which there may be water used, the plumber,
if at fault, may be suspended and fined, or either; and if it appears to be
wilful, his or her permit may be revoked.
      8.   Plumbers shall make a report (return) on all work done by them. Upon
the face or back of the copy of the original permit issued for such work in the
office of the Utilities Superintendent, they shall note the number of the "Ys"
used in making a sewer connection or if no "Y" was used, said connection shall
be located by measuring the distance therefrom to the center of the nearest
manhole on the main sewer that was tapped. The location of manhole and distance
shall be carefully indicated.
   B.   Information Relative To Installation Indicated: All new taps,
stopcocks, and shut-off boxes installed on water service lines shall be
witnessed in to two (2) or more permanent objects in close proximity to said
installation. Sketch showing location, objects used as witnesses together with
careful measurements shall be made on the back of the copy of the original
permit issued for such work in the office of the Utilities Superintendent. All
other information relative to such installation, either sewer or water
connections, that will aid in locating said connections shall be indicated.
(Ord. 425, 7-24-1972)
8-4-17: PIPES PROTECTED:
All pipes from the street stopcocks where they enter cellars or basements of
buildings and inside of such buildings must be carefully protected against the
cold and provided with a stop and waste pipe where they enter the building so
located that the water may be conveniently shut off and pipe drained to prevent
freezing. Where a meter is used, the stop and waste pipe shall be placed before
the inlet of meter. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-18: PLUMBER NOT TO TURN WATER ON:
After completing the connection of service pipe with City water main, the
plumber shall leave the street stopcock tightly closed and the cover of the
stopcock shut and fastened, and it shall not be opened again until the
Superintendent shall so direct. The water will not be turned into any house or
service pipe, except upon the order of the Superintendent, nor until the
applicant shall have paid the rent due for the current term. Plumbers are
strictly prohibited from turning the water into any service pipe except for
testing the pipes. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-19: STREET STOPCOCKS UNDER CITY CONTROL:
Any party taking water from the City waterworks does so upon the express
understanding that the street stopcocks are under the exclusive control of the
City. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-20: PIPES AND FIXTURES; KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR:
Persons using water must place and keep their service pipes and all fixtures
required in good repair, and protected from frost, at their own expense, and
prevent all wastage of water. No consumer shall supply water to other families
nor suffer them to take it off the premises; hydrants, taps, hoses, water
closets, baths or other fixtures will not be permitted to be kept running when
not in use. The water will not be furnished any premises having wasteful or
improper fittings. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-21: STREET STOPCOCKS:
A street stopcock shall be attached to service pipe of the outer edge of the
sidewalk and even with the surface thereof, where there is a sidewalk, and if
there is none, then at such point in the street or alley as the Superintendent
may direct, and must be enclosed with a substantial iron box, provided with a
strong iron or brass covering. No person shall be allowed to put in hydrants,
sprinklers or private fireplugs without a stopcock under the control of the
City. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-22: SERVICE PIPE:
When a permit for a connection with a main for building purposes is issued, the
service pipe must be carried to the outer edge of the sidewalk as in other
cases, and when the building is completed, the pipe shall be taken up, the
ferule drawn and the hole plugged, unless an extension is wanted to supply the
building, in which case application must be made in the usual way. Rates for
building purposes shall be payable on demand. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-23: METERS TO BE APPLIED:
The Council shall have right to order a meter owned and controlled by the City
to be applied to any service pipe, wherever they deem it advisable, and collect
meter rates for water. Meter rates shall be payable at the end of every month
or at such periods as may be determined by the Council. The amount of water
used will determine the amount to be paid each month. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-24: COUNCIL MAY AMEND RULES:
No rule or regulation in this Chapter contained or hereafter enacted touching
the supply of water from the City waterworks to private persons shall be
construed as in the nature of a contract in such a sense as to prevent the
Council from altering or amending the same or from establishing such additional
regulations as may from time to time be found necessary; and the Council
reserves the right to make such changes or additions at its discretion. (Ch.
79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-25: FIRES; WATER MAY BE SHUT OFF:
In case of fire or alarm of fire, or in making repairs or construction of new
works, the Superintendent may shut off the water at any time and keep it shut
off as long as the Superintendent shall deem necessary. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-26: FIRE CHIEF TO CONTROL DURING FIRE:
In time of fire, the Utilities Superintendent shall surrender control, for the
time being, of all mains, gates and fire hydrants to the Chief of the Fire
Department for the purpose of extinguishing such fire; and it shall be the duty
of such Chief, after the extinguishment of the fire to restore all hydrants and
gates. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-27: EXCESSIVE OR UNREASONABLE USE PROHIBITED:
The water shall be cut off from premises where the use is not confined to a
fair application for proper purposes and also where the use is excessive or
unreasonable. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-28: FOUNTAINS:
The service of fountains out of doors must be provided with stopcocks under the
exclusive control of the City. The right is reserved to suspend the use of
fountains and hoses for sprinkling streets, yards, gardens or otherwise
whenever, in the opinion of the Council, the public exigency may require.
During a fire no water shall be drawn from the City waterworks through any yard
fountain or hose for sprinkling purposes, except for the extinguishment of
fires. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-29: TAKING WATER FROM ANOTHER:
In case, for any reason, water shall fail to flow to any consumer thereof under
this Chapter, such consumer may, on application to the Superintendent, receive
permission to take water from any place where the same be furnished with the
consent of the parties controlling the same. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-30: TURN OFF WATER PROHIBITED:
No person shall turn the water from the City waterworks off on any street
stopcock connected with any private pipe or water gate except by special
direction from the Utilities Superintendent. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-31: OPEN FIRE HYDRANT PROHIBITED:
No person shall open any fire hydrant for any purpose without permission from
the Superintendent, or, in time of fire, from some competent officer of the
Fire Department. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-32: INJURY TO APPARATUS:
No person shall wilfully break or injure any hydrant, main, pipe, pump,
cistern, fixture, implement, or any machine, apparatus or building appurtenant
to, or used in, the management or operation of the city waterworks or any part
thereof. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922)
8-4-33: SPECIFICATIONS:
A copper or bronze coupling must be used for all connections between iron and
lead pipes. No iron pipe shall be used except by express permission of the
utilities superintendent, and in that event the pipe must be heavily galvanized
extra strong lap welded, and have the exposed threads thoroughly coated with
coal-tar pitch applied hot. All pipe between the city water main and the
property line shall be of ninety nine percent (99%) pure copper tubing tested
at one thousand (1,000) pounds, internal hydraulic pressure, flanged at the
ends and connected with suitable copper or bronze fittings; provided, that
whenever conditions make such substitution advisable, the utilities
superintendent may grant permission to use other material permitted under the
current Minnesota plumbing code provided such approval is made in writing. (Ch.
79, 1-1-1922; amd. 1998 Code)
8-4-34: WATER RATES:
   A.   Water rates for the supply of water to consumers shall be set as
follows:
      1.   Rates for water usage shall be set by resolution of the city
council.
      2.   There shall also be a charge, set by resolution of the council, for
connecting or disconnecting or reconnecting a service whether the same be
voluntary or for the purpose of enforcing collection of a utility charge, said
additional charge shall become due and payable when a representative of the
city calls at the premises for the purpose of shutting off such water because
of a delinquency in making payment.
      3.   An additional twenty five percent (25%) of the basic water rate
shall be charged to consumers outside of the city limits, unless negotiated as
part of an agreement with another governmental unit. (Ord. 882, 10-20-2008)
8-4-35: METERS:
All piping, connections, appurtenances and meters shall be installed and
operated strictly in accordance with the State Plumbing Code, under the
direction and to the satisfaction and approval of the utilities superintendent.
Failure to install or maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to
have or permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city be
grounds for termination of water service to any consumer who so fails to
comply. (Ch. 79, 1-1-1922; amd. Ord. 963, 7-6-2021)
8-4-36: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Unlawful Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged directly or indirectly any stormwater, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage waste from on site disposal systems,
unpolluted cooling or process water into the sanitary sewer collection system.
No roof, sump pump, swimming pool discharge, or surface or subsurface water
drainage system shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system, and no
building shall hereafter be constructed, nor shall an existing building be
hereafter altered in such a manner so as to provide such connection with the
sanitary sewer system, either inside or outside the building, except as herein
provided.
   B.   Deadline For Removal Of Illegal Connections: Before July 15, 1998, any
person having a roof, sump pump, swimming pool discharge, or surface or
subsurface drainage system now connected and/or discharging into the sanitary
sewer, shall disconnect and/or remove the same. Any disconnects or openings in
the sanitary sewer shall be closed and repaired in an effective, workmanlike
manner, as approved by the city.
   C.   Inspection Rights Of City: The owner of such property shall allow
employees of the city or its agents to inspect the buildings to confirm
compliance with the provisions hereof, or such owner may alternatively furnish
a certificate from a licensed plumber certifying that their property is in
compliance with this section in lieu of a city inspection of the same. Any
person refusing to allow their property to be inspected, or refusing to provide
a plumber's certificate of compliance within fourteen (14) days of the date a
city employee or agent is denied admittance to inspect the property, shall be
deemed to be in violation of this section, said violation to constitute a
misdemeanor.
   D.   Penalty Surcharge Imposed: A monthly surcharge set by resolution of the
council is hereby imposed and added to every sewer billing mailed on or after
January 1, 1999, to property owners who are not in compliance with this
subsection. The surcharge shall be added every month until the property is in
compliance.
   E.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, upon
application to the city, a property owner, in the sole discretion of the city
upon showing of undue hardship, may be granted authorization to discharge
contrary to the terms hereof during the months of December, January, February
and March.
   F.   Implementation: The city may establish regulations for the
implementation of this section. Such regulations shall be effective upon
approval by the city council and publication in the official newspaper. (Ord.
780, 5-6-1997)
8-4-37: WATER COOLED COMPRESSORS:
No water cooled compressor, other than a recirculating type which provides for
the cooling and reusing of water, shall be connected to any water main or water
line of the city or in any manner whatsoever be permitted to use water supplied
by the city for purposes of cooling any such compressor. (Ord. 401, 8-17-1970)
8-4-38: CONNECTION CHARGE:
   A.   Flexibility In Application: Whenever the city council determines that a
special assessment is not practical or feasible or will be inequitable and will
not fairly represent the benefits to the property to be served with water or
sanitary sewer, or that a connection charge in lieu of a special assessment
will more accurately reflect the benefits to be received by the property to be
served with water or sanitary sewer, the city council may by resolution provide
that a connection charge be paid for providing water or sanitary sewer service
to any property.
   B.   Content Of Resolution: Any such resolution shall fix the amount of the
connection charge to be paid and shall describe the property to be benefited
thereby.
   C.   Method Of Payment: Any such connection charge so imposed shall be
assessed and may be paid in the same manner as special assessments for local
improvements are assessed and paid.
   D.   Additional Charges Possible: Any such connection charge shall be in
lieu of any special assessment against the property benefited for the service
for which the connection charge is made, and no property for which a connection
charge has been paid shall be assessed otherwise for the same service, but this
shall not prevent additional connection charges being made for additional
connections to the water or sanitary sewer lines to provide additional services
to the same property. (Ord. 479, 7-7-1975)
8-4-39: SERVICE LINES:
All water service lines and all sanitary sewer service lines shall be owned and
all expenses of maintaining, repairing and replacing the same shall be paid by
the owners of the property served for whose benefit the same were installed,
whether such installation is by the city or by those benefited. All such water
and sanitary sewer service lines shall be installed at a sufficient depth to
avoid freezing. All new connections (or disconnections) to the mains shall be
at the expense of the property owner. In areas where water or sewer service
line stubs/curb boxes have been installed, the owner of the property being
served may connect to those lines or stubs, but the city neither guarantees
their location or state of repair. All initial costs to connect water and sewer
service lines to the main are at the cost of the property owner, including
connections to previously installed stub lines.
   A.   Water Service Line Defined: A "water service line" is any line which
connects the city main to the property being served. Once installed at cost to
the property owners, ownership and maintenance of the water line is defined as:
      1.   Property Owner Owns And Maintains: From the property side of the
curb box (shutoff), including the flare and nut connection to the curb box, to
the house or business being served. This includes valves, meter valves,
sprinkler systems and appurtenances such as backflow preventers and pressure
reducers, whether or not installed by the city. The property owner is also
responsible to repair frozen water lines from the house to the main.
      2.   City Owns And Maintains: The water service lines from the curb box
(shutoff) to the main. The city shall also own all city installed unused stubs
or water service line extensions, up to and including the curb box.
      3.   Abandoned Lines: Property owners who abandon or no longer need the
use of a service line must pay the full cost of the abandonment or
disconnection of the line, including all costs to remove the line, up to the
main, if so directed by the city. These costs include all costs to repair the
right of way, curbs, sidewalks and streets. Once correctly abandoned, under the
direction of the city, the city will take ownership of the remaining stub,
shutoff or line, if left in place at the direction of the city.
   B.   Sanitary Sewer Service Line Defined: A "sanitary sewer service line" is
any sanitary sewer line which is less than eight inches (8") in diameter and
also includes any sanitary sewer line which is eight inches (8") or more in
diameter where such size is made necessary to provide service to a particular
individual or individuals and is not an extension of the City sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 934, 2-17-2015)
8-4-40: COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Failure To Comply; Recourse By City: If any property owner fails to
comply with any obligation placed upon the property owner by this chapter, the
City shall give the property owner written notice of the obligation by
certified mail, including a date by which the obligation must be completed, and
a time and place when the owner may appear before the Council to be heard as to
any objections concerning the obligation. Such notice shall be sent at least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing before the Council. If the owner does not
comply with such notice and, after having heard the objections thereto, if any,
the Council does not determine otherwise, the Council may cause such action to
be taken by the City. The City shall notify the property owner of the amount of
the expenditure and require reimbursement therefor. If the owner does not
reimburse the City within thirty (30) days of the date of notification, the
City may recover such expenditure, either by civil action against the owner or
by ordering the Clerk to extend such sum as a special assessment against the
affected property and to certify the same to the County auditor for collection
in the manner as provided by law.
   B.   Emergency Procedure: In case of an emergency arising out of or caused
by the property owner's failure to comply with this chapter, the City may take
whatever action is necessary to correct the emergency. The City shall then send
the property owner a notice by certified mail of the action taken, the amount
necessary to reimburse the City for its costs and disbursements in correcting
the situation, and a time and place when the owner may appear before the
Council to be heard as to the necessity of the City's action and the amount of
the reimbursement required. If, after having heard the objections thereto, if
any, the Council does not determine otherwise, the Council may order the City
to recover such expenditure, either by civil action against the owner or by
ordering the Clerk to extend such sum as a special assessment against the
affected property, and to certify the same to the County auditor for collection
in the manner provided by law. The property owner shall have thirty (30) days
after the hearing to pay the amount in full before any recovery shall be
undertaken. (Ord. 666, 5-21-1990)
8-4-41: PRIVATE WELLS AND SEPTIC SYSTEMS:
No party shall construct a new private well or septic system within the City
limits of the City of Montevideo without the consent of the City Manager. (Ord.
872, 10-15-2007)
8-4-42: CRITICAL WATER DEFICIENCY DECLARATION:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes water conservation restrictions and
the plan will be in effect at any time the Governor declares by executive order
a critical water deficiency, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 103G.291.
   B.   Definitions:
DEPARTMENT: Means the City Water
Department.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
EMERGENCY: Means the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the
Governor.
IRRIGATION: Means the watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens,
lawns, or any other outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for
agricultural purposes.
NOTIFICATION TO PUBLIC: Means notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER: Means the City.
RECLAIMED WATER: Means water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other
collection devices and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the
natural water cycle.
WATER RECIRCULATION SYSTEM: Means any system which enables a user to reuse
water at least once prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
   C.   Application:
      1.   This section applies to all customers of public water suppliers who
own or control water use on any premises.
      2.   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water
received from a public water supply for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provisions in
this section.
      3.   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based
upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the Governor.
   D.   Declaration Of Critical Water Deficiency: Upon the declaration of a
critical water deficiency by the Governor, the public water supplier shall
immediately post notice of the emergency declaration at the usual meeting place
of the City Council or upon the official City bulletin board. The City shall
provide notification to the public as quickly as possible or through
established water supply plans, emergency response plans or procedures.
   E.   Mandatory Emergency Water Conservation Measurers: Upon declaration of a
water emergency and notification to the public, the following mandatory
restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced:
      1.   Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and
other non-agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed
water, is prohibited.
      2.   Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis
courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any pressurized source,
including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards,
is prohibited.
      3.   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a
pressurized source is prohibited.
      4.   Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited
from serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically requested
by the customers.
      5.   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is
prohibited.
      6.   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other exterior
water features is prohibited.
      7.   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of
mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water
recirculation systems and except for vehicles requiring frequent washing to
protect public health, safety, and welfare.
   F.   Variances: The City Manager or his/her designee, is authorized to grant
variances to this section where strict application of its provisions would
result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only for
reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a
variance within five (5) days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to
the City Manager. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City
Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
   G.   Violation:
      1.   Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Manager or his/
her designee. A violator may appeal the citation within five (5) days of its
issuance by submitting a written appeal to the City Council. The City Council
shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the
City Council is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if
evidence is provided that equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A
letter from a qualified vendor or equipment invoice will be required to show
proof of equipment failure.
      2.   Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued,
either personally or by mail, a warning letter that sets forth the violation
and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future violations.
      3.   Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall
be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
violation, shall describe the remedy and the amount of the fine imposed. Fines
shall be added to the monthly water bill of the owner or current occupant of
the premises where the violation occurred. The imposition of the fine shall in
no way limit the right of the City to pursue other legal remedies.
      4.   The amount of the fines to be imposed shall be set by resolution of
the City Council.
   H.   Enforcement: The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to
designate City employees or law enforcement personnel to enforce the provisions
of this section.
   I.   Severability: If any provision of this section or the application of
any provision to a particular situation is held to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this section and the
application of this section to any other situation shall not be invalidated.
(Ord. 948, 6-4-2018)
CHAPTER 5
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT; SERVICE CHARGES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Sewage Service Charge
8-5-3: Utility Fund; Disbursements
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms are defined as follows:
DOMESTIC WASTE: The waste from the water closets, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs,
showers, household laundries, cellar floor drains, bars, soda fountains,
cuspidors, refrigerator drips and drinking fountains.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid waste resulting from any commercial,
manufacturing or industrial operations or processes. (Ch. 123, 8-22-1935; amd.
1998 Code)
8-5-2: SEWAGE SERVICE CHARGE:
For the purpose of providing funds to meet the cost of operating and
maintaining the wastewater treatment plant and the facilities connected
therewith and the payment of capital charges represented by bonds, certificates
of indebtedness, or otherwise, and to the payment of reasonable requirements
for replacement and obsolescence thereof, there is hereby levied and assessed
upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having any connection with
the public sewer system of the city, or otherwise discharging sewage,
industrial wastes, water or other liquids directly or indirectly into the
public sewer system of the city, a sewage service charge payable as hereinafter
provided and in amounts determinable as follows: (Ord. 609, 12-19-1983; amd.
1998 Code)
   A.   Sanitary Sewer Usage Fee: The city council shall set fees for usage of
the sanitary sewer system by resolution. (Ord. 882, 10-20-2008)
   B.   Discharge Fee For Nonwater Users: In the event any lot, parcel of land,
building or premises discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or
other liquids into the sewer system of the city, either directly or indirectly,
is not supplied with water from the waterworks of the city, and the water used
thereon or therein is not measured by a city meter or by a meter approved by
the utilities superintendent, then in each such case the sewer service charge
shall be fixed and determined by the council in such a manner and by such
method as they may find just, equitable and practicable in the light of
conditions and attendant circumstances of the case.
   C.   Discharge Classifications: The council shall have the power to classify
the sewage discharged into the sewage system based upon its concentration and
cost of disposal, and fix just and reasonable rates and charges for its
disposal according to such classifications and said council shall have the
power to increase or decrease all rates and charges in this chapter provided
for as the same may reasonably be required.
   D.   Clerk To Render Statement: The clerk shall compute the amount due the
city for sewage charges and render a statement thereof, either monthly or
quarterly, as directed by the council, to the owner or occupant of any premises
served, or to both. All amounts due hereunder shall be payable at the office of
the clerk. (Ord. 609, 12-19-1983)
8-5-3: UTILITY FUND; DISBURSEMENTS:
The funds received from the collection of the charges or rentals authorized by
this chapter shall be deposited, as collected, in a fund to be known as the
utility fund, and shall be disbursed:
   A.   To meet the costs of operating and maintaining the wastewater treatment
plant and facilities;
   B.   To be applied to capital charges represented by bonds, or certificates
of indebtedness;
   C.   For the reasonable requirements for replacement and obsolescence. (Ch.
123, 8-22-1935; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE AND ILLICIT CONNECTION
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose; Intent
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Applicability
8-6-4: Responsibility For Administration
8-6-5: Compatibility With Other Regulations
8-6-6: Discharge Prohibitions
8-6-7: Watercourse Protection
8-6-8: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
8-6-9: Compliance Monitoring
8-6-10: Notification Of Spills
8-6-11: Enforcement
8-6-12: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
8-6-13: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
8-6-14: Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation
8-6-15: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
8-6-16: Remedies Not Exclusive
8-6-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the city of Montevideo through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this chapter are:
   A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
   C.   To establish legal authority to carry out an inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the director of the
municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or
more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
FACILITY: Any commercial, industrial or construction activity required to have
an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater association with that activity.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm
drain system, except as exempted in section
8-6-6 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An "illicit connection" is defined as either of the
following:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wastewater to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined
in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
MS4: Municipal separate storm sewer system.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general areawide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A document which describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify
sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/
or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated
on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by this
chapter. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city of Montevideo
may be delegated in writing by the city manager of the city of Montevideo to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employment
of the agency. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-5: COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (Ord.
916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall throw, drain, or
otherwise discharge, cause or allow others under their control to throw, drain
or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm
drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
      1.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing, landscape irrigation,
diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water
sources, foundation drains, sump pumps, air conditioning condensation,
irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn
watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, hot tub/spa discharges, and
street wash water.
      2.   Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified
in writing by the city of Montevideo as being necessary to protect public
health and safety.
      3.   Discharges associated with dye testing; however, this activity
requires a verbal notification to the city of Montevideo prior to the time of
the test.
      4.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the United States
environmental protection agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
      5.   Any other discharges that do not create a harmful effect on the
environment.
   B.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection. Preexisting illicit connections shall be eliminated within six (6)
months of the effective date hereof.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
      4.   Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on site wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city of
Montevideo.
      5.   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be
located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the city of Montevideo requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the
location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the
outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary
sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these
investigations are to be documented and provided to the city of Montevideo.
(Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-7: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
   A.   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city of Montevideo prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
   B.   The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to
have an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the city of
Montevideo at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent
to the EPA as applicable.
   C.   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the city of
Montevideo either in person or by mailing it to:
Notice Of Intent To Discharge Stormwater
City Of Montevideo
103 Canton Avenue, P.O. Box 517
Montevideo, MN 56265
   D.   A person violates this chapter if the person operates a facility that
is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the city of Montevideo.
(Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-9: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
   A.   Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling: The city of Montevideo shall
be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
      1.   If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger
shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
city of Montevideo.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the city of Montevideo ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.
      3.   The city of Montevideo shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city of
Montevideo to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
      4.   The city of Montevideo has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city of Montevideo and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city of Montevideo access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this
chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity violates this chapter
if the person denies the city of Montevideo reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this chapter.
   B.   Search Warrants: If the city of Montevideo has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then the city of Montevideo may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-10: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. said
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials
said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city of Montevideo in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the city of Montevideo within three (3) business days
of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three (3) years. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any
person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter
may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be
restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or
public safety, the city of Montevideo is authorized to enter upon the subject
private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city of
Montevideo is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section
8-6-14 of this chapter.
   B.   Warning Notice: When the city of Montevideo finds that any person has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order
issued hereunder, the city of Montevideo may serve, by certified mail, upon
that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation
believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately
investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge
will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the
warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in
this subsection shall limit the authority of the city of Montevideo to take any
action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a warning notice.
   C.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city manager finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
city manager may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice shall be personally served upon the person
alleged to have violated this chapter.
The notice of violation shall contain:
      1.   The name and address of the alleged violator;
      2.   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
      3.   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
      4.   A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
      5.   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
      6.   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the city by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within
thirty (30) days of service of notice of violation; and
      7.   A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore
compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
Such notice may require without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or illegal discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   D.   Suspension Of MS4 Access:
      1.   Emergency Cease And Desist Orders: When the city manager finds that
any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations
are likely to recur, and that the person's violations have caused or
contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the
United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the
city manager may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to
cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
         a.   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
         b.   Take such appropriate preventative action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection
shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In
the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
emergency order, the city manager may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or
endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination
of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility
services. The city manager may allow the person to recommence its discharge
when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person who is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes
of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the city manager within ten (10) days of receipt of the
emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a
bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
violator.
      2.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The
city manager may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the city manager may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United
States, or to minimize danger to persons.
      3.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illegal Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illegal discharge. The
city manager will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4
access. The violator may petition the city of Montevideo for a reconsideration
and hearing.
A person violates this chapter if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city
manager.
   E.   Civil Penalties: In the event the alleged violator fails to take the
remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to
cure the violations described therein within thirty (30) days, or such greater
period as the city manager shall deem appropriate, after the city of Montevideo
has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager may
impose a penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) (depending on the
severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after
receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-12: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager. The
notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of
service of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the
appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within thirty (30)
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
municipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-13: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within thirty (30)
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
city manager, then representatives of the city of Montevideo may enter upon the
subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises
to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon
the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-14: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
The city may recover the costs of abatement of the violation, including
administrative costs, either by civil action against the person served the
notice of violation or, if service has been had upon the owner of the property
on which the violation occurred, by ordering the city clerk to extend such sum
plus twenty five percent (25%) thereof as a special assessment against the
property on which the violation existed and to certify the same to the county
auditor for collection in the same manner as taxes and special assessments are
collected. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-15: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 916, 3-19-2012)
8-6-16: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the city of Montevideo to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 916, 3-
19-2012)
CHAPTER 7
STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
SECTION:
8-7-1: Establishment
8-7-2: Purpose
8-7-3: Definitions
8-7-4: Fees
8-7-5: Rate
8-7-6: Adjustments
8-7-7: Exemptions
8-7-8: Payment Of Fee
8-7-9: Recalculation Of Fee
8-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The municipal storm water drainage system shall be operated as a public utility
pursuant to Minnesota Statute §444.075, as amended from time to time, from
which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes. (Ord. 978, 4-3-2023)
8-7-2: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this article to establish a storm water drainage utility
within the city to build, construct, reconstruct, repair, enlarge, improve, or
in any other manner obtain storm water drainage systems, including mains,
holding areas and ponds, drainage channels, waterways and other appurtenances
and related facilities for the collection and disposal of storm water and to
maintain and operate the systems pursuant to Minn. Stat. §444.075 from which
revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and state
statutes. The storm water drainage utility shall be a part of the public works
department and under the administration of the public works director and the
city manager. (Ord. 978, 4-3-2023)
8-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
 
                                     One REF is defined as the ratio of the
                                     average volume of runoff generated by a
                                     given land use to the average volume of
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF): runoff generated by a typical single-
                                     family residential land during a standard
                                     one-year rainfall event. (Ord. 978, 4-3-
                                     2023)
 
8-7-4: FEES:
   A.   Single-Family Dwelling or Twin Home. The storm water drainage charges
for Single-Family Dwellings or Twin Homes shall be set by Resolution of the
City Council.
   B.   Storm water drainage charges for a lot, except those used for a single-
family dwelling or twin home shall be determined by multiplying the residential
equivalent factor for the lot, as set out in Paragraph C, by the lot’s area as
measured in acres and then multiplying the resulting product by the residential
equivalent factor rate established by Resolution of the City Council.
   C.   The Residential equivalent for each land use is as follows:
 
Residential uses, except single-family dwellings, twin homes and 2.0
Manufactured Homes
Manufactured Homes                                               1.5
Institutional and Churches, except schools                       2.0
Commercial and Industrial                                        2.5
Schools                                                          1.0
Agricultural and Vacant Parcels                                  0.0
 
(Ord. 978, 4-3-2023)
8-7-5: RATE:
The storm water drainage rate shall be set forth in the city fee schedule at a
per-month, per-REF-acre rate, billed monthly. (Ord. 978, 4-3-2023)
8-7-6: ADJUSTMENTS:
The council may adopt policies recommended by the engineer for adjustment of
the residential equivalent factor for lots based upon hydrologic data to be
supplied by property owners, which data demonstrates a hydrologic response
substantially different from the standards used by city to establish the
residential equivalent factor. Adjustments to a residential equivalent factor
shall not retroactively reduce storm water drainage charges. (Ord. 978, 4-3-
2023)
8-7-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The following land uses are exempt from storm water drainage fees:
   A.   Public rights-of-way;
   B.   Vacant and unimproved land with ground cover, such as agricultural and
conservation zoned land that does not have a residential or commercial building
on the parcel. Platted and subdivided land is not included as exempt;
   C.   Lakes;
   D.   Wetlands recognized by local authorities;
   E.   City owned property (except hospital), city parks, and city libraries;
   F.   Cemeteries. (Ord. 978, 4-3-2023)
8-7-8: PAYMENT OF FEE:
A statement for charges shall be rendered monthly. The statements will be
mailed out as part of the regular monthly utility bill. The amount billed will
become due and payable in accordance with water and sewer billing policy. In
the event of nonpayment of such bill, the City Clerk shall be authorized to
certify the unpaid portion to the County Auditor to be added to the tax rolls
for the property involved as provided in Section
8-2-3 of this Chapter. A separate billing will be mailed to those properties
for which a regular monthly utility bill is not sent. (Ord. 978, 4-3-2023)
8-7-9: RECALCULATION OF FEE:
If a property owner or person responsible for paying the storm water drainage
fee questions the correctness of an invoice for such charge, such person may
have the determination of the charge re-computed by written request to the city
made within 12 months of mailing of the invoice in question by the city. (Ord.
978, 4-3-2023)
TITLE 9
FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 1
CABLE TV FRANCHISE
SECTION:
9-1-1: Overview
9-1-1-1: Statement Of Intent And Purpose
9-1-1-2: Findings
9-1-2: Short Title
9-1-3: Definitions
9-1-4: Grant Of Authority And General Provisions
9-1-4-1: Grant Of Franchise
9-1-4-2: Grant Of Nonexclusive Authority
9-1-4-3: Lease Or Assignment Prohibited
9-1-4-4: Franchise Term
9-1-4-5: Previous Franchises
9-1-4-6: Compliance With Applicable Laws, Resolutions And Ordinances
9-1-4-7: Rules Of Grantee
9-1-4-8: Territorial Area Involved
9-1-4-9: Written Notice
9-1-4-10: Ownership Of Grantee
9-1-5: Construction Standards
9-1-5-1: Registration, Permits, Construction Codes, And Cooperation
9-1-5-2: Ongoing Construction
9-1-5-3: Use Of Existing Poles Or Conduits
9-1-5-4: Minimum Interference
9-1-5-5: Disturbance Or Damage
9-1-5-6: Temporary Relocation
9-1-5-7: Emergency
9-1-5-8: Tree Trimming
9-1-5-9: Protection Of Facilities
9-1-5-10: Installation Records
9-1-5-11: Locating Facilities
9-1-5-12: City's Rights
9-1-5-13: Facilities In Conflict
9-1-5-14: Relocation Delays
9-1-5-15: Interference With City Facilities
9-1-5-16: Interference With Utility Facilities
9-1-5-17: Collocation
9-1-5-18: Safety Requirements
9-1-6: Design Provisions
9-1-6-1: System Upgrade/Construction; Minimum Channel Capacity
9-1-6-2: Construction Timetable
9-1-6-3: Interruption Of Service
9-1-6-4: Emergency Alert Capability
9-1-6-5: Technical Standards
9-1-6-6: Special Testing
9-1-6-7: FCC Reports
9-1-6-8: Annexation
9-1-6-9: Line Extension
9-1-6-10: Nonvoice Return Capability
9-1-6-11: Lockout Device
9-1-7: Service Provisions
9-1-7-1: Regulation Of Service Rates
9-1-7-2: Nonstandard Installations
9-1-7-3: Sales Procedures
9-1-7-4: Consumer Protection And Service Standards
9-1-7-5: Subscriber Contracts
9-1-7-6: Refund Policy
9-1-7-7: Late Fees
9-1-7-8: Local Office Policy
9-1-8: Access Channel(s) Provisions
9-1-8-1: Grantee Support For PEG Access
9-1-9: Operation And Administration Provisions
9-1-9-1: Administration Of Franchise
9-1-9-2: Delegated Authority
9-1-9-3: Franchise Fee
9-1-9-4: Not Franchise Fees
9-1-9-5: Access To Records
9-1-9-6: Reports And Maps To Be Filed With City
9-1-9-7: Periodic Evaluation
9-1-9-8: Franchise Modifications
9-1-10: General Financial And Insurance Provisions
9-1-10-1: Performance Bond
9-1-10-2: Letter Of Credit
9-1-10-3: Liability Insurance
9-1-10-4: Indemnification
9-1-10-5: Grantee's Insurance
9-1-11: Sale, Abandonment, Transfer And Revocation Of Franchise
9-1-11-1: City's Right To Revoke
9-1-11-2: Procedures For Revocation
9-1-11-3: Abandonment Of Service
9-1-11-4: Removal After Abandonment, Termination Or Forfeiture
9-1-11-5: Sale Or Transfer Of Franchise
9-1-12: Protection Of Individual Rights
9-1-12-1: Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
9-1-12-2: Subscriber Privacy
9-1-13: Unauthorized Connections And Modifications
9-1-13-1: Unauthorized Connections Or Modifications Prohibited
9-1-13-2: Removal Or Destruction Prohibited
9-1-13-3: Penalty
9-1-14: Miscellaneous Provisions
9-1-14-1: Franchise Renewal
9-1-14-2: Work Performed By Others
9-1-14-3: Amendment Of Franchise Ordinance
9-1-14-4: Compliance With Federal, State And Local Laws
9-1-14-5: Nonenforcement By City
9-1-14-6: Rights Cumulative
9-1-14-7: Grantee Acknowledgment Of Validity Of Franchise
9-1-14-8: Force Majeure
9-1-15: Publication Effective Date; Acceptance
9-1-15-1: Publication, Effective Date
9-1-15-2: Acceptance
9-1-16: Exhibits
9-1-1: OVERVIEW:
9-1-1-1: STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE:
City intends, by the adoption of this franchise, to bring about the further
development of a cable system, and the continued operation of it. Such
development can contribute significantly to the communication needs and desires
of the residents and citizens of city and the public generally. Further, city
may achieve better utilization and improvement of public services and enhanced
economic development with the development and operation of a cable system.
Adoption of this franchise is, in the judgment of the city council, in the best
interests of city and its residents. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-1-2: FINDINGS:
In the review of the request for renewal by grantee and negotiations related
thereto, and as a result of a public hearing, the city council makes the
following findings:
   A.   Grantee's technical ability, financial condition, legal qualifications,
and character were considered and approved in a full public proceeding after
due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
   B.   Grantee's plans for constructing, upgrading, and operating the cable
system were considered and found adequate and feasible in a full public
proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
   C.   The franchise granted to grantee by city complies with the existing
applicable Minnesota statutes, federal laws and regulations; and
   D.   The franchise granted to grantee is nonexclusive. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002,
eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-2: SHORT TITLE:
This franchise ordinance shall be known and cited as the CABLE TELEVISION
FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words in the singular number include the plural number, and
words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is directory and
discretionary and not mandatory. Words not defined shall be given their common
and ordinary meanings.
APPLICABLE LAWS: Any law, statute, charter, ordinance, rule, regulation, code,
license, certificate, franchise, permit, writ, ruling, award, executive order,
directive, requirement, injunction (whether temporary, preliminary or
permanent), judgment, decree or other order issued, executed, entered or deemed
applicable by any governmental authority.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the lawful retransmission
of local television broadcast signals and any public, educational, and
governmental access programming required by the franchise to be carried on the
basic tier. Basic cable service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent
with 47 USC section 543(b)(7).
CABLE SERVICE OR SERVICE:
   A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 1) video programming or 2)
other programming service, and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable service as
defined herein shall not be inconsistent with the definition set forth in 47
USC section 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which
is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not
include:
   A.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
   B.   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right of
way;
   C.   A facility of common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of 47 USC section 201 et seq., except that such facility shall
be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 USC section 541(c))
to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on demand services;
   D.   An open video system that complies with 47 USC section 573; or
   E.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems.
CHANNEL OR CABLE CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
channel as defined by the FCC.
CITY: City of Montevideo, a municipal corporation, in the state of Minnesota,
acting by and through its city council, or its lawfully appointed designee.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of the city of Montevideo, Minnesota.
CLASS IV CABLE CHANNEL: A signaling path provided by a cable system to transmit
signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the system.
CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
acceptable to a television receiver of a subscriber and by an appropriate
selector permits a subscriber to view all subscriber signals included in the
service.
DROP: The cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber's residence or
institution to the nearest feeder cable of the system.
FCC: The federal communications commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.
FRANCHISE FEE: Includes any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the
city or other governmental entity on grantee or subscriber, or both, solely
because of their status as such. It does not include any tax, fee, or
assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment
imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services but not
including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against
cable operators or cable subscribers); capital costs which are required by the
franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental
access facilities; requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or
enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds,
letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated
damages; or any fee imposed under title 17.
FRANCHISE OR CABLE FRANCHISE: This chapter and the regulatory and contractual
relationship established hereby.
GRANTEE: CC VIII Operating, LLC, d/b/a Charter Communications, its lawful
successors, transferees or assignees.
GROSS REVENUE: All revenue derived directly or indirectly by grantee, its
affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, or person in which grantee has financial
interest of five percent (5%) or more, from the operation of its cable system
within city including, but not limited to, all cable service fees, franchise
fees, late fees, installation and reconnection fees, upgrade/construction and
downgrade fees, advertising revenue, converter rental fees and lockout device
fees. To the maximum extent required by all applicable laws, internet access
fees and cable modem service fees resulting from the provision of data services
within the city shall also be considered part of grantee's gross revenue. The
term gross revenue shall not include any taxes on services furnished by grantee
imposed by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit and collected by
grantee for such governmental unit.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the cable system from feeder cable to the point
of connection including standard installations and custom installations with
the subscriber converter or other terminal equipment.
LOCKOUT DEVICE: An optional mechanical or electrical accessory to a
subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain program, certain
channel, or certain channels provided by way of the cable system.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in city
are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" for customer
service must include some evening hours, at least one night per week and/or
some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions which are within the
control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of grantee
include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay per view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade/
construction of the cable system.
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE: Information that a cable operator makes available to
all subscribers generally.
PAY TELEVISION: The delivery over the system of pay per channel or pay per
program audiovisual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to
the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
other legal entity.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: The area on, below, or above any real property
in city in which the city has an interest including, but not limited to, any
street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, skyway, or any other
place, area, or real property owned by or under the control of city, including
other dedicated rights of way for travel purposes and utility easements.
RIGHT OF WAY ORDINANCE: Any ordinance codifying requirements regarding
regulation, management and use of rights of way in city, including registration
and permitting requirements.
SERVICE AREA OR FRANCHISE AREA: The entire geographic area within the city as
it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels.
STANDARD INSTALLATION: Any residential installation which can be completed
using a drop of one hundred fifty feet (150') or less.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who lawfully receives cable service via the system. In
the case of multiple office buildings or multiple dwelling units, the
"subscriber" means the lessee, tenant or occupant.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING: Programming provided by, or generally considered comparable
to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. (Ord. 827, 8-5-
2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4: GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS:
9-1-4-1: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions contained
herein. Failure of grantee to provide a system as described herein, or meet the
obligations and comply with all provisions herein, shall be deemed a violation
of this franchise. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4-2: GRANT OF NONEXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY:
   A.   The grantee shall have the right and privilege, subject to the
permitting and other lawful requirements of city ordinance, rule or procedure,
to construct, erect, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and
under the rights of way in city a cable system and shall have the right and
privilege to provide cable service. The system constructed and maintained by
grantee or its agents shall not interfere with other uses of the rights of way.
Grantee shall make use of existing poles and other above and below facilities
available to grantee to the extent it is technically and economically feasible
to do so.
   B.   Notwithstanding the above grant to use rights of way, no right of way
shall be used by grantee if city determines that such use is inconsistent with
the terms, conditions, or provisions by which such right of way was created or
dedicated, or with the present use of the right of way.
   C.   This franchise shall be nonexclusive, and city reserves the right to
grant a use of said rights of way to any person at any time during the period
of this franchise for the provision of cable service. The terms and conditions
of any such grant of use of the rights of way shall be, when taken as a whole
no less burdensome or more beneficial than those imposed upon grantee pursuant
to this franchise. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4-3: LEASE OR ASSIGNMENT PROHIBITED:
No person may lease grantee's system for the purpose of providing cable service
until and unless such person shall have first obtained and shall currently hold
a valid franchise or other lawful authorization containing substantially
similar burdens and obligations to this franchise. Any assignment of rights
under this franchise shall be subject to and in accordance with the
requirements of section
9-1-11-5 of this chapter. This provision shall not prevent grantee from
complying with any commercial leased access requirements or any other provision
of applicable laws. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4-4: FRANCHISE TERM:
This franchise shall be in effect for a period of ten (10) years from the date
of acceptance by grantee, unless sooner renewed, revoked or terminated as
herein provided. Pursuant to section
9-1-6 of this chapter, grantee has agreed to upgrade the cable system serving
the city to 750 MHz capacity on or before May 31, 2003. Section
9-1-6 of this chapter does not mandate that the grantee utilize fiber optics
for its distribution system as part of the upgrade. If grantee constructs and
activates fiber optics to replace existing trunk facilities within the city
serving subscriber nodes of seven hundred fifty (750) or fewer, this franchise
shall be automatically extended for an additional five (5) years bringing the
total franchise term to fifteen (15) years from date of acceptance. The
construction and activation of fiber as outlined above must be completed on or
before December 31, 2009. Grantee shall cooperate with any desired verification
by the city. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4-5: PREVIOUS FRANCHISES:
Upon acceptance by grantee as required by section
9-1-15 of this chapter, this franchise shall supersede and replace any previous
ordinance granting a franchise to grantee. Ordinance 643 is hereby expressly
repealed. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4-6: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS, RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   The terms of this franchise shall define the contractual rights and
obligations of grantee with respect to the provision of cable service and
operation of the system in city. However, grantee shall at all times during the
term of this franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power,
statutory rights, local ordinance making authority, and eminent domain rights
of city. This franchise may also be modified or amended with the written
consent of city and grantee as provided in section
9-1-14-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Grantee shall comply with the terms of any city ordinance or regulation
of general applicability which addresses usage of the rights of way within
city, which may have the effect of superseding, modifying or amending the terms
herein, except that grantee shall not, through application of such city
ordinance or regulation of rights of way, be subject to additional burdens with
respect to usage of rights of way which exceed burdens on similarly situated
rights of way users.
   C.   In the event of any conflict between this franchise and any city
ordinance or regulation which addresses usage of the rights of way, the
conflicting terms of this franchise shall govern.
   D.   In the event any city ordinance or regulation which addresses usage of
the rights of way adds to, modifies, amends, or otherwise differently addresses
issues addressed in this franchise, grantee shall comply with such ordinance or
regulation of general applicability, regardless of which requirement was first
adopted except that grantee shall not, through application of such city
ordinance or regulation of rights of way, be subject to additional burdens with
respect to usage of rights of way which exceed burdens on all similarly
situated rights of way users.
   E.   In the event grantee cannot determine how to comply with any right of
way requirement of city, whether pursuant to this franchise or other
requirement, grantee shall immediately provide written notice of such question,
including grantee's proposed interpretation, to city, in accordance with
section
9-1-4-9 of this chapter. City shall provide a written response within fourteen
(14) days of receipt indicating how the requirements cited by grantee apply.
Grantee may proceed in accordance with its proposed interpretation in the event
a written response is not received within seventeen (17) days of mailing or
delivering such written question. City will use all reasonable best efforts to
ensure that no right of way ordinance provisions unduly slow grantee's system
rebuild unless necessary to address health safety and welfare concerns. (Ord.
827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4-7: RULES OF GRANTEE:
Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms
and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably
necessary to enable said grantee to exercise its rights and perform its
obligations under this franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to each
and all of its subscribers; provided that such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions shall not be in conflict with applicable laws. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002,
eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4-8: TERRITORIAL AREA INVOLVED:
This franchise is granted for the corporate boundaries of city, as they exist
from time to time. In the event of annexation by city, or as development
occurs, any new territory shall become part of the territory for which this
franchise is granted; provided, however, that grantee shall only be required to
extend cable service beyond its present cable system boundaries pursuant to
section
9-1-6-9 of this chapter. Access to cable service shall not be denied to any
group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the
residents of the area in which such group resides. Grantee shall be given a
reasonable period of time to construct and activate cable plant to cable
service annexed or newly developed areas but in no event to exceed nine (9)
months from notice thereof by city to grantee. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-
2002)
9-1-4-9: WRITTEN NOTICE:
All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in writing under this
franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to any officer
of grantee or city's manager of this franchise or forty eight (48) hours after
it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered
or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the party to whom
notice is being given, as follows:
If to city:
City Manager
102 Canton Avenue
Montevideo, MN 56265
If to grantee:
General Manager
Charter Communications
1215 North 15th Street
P.O. Box 1188
St. Cloud, MN 56302
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party
given as provided in this section. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-4-10: OWNERSHIP OF GRANTEE:
Grantee represents and warrants to city that the names of the shareholders,
partners, members or other equity owners of the grantee and any of the
shareholders, partners, members and/or other equity owners of grantee are as
set forth in section
9-1-16, exhibit A, of this chapter. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
9-1-5-1: REGISTRATION, PERMITS, CONSTRUCTION CODES, AND COOPERATION:
   A.   Grantee shall comply with the construction requirements of Minnesota
statutes section 238.084(n).
   B.   Grantee agrees to obtain a permit as required by city prior to
removing, abandoning, relocating or reconstructing, if necessary, any portion
of its facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, city understands and
acknowledges there may be instances when grantee is required to make repairs,
in compliance with federal or state laws, that are of an emergency nature.
Grantee will notify city prior to such repairs, if practicable, and will obtain
the necessary permits in a reasonable time after notification to city.
   C.   Reimbursement paid through the permitting process is separate, and in
addition to, any other fees included in the franchise. Grantee, at the time of
or prior to submitting construction plans, shall provide city with a
description of the type of service to be provided by the grantee in sufficient
detail for city to determine compliance with the franchise and applicable laws.
   D.   City may issue reasonable policy guidelines to all grantees to
establish procedures for determining how to control issuance of engineering
permits to multiple grantees for the use of the same rights of way for their
facilities. Grantee shall cooperate with city in establishing such policy and
comply with the procedures established by the city manager or his or her
designee to coordinate the issuance of multiple engineering permits in the same
right of way segments.
   E.   Failure to obtain permits or comply with permit requirements shall
subject grantee to all enforcement remedies available to city under applicable
laws or this franchise.
   F.   Grantee shall meet with developers and be present at preconstruction
meetings to ensure that the newly constructed cable system facilities are
installed in new developments within city in a timely manner. City shall notify
grantee in writing of any such scheduled meetings at least fourteen (14) days
in advance.
   G.   Grantee shall provide a written status report to city every ninety (90)
days regarding its progress toward completion of the system upgrade/
construction, which completion shall be on or before May 31, 2003, as required
by section
9-1-6 of this chapter and in accordance with section
9-1-16, exhibit C, of this chapter. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-2: ONGOING CONSTRUCTION:
Grantee shall notify city at least ten (10) days prior to the commencement of
any construction in any rights of way. Grantee shall not open or disturb the
surface of any rights of way or public place for any purpose without first
having obtained a permit to do so in the manner provided by law. All excavation
shall be coordinated with other utility excavation or construction so as to
minimize disruption to the public. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-3: USE OF EXISTING POLES OR CONDUITS:
   A.   Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities
whenever commercially reasonable and shall not construct or install any new,
different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities on public property
until the written approval of city is obtained. No location or any pole or wire
holding structure of grantee shall be a vested interest, and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by grantee at its own expense whenever
city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
   B.   The facilities of grantee shall be installed underground in those areas
of city where existing telephone and electric services are both underground at
the time of construction by grantee. In areas where either telephone or
electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of system
construction, grantee may install its facilities aerially; however, at such
time as the existing aerial facilities are placed underground, grantee shall
likewise place its facilities underground at its sole cost. If city requires
utilities to bury lines which are currently overhead, and the city financially
participates in said undergrounding, then the city will provide the same cost
sharing to the grantee. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-4: MINIMUM INTERFERENCE:
   A.   Grantee shall use its best efforts to give reasonable prior notice to
any adjacent private property owners who will be negatively affected or
impacted by grantee's work in the rights of way.
   B.   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by grantee shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with
the unencumbered use of rights of way and other public places and minimum
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the rights of way and public places. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-
26-2002)
9-1-5-5: DISTURBANCE OR DAMAGE:
Any and all rights of way, or public or private property, which are disturbed
or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation,
maintenance, expansion, extension or reconstruction of the system shall be
promptly and fully restored by grantee, at its expense, to a condition as good
as that prevailing prior to grantee's work, as determined by city. If grantee
shall fail to promptly perform the restoration required herein, after written
request of city and reasonable opportunity to satisfy that request, city shall
have the right to put the rights of way back into condition as good as that
prevailing prior to grantee's work. In the event city determines that grantee
is responsible for such disturbance or damage, grantee shall be obligated to
fully reimburse city for such restoration within thirty (30) days after its
receipt of city's invoice therefor. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-6: TEMPORARY RELOCATION:
   A.   At any time during the period of the franchise, grantee shall, at its
own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any
of its property when, in the opinion of city: 1) the same is required by reason
of traffic conditions, public safety, rights of way vacation, freeway or rights
of way construction, alteration to or establishment of any rights of way or any
facility within the rights of way, sidewalk, or other public place, including,
but not limited to, installation of sewers, drains, water lines, power lines,
traffic signal lines or transportation facilities; or 2) a city project or
activity makes disconnection, removal, or relocation necessary or less
expensive for city.
   B.   Grantee shall, on request of any person holding a permit to move a
building, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the movement of such
buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of
wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and grantee shall have
the authority to require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not
less than five (5) business days' advance notice to arrange such temporary wire
alterations. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-7: EMERGENCY:
Whenever, in case of fire or other emergency, it becomes necessary in the
judgment of the city manager, police chief, fire chief, or their delegates, to
remove or damage any of grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by
grantee against city for restoration, repair or damages. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002,
eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-8: TREE TRIMMING:
Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public rights of way at its
own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to
supervision and direction by city. Trimming of trees on private property shall
require consent of the property owner. Any trimming of trees by the grantee in
the rights of way and public ways shall be subject to such regulation as the
city manager or other authorized official may establish to protect the public
health, safety and convenience. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-9: PROTECTION OF FACILITIES:
Nothing contained in this section
9-1-5 shall relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure to
exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging grantee's facilities while
performing any work connected with grading, regrading or changing the line of
any rights of way or public place or the construction or reconstruction of any
sewer or water system. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-10: INSTALLATION RECORDS:
Each grantee shall keep accurate installation records of the location of all
facilities in the rights of way and public ways and furnish them to city upon
request. Grantee shall cooperate with city to furnish such information in an
electronic mapping format, if possible, compatible with the then current city
electronic mapping format. Upon completion of new or relocation construction of
underground facilities in the rights of way and public ways, grantee shall
provide city with installation records in an electronic format, if possible
compatible with the then current city electronic mapping format showing the
location of the underground and aboveground facilities. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002,
eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-11: LOCATING FACILITIES:
   A.   If, during the design process for public improvements, city discovers a
potential conflict with proposed construction, grantee shall either: 1) locate
and, if necessary, expose its facilities in conflict or 2) use a location
service under contract with city to locate or expose its facilities. Grantee is
obligated to furnish the location information in a timely manner, but in no
case longer than thirty (30) days.
   B.   City reserves the prior and superior right to lay, construct, erect,
install, use, operate, repair, replace, remove, relocate, regrade, widen,
realign, or maintain any rights of way and public ways, aerial, surface, or
subsurface improvement, including, but not limited to, water mains, traffic
control conduits, cable and devices, sanitary or storm sewers, subways,
tunnels, bridges, viaducts, or any other public construction within the rights
of way of city limits. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-12: CITY'S RIGHTS:
   A.   When city uses its prior superior right to the rights of way and public
ways, grantee shall move its property that is located in the rights of way and
public ways, at its own cost, to such a location as city directs.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the public project is paid for
totally or in part by nonpublic funds, then grantee's costs of moving its
property shall be borne by the source of the nonpublic funds in the same ratio
as the nonpublic funds bear to the total project costs.
   B.   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to prevent city from
constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading, paving,
maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any right of way;
constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water
mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or
other public work. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-13: FACILITIES IN CONFLICT:
If, during the course of a project, city determines grantee's facilities are in
conflict, the following shall apply:
   A.   Prior To City Notice To Proceed To Contractor: Grantee shall, within a
reasonable time, but in no event exceeding three (3) months, remove or relocate
the conflicting facility. This time period shall begin running upon receipt by
grantee of written notice from city. However, if both city and grantee agree,
the time frame may be extended based on the requirements of the project.
   B.   Subsequent To City Notice To Proceed To Contractor: City and grantee
will immediately begin the coordination necessary to remove or relocate the
facility. Removal or relocation is to begin no later than seventy two (72)
hours, if practicable, after written notification from city of the conflict.
(Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-14: RELOCATION DELAYS:
   A.   Subject to grantee's compliance with section
9-1-5-13 of this chapter, if grantee's relocation effort so delays construction
of a public project causing city to be liable for delay damages, grantee shall
reimburse city for those damages attributable to the delay created by grantee.
In the event grantee should dispute the amount of damages attributable to
grantee, the matter shall be referred to the city engineer for a decision. In
the event that grantee disagrees with the city engineer's decision, the matter
shall be submitted to the city manager or the city manager's designee for
determination, whose decision shall be final and binding upon grantee as a
matter of city review, but nothing herein waives any right of appeal to the
courts.
   B.   In the event city becomes aware of a potential delay involving
grantee's facilities, city shall promptly notify grantee of this potential
delay. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-15: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY FACILITIES:
The installation, use and maintenance of the grantee's facilities within the
rights of way and public ways authorized herein shall be in such a manner as
not to interfere with city's placement, construction, use and maintenance of
its rights of way and public ways, rights of way lighting, water pipes, drains,
sewers, traffic signal systems or other city systems that have been, or may be,
installed, maintained, used or authorized by city. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-
26-2002)
9-1-5-16: INTERFERENCE WITH UTILITY FACILITIES:
Grantee agrees not to install, maintain or use any of its facilities in such a
manner as to damage or interfere with any existing facilities of another
utility located within the rights of way and public ways of city and agrees to
relocate its facilities, if necessary, to accommodate another facility
relocation. Nothing in this section
9-1-5 is meant to limit any rights grantee may have under applicable laws to be
compensated for the cost of relocating its facilities from the utility that is
requesting the relocation. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-17: COLLOCATION:
To maximize public and employee safety, to minimize visual clutter of aerial
plant, and to minimize the amount of trenching and excavation in and along city
rights of way and sidewalks for underground plant, grantee shall make every
commercially reasonable effort to collocate compatible facilities within the
rights of way subject to the engineering requirements of the owners of utility
poles and other facilities. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-5-18: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and
shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods
and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damage or injuries.
   B.   Grantee shall install and maintain its system and other equipment in
accordance with city codes and the requirements of the national electrical
safety code and all other applicable FCC, state and local regulations, and in
such manner that they will not interfere with city communications technology
related to health, safety and welfare of the residents.
   C.   Cable system structures, and lines, equipment and connections in, over,
under and upon the rights of way of city, wherever situated or located, shall
at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so
that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of city or any
person. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6: DESIGN PROVISIONS:
9-1-6-1: SYSTEM UPGRADE/CONSTRUCTION; MINIMUM CHANNEL CAPACITY:
   A.   Grantee shall develop, construct and operate for the term of this
franchise a system providing a minimum of 750 MHz capacity.
   B.   The system will be designed with the capability to transmit return
signals upstream in the 5-40 MHz spectrum.
   C.   Grantee shall develop, construct and operate a system capable of
providing nonvideo services such as high speed data transmission, internet
access, and other programming services.
   D.   Grantee shall provide information to any business or other subscriber
within city which desires information regarding nonvideo services offered by
grantee.
   E.   All final programming decisions remain the discretion of grantee in
accordance with this franchise, provided that grantee notifies city and
subscribers in writing thirty (30) days prior to any channel additions,
deletions, or realignments, and further subject to grantee's signal carriage
obligations hereunder and pursuant to 47 USC section 531-536, and further
subject to city's rights pursuant to 47 USC section 545. Location and
relocation of the PEG channels shall be governed by sections
9-1-8 and
9-1-16, exhibit B, of this chapter. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6-2: CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE:
   A.   Grantee shall complete all construction related to the system upgrade/
construction required by this section
9-1-6 on or before May 31, 2003. Failure to timely complete such construction
shall be a violation of this franchise.
   B.   On or about thirty (30) days prior to construction of the upgraded/
constructed system, affected subscribers will receive a letter notifying them
of same, which letter shall include grantee's telephone number that subscribers
can use to contact grantee with any questions or concerns they may have. No
less than forty eight (48) hours before construction, all affected houses will
receive written notification regarding grantee's construction schedule which
will also include grantee's telephone number. Nothing shall prohibit grantee
from consolidating the notices required in this subsection. (Ord. 827, 8-5-
2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6-3: INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE:
Grantee shall interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Such interruption shall occur during periods of minimum use of the
system. If service is interrupted for a total period of more than twenty four
(24) continuous hours in any thirty (30) day period, subscribers shall be
credited pro rata for such interruption. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6-4: EMERGENCY ALERT CAPABILITY:
Grantee shall, upon completion of upgrade, provide the system capability to
allow the city to transmit from the sheriff's office or other said location at
city's discretion, an emergency alert signal to all participating subscribers,
in the form of an audio message on all channels simultaneously in the event of
disaster or public emergency. Grantee shall at all times comply with the
emergency alert system standards pursuant to title 47, section 11, subparts A–E
of the code of federal regulations, as may be amended or modified from time to
time. City and grantee agree that the emergency alert system shall not be used
for routine communications such as street cleaning and snow plowing. (Ord. 827,
8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6-5: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
The technical standards used in the operation of the system shall comply, at
minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable
systems pursuant to title 47, section 76, subpart K of the code of federal
regulations, as may be amended or modified from time to time, which regulations
are expressly incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-
2002)
9-1-6-6: SPECIAL TESTING:
   A.   City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation
work performed pursuant to the provisions of the franchise. In addition, city
may require special testing of a location or locations within the system if
there is a particular matter of controversy or unresolved complaints regarding
such construction or installation work or pertaining to such location(s).
Demand for such special tests may be made on the basis of complaints received
or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or noncompliance. Such
tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy or unresolved
complaints. City shall endeavor to so arrange its request for such special
testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee or to the
subscribers caused by such testing.
   B.   Before ordering such tests, grantee shall be afforded thirty (30) days
following receipt of written notice to investigate and, if necessary, correct
problems or complaints upon which tests were ordered. City shall meet with
grantee prior to requiring special tests to discuss the need for such and, if
possible, visually inspect those locations which are the focus of concern. If,
after such meetings and inspections, city wishes to commence special tests and
the thirty (30) days have elapsed without correction of the matter in
controversy or unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted at city's
expense by a qualified engineer selected by city and grantee, and grantee shall
cooperate in such testing. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6-7: FCC REPORTS:
The results of any tests required to be filed by grantee with the FCC shall
upon request of city also be filed with city or its designee within ten (10)
days of the conduct of such tests. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6-8: ANNEXATION:
Upon the annexation of any additional land area by city, the annexed area shall
thereafter be subject to all the terms of this franchise immediately upon
notification to grantee of the annexation by city, subject to the line
extension policies contained herein and provided that the annexed area is not
already served by another cable operator. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6-9: LINE EXTENSION:
   A.   Grantee shall construct and operate its cable system so as to provide
service to all parts of its franchise area as provided in this franchise and
having a density equivalent of eight (8) residential units per one-quarter (1/
4) cable mile of system, as measured from the nearest tap on the cable system.
   B.   Where the density is less than that specified above, grantee shall
inform persons requesting service of the possibility of paying for installation
or a line extension and shall offer to provide them with a free written
estimate of the cost, which shall be provided within fifteen (15) working days
of such a request. The charge for installation or extension for each person
requesting service shall not exceed a pro rata share of the actual cost of
extending the service.
   C.   Any residential and/or commercial unit located within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of the nearest tap on grantee's system shall be connected to the
system at no charge other than the standard installation charge. Grantee shall,
upon request by any potential subscriber residing in city beyond the one
hundred fifty foot (150') limit, extend service to such subscriber provided
that the subscriber shall pay the net additional drop costs.
   D.   Under normal operating conditions, if grantee cannot perform
installations within the times specified in applicable customer standards, the
subscriber may request and is entitled to receive a credit equal to the charge
for a standard installation. For any installation that is not a free
installation or a standard installation, grantee shall provide the subscriber
with a written estimate of all charges within seven (7) days of a request by
the subscriber. Failure to comply will subject grantee to appropriate
enforcement actions. This section does not apply to the introduction of new
products and services when grantee is utilizing a phased introduction. (Ord.
827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-6-10: NONVOICE RETURN CAPABILITY:
Grantee shall use cable and associated electronics having the technical
capacity for nonvoice return communications. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-
2002)
9-1-6-11: LOCKOUT DEVICE:
Upon the request of a subscriber, grantee shall make available by sale or lease
a lockout. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-7: SERVICE PROVISIONS:
9-1-7-1: REGULATION OF SERVICE RATES:
City may regulate rates for the provision of cable service, equipment, or any
other communications service provided over the system to the extent allowed
under federal or state law(s). City reserves the right to regulate rates for
any future services to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff.
8-26-2002)
9-1-7-2: NONSTANDARD INSTALLATIONS:
Grantee shall install and provide cable service to any person requesting other
than a standard installation provided that said cable service can meet FCC
technical specifications and all payment and policy obligations are met. In
such case, grantee may charge for the incremental increase in material and
labor costs incurred beyond the standard installation. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002,
eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-7-3: SALES PROCEDURES:
In its initial face to face communication with a nonsubscriber, grantee shall
inform the nonsubscriber of all levels of service available by providing a rate
card outlining all available services and rates. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-
26-2002)
9-1-7-4: CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS:
Grantee shall provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to
comply with the following consumer protection standards under normal operating
conditions:
   A.   Cable System Office Hours And Telephone Availability:
      1.   Grantee will maintain a local, toll free or collect call telephone
access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty four (24) hours a
day, seven (7) days a week.
         a.   Trained grantee representatives will be available to respond to
subscriber telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
         b.   After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained grantee representative on the next business day.
      2.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30)
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred,
transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be
met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating
conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
      3.   Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment and/or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above
unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
      4.   Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
      5.   Customer service center and bill payment locations will be available
at least during normal business hours.
   B.   Installations, Outages And Service Calls: Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four (4) standards will be met no less than
ninety five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
      1.   Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business
days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that
are located up to one hundred fifty feet (150') from the existing distribution
system.
      2.   Excluding conditions beyond the control of grantee, grantee will
begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than
twenty four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. Grantee must begin
actions to correct other service problems the next business day after
notification of the service problem. Grantee shall resolve all service
interruptions within forty eight (48) hours under normal operating conditions.
      3.   The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service
calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four (4) hour time block during normal business hours. (Grantee may
schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
      4.   Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the
close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
      5.   If Grantee's representative is running late for an appointment with
a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient
for the customer.
   C.   Communications Between Grantee And Subscribers:
      1.   Notifications To Subscribers:
         a.   Grantee shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to
all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
            (1)   Products and services offered;
            (2)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
            (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
            (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
            (5)   Channel positions of the programming carried on the system;
and
            (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the city.
         b.   Subscribers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming
services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be
given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes
if the changes are within the control of the grantee. In addition, the grantee
shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes
in the other information required by subsection C1a of this section. Grantee
shall not be required to provide prior notice of any rate changes as a result
of a regulatory fee, franchise fee, or other fees, tax, assessment or charge of
any kind imposed by any federal agency, state or city on the transaction
between the operator and the subscriber.
      2.   Billing:
         a.   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates and credits.
         b.   In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days.
      3.   Refunds: Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
         a.   The subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or
         b.   The return of the equipment supplied by grantee if service is
terminated.
      4.   Credits: Credits for service will be issued no later than the
subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
Grantee shall, upon request, provide city with a quarterly compliance report
specific to the system serving city, which report shall, at a minimum, describe
in detail grantee's compliance with each and every term and provision of this
section
9-1-7 and any additional customer service requirements contained in grantee's
franchise. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-7-5: SUBSCRIBER CONTRACTS:
Grantee shall file with city any standard form residential subscriber contract
utilized by grantee. If no such written contract exists, grantee shall file
with the city a document completely and concisely stating the length and terms
of the subscriber contract offered to customers. The length and terms of any
subscriber contract(s) shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours. A list of grantee's current subscriber rates and charges for
cable service shall be maintained on file with city and shall be available for
public inspection. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-7-6: REFUND POLICY:
In the event a subscriber establishes or terminates service and receives less
than one full month of service, grantee shall prorate the monthly rate on the
basis of the number of days in the period for which service was rendered to the
number of days in the billing. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-7-7: LATE FEES:
The franchisee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date not
earlier than at least ten (10) business days from the date the bill is
postmarked, unless otherwise agreed to pursuant to a subscriber agreement. The
franchisee shall not assess a late fee earlier than the cut off date of the
next billing cycle. The late fee shall appear on the following month's billing
statement. The franchisee may not charge a late fee unless the subscriber has
received notice that failure to pay by the due date may subject the subscriber
to a late fee. Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise be
penalized for any failure by franchisee, including a failure to timely or
correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for
a payment timely made. Consistent with applicable law, franchisee reserves the
right to modify this late fee policy from time to time in its sole discretion;
provided, however, franchisee shall provide the city and franchisee's customers
with thirty (30) days written notice to implementing any changes. (Ord. 827, 8-
5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-7-8: LOCAL OFFICE POLICY:
   A.   Grantee shall either: 1) maintain a location in city for receiving
subscriber inquiries, bill payments, and equipment transfers (the location must
be staffed by a person capable of receiving inquiries and bill payments and the
location shall be open a minimum of 40 hours per week), or 2) shall arrange for
a payment box located in the city and shall ensure that technicians are
available to pick up and drop off from subscriber's residences at no charge to
subscribers, any faulty equipment such as converters and remote controls.
   B.   Payments at grantee's drop box location shall be deemed received on the
date such payments are picked up by grantee which shall occur no less than
twenty four (24) hours after each and every due date for subscriber bills.
(Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-8: ACCESS CHANNEL(S) PROVISIONS:
9-1-8-1: GRANTEE SUPPORT FOR PEG ACCESS:
Grantee shall provide the following support for PEG access usage within the
service area:
   A.   Provision of the channels designated in section
9-1-16, exhibit B, of this chapter for local PEG programming and access use at
no charge in accordance with the requirements of section
9-1-16, exhibit B, of this chapter.
   B.   Support of PEG programming to the extent specified in section
9-1-16, exhibit B, of this chapter.
   C.   Provision of free public building installation and cable service and a
fiber connection to city's network as more clearly specified in section
9-1-16, exhibit B, of this chapter. Additional outlets may be installed at the
option of the city at city's cost or, if performed by grantee, at grantee's
cost of material and labor. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-9: OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS:
9-1-9-1: ADMINISTRATION OF FRANCHISE:
The city manager or other designee shall have continuing regulatory
jurisdiction and supervision over the system and the grantee's operation under
the franchise; provided, however, that the city council shall retain the sole
authority to take enforcement action pursuant to this franchise. (Ord. 827, 8-
5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-9-2: DELEGATED AUTHORITY:
The city may appoint a citizen advisory body or may delegate to any other body
or person authority to monitor the performance of grantee pursuant to the
franchise. Grantee shall cooperate with any such delegates of city. (Ord. 827,
8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-9-3: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   During the term of the franchise, grantee shall pay quarterly to city a
franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of its quarterly gross
revenues, or such other amounts as are subsequently permitted by federal
statute.
   B.   Any payments due under this provision shall be payable quarterly. The
payment shall be made within thirty (30) days of the end of each of grantee's
fiscal quarters together with a report showing the basis for the computation.
   C.   All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by city
and acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-9-4: NOT FRANCHISE FEES:
Grantee acknowledges and agrees that the franchisee fees payable by grantee to
city pursuant to this section
9-1-9 shall take precedence over all other payments, contributions, services,
equipment, facilities, support, resources or other activities to be provided or
performed by grantee pursuant to this franchise and that the franchise fees
provided for in this section
9-1-9 of this franchise shall not be deemed to be in the nature of a tax, and
shall be in addition to any and all taxes of general applicability and other
fees and charges which grantee shall be required to pay to city and/or to any
other governmental authority, all of which shall be separate and distinct
obligations of grantee. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-9-5: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The city shall have the right to inspect, upon reasonable notice and during
normal business hours, or require grantee to provide within a reasonable time
copies of any records maintained by grantee which relate to system operations
including specifically grantee's accounting and financial records. Grantee
reserves the right to withhold providing copies of records and information
which grantee can demonstrate contain confidential or trade secret information
in accordance with all applicable laws. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-9-6: REPORTS AND MAPS TO BE FILED WITH CITY:
   A.   Grantee shall file with the city, at the time or payment of the
franchise fee, a report of all gross revenues in form and substance as section
9-1-16, exhibit D, of this chapter.
   B.   City and grantee shall mutually agree, at the times and in the form
prescribed, such other reasonable reports with respect to grantee's operations
pursuant to this franchise.
   C.   To the extent required of all other right of way users, grantee shall
furnish to and file with city manager the maps, plats, and permanent records of
the location and character of all facilities constructed, including underground
facilities, and grantee shall file with city updates of such maps, plats and
permanent records annually if changes have been made in the system. (Ord. 827,
8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-9-7: PERIODIC EVALUATION:
   A.   City may require evaluation sessions not more than once every three (3)
years during the term of this franchise, upon fifteen (15) days' written notice
to grantee.
   B.   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may include,
but are not limited to, application of new technologies, system performance,
programming offered, access channels, facilities and support, municipal uses of
cable, subscriber rates, customer complaints, amendments to this franchise,
judicial rulings, FCC rulings, line extension policies and any other topics
city deems relevant. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-9-8: FRANCHISE MODIFICATIONS:
As a result of a periodic review or evaluation session, upon notification from
city, grantee shall meet with city and undertake good faith efforts to reach
agreement on changes and modifications to the terms and conditions of the
franchise which are both economically and technically feasible as measured over
the remaining life of the franchise. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-10: GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS:
9-1-10-1: PERFORMANCE BOND:
   A.   At the time the franchise becomes effective and at all times thereafter
until the system upgrade has been completed, the grantee shall furnish a bond
to city in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in a form and with
such sureties as reasonably acceptable to city. This bond will be conditioned
upon the faithful performance by the grantee of its system upgrade obligations
and upon the further condition that in the event the grantee shall fail to
comply with any law, ordinance or regulation governing the franchise, there
shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the
bond any damages or loss suffered by city as a result, including the full
amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment
of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney fees
and costs, up to the full amount of the bond, and further guaranteeing payment
by the grantee of claims, liens and taxes, due city which arise by reason of
the construction, operation, or maintenance of the system. The rights reserved
by city with respect to the bond are in addition to all other rights city may
have under the franchise or any other law.
   B.   The time for grantee to correct any violation or liability, shall be
extended by city if the necessary action to correct such violation or liability
is, in the sole determination of city, of such a nature or character as to
require more than thirty (30) days within which to perform, provided grantee
provides written notice that it requires more than thirty (30) days to correct
such violations or liability, commences the corrective action within the thirty
(30) day period and thereafter uses reasonable diligence to correct the
violation or liability.
   C.   In the event this franchise is revoked by reason of default of grantee,
city shall be entitled to collect from the performance bond that amount which
is attributable to any damages sustained by city as a result of said default or
revocation.
   D.   Grantee shall be entitled to the return of the performance bond, or
portion thereof, as remains sixty (60) days after completion of system
construction provided city has not notified grantee of any actual or potential
damages incurred as a result of grantee's operations pursuant to the franchise
or as a result of said default.
   E.   The rights reserved to city with respect to the performance bond are in
addition to all other rights of city whether reserved by this franchise or
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with
respect to the performance bond shall affect any other right city may have.
(Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-10-2: LETTER OF CREDIT:
   A.   Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a notice from the city of an
alleged violation of this franchise, as determined by the city, grantee shall
provide the city with an irrevocable letter of credit in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The letter of credit shall ensure the faithful
performance by the grantee of all the provisions of this franchise, and
compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the city and the payment
by grantee of any claim, penalties, damages, liens and taxes due the city
related thereto or which arise by reason of the construction, operation or
maintenance of the cable system. The letter of credit shall be provided by
grantee regardless of whether grantee disputes the alleged violation. Any
failure by grantee to provide the letter of credit as required herein shall
constitute a breach of this franchise. Any interest on this deposit shall be
paid to the grantee. Once the proceeding addressing the alleged violation has
been completed the grantee shall be relieved of maintaining the letter of
credit until such time as another alleged violation notification is received by
grantee at which time the process shall begin again.
   B.   In addition to recovery of any monies owed by grantee to city or any
person or damages to city or any person as a result of any acts or omissions by
grantee pursuant to the franchise, city in its sole discretion may charge to
and collect from the letter of credit the following penalties:
      1.   For failure to timely complete system upgrades as provided in this
franchise unless city approves the delay, the penalty shall be two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure
occurs or continues.
      2.   For failure to provide data, documents, reports or information or to
cooperate with city during an application process or system review or as
otherwise provided herein, the penalty shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or
continues.
      3.   Fifteen (15) days following notice from city of a failure of grantee
to comply with construction, operation or maintenance standards, the penalty
shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day, or part
thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
      4.   For failure to provide the services grantee has proposed, including,
but not limited to, the implementation and the utilization of the access
channels and the maintenance and/or replacement of the equipment and other
facilities, the penalty shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day
for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
      5.   For grantee's breach of any written contract or agreement with or to
the city or its designee, the penalty shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such breach occurs or
continues.
      6.   For failure to comply with any of the provisions of this franchise,
or other city ordinance for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically
provided, the penalty shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day for
each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
      7.   For failure to comply with any of the customer service provisions of
this franchise, or other city ordinance, the penalty shall be three hundred
dollars ($300.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or
continues, provided, any damages so paid to city thereafter shall be credited
by grantee to grantee's subscribers, less costs of prosecution, which shall
include, but not be limited to, reasonable attorney fees.
   C.   Each violation of any provision of this franchise shall be considered a
separate violation for which a separate penalty can be imposed.
   D.   Whenever city finds that grantee has violated one or more terms,
conditions or provisions of this franchise, or for any other violation
contemplated in subsection B of this section, a written notice shall be given
to grantee informing it of such violation. At any time after thirty (30) days
(or such longer reasonable time which, in the sole determination of city, is
necessary to cure the alleged violation) following local receipt of notice,
provided grantee remains in violation of one or more terms, conditions or
provisions of this franchise, in the sole opinion of city, city may draw from
the letter of credit all penalties and other monies due city from the date of
the local receipt of notice.
   E.   Whenever the letter of credit is drawn upon, grantee may, within seven
(7) days of such draw, notify city in writing that there is a dispute as to
whether a violation or failure has in fact occurred. Such written notice by
grantee to city shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by
grantee. All penalties shall continue to accrue from the letter of credit
during any appeal.
      1.   City shall hear grantee's dispute within sixty (60) days and render
a final decision within sixty (60) days thereafter.
      2.   Upon the determination of city that no violation has taken place,
city shall refund to grantee, without interest, all monies drawn from the
letter of credit by reason of the alleged violation.
   F.   If city draws upon the letter of credit or any subsequent letter of
credit delivered pursuant hereto, in whole or in part, grantee shall replace or
replenish to its full amount the same within ten (10) days and shall deliver to
city a like replacement letter of credit or certification of replenishment for
the full amount stated in subsection A of this section as a substitution of the
previous letter of credit. This shall be a continuing obligation for any draws
upon the letter of credit.
   G.   If any letter of credit is not so replaced or replenished, city may
draw on said letter of credit for the whole amount thereof and use the proceeds
as city determines in its sole discretion. The failure to replace or replenish
any letter of credit may also, at the option of the city, be deemed a default
by grantee under this franchise. The drawing on the letter of credit by city,
and use of the money so obtained for payment or performance of the obligations,
duties and responsibilities of grantee which are in default, shall not be a
waiver or release of such default.
   H.   The collection by city of any damages, monies or penalties from the
letter of credit shall not affect any other right or remedy available to city,
nor shall any act, or failure to act, by city pursuant to the letter of credit,
be deemed a waiver of any right of city pursuant to this franchise or
otherwise. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-10-3: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   Upon the effective date, grantee shall, at its sole expense take out
and maintain during the term of this franchise public liability insurance with
a company licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota with a rating by
A.M. Best & Co., of not less than A that shall protect the grantee, city and
its officials, officers, directors, employees and agents from claims which may
arise from operations under this franchise, whether such operations be by the
grantee, its officials, officers, directors, employees and agents or any
subcontractors of grantee. This liability insurance shall include, but shall
not be limited to, protection against claims arising from bodily and personal
injury and damage to property, resulting from grantee's vehicles, products and
operations. The amount of insurance for single limit coverage applying to
bodily and personal injury and property damage shall not be less than two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00). The following endorsements shall be attached
to the liability policy:
      1.   The policy shall provide coverage on an "occurrence" basis.
      2.   The policy shall cover personal injury as well as bodily injury.
      3.   The policy shall cover blanket contractual liability subject to the
standard universal exclusions of contractual liability included in the
carrier's standard endorsement as to bodily injuries, personal injuries and
property damage.
      4.   Broad form property damage liability shall be afforded.
      5.   City shall be named as an additional insured on the policy.
      6.   An endorsement shall be provided which states that the coverage is
primary insurance and that no other insurance maintained by the grantor will be
called upon to contribute to a loss under this coverage.
      7.   Standard form of cross liability shall be afforded.
      8.   An endorsement stating that the policy shall not be canceled without
thirty (30) days notice of such cancellation given to city.
   B.   Grantee shall submit to city documentation of the required insurance,
including a certificate of insurance signed by the insurance agent and
companies named, as well as all properly executed endorsements. (Ord. 827, 8-5-
2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-10-4: INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold city, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents and employees (collectively the "indemnified parties")
harmless from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes or action,
actions, liabilities, demands, damages, judgments, settlements, disability,
losses, expenses (including attorney fees and disbursements of counsel) and
costs of any nature that any of the indemnified parties may at any time suffer,
sustain or incur arising out of, based upon or in any way connected with the
grantee's operations, the exercise of the franchise, the breach of grantee of
its obligations under this franchise and/or the activities of grantee, its
subcontractor, employees and agents hereunder. Grantee shall be solely
responsible for and shall indemnify, defend and hold the indemnified parties
harmless from and against any and all matters relative to payment of grantee's
employees, including compliance with social security and withholdings. Grantee
shall not be required to provide indemnification to city for programming
cablecast over the educational and governmental access channels administered by
city.
   B.   The indemnification obligations of grantee set forth in this franchise
are not limited in any way by the amount or type of damages or compensation
payable by or for grantee under workers' compensation, disability or other
employee benefit acts, acceptance of insurance certificates required under this
franchise or the terms, applicability or limitations of any insurance held by
grantee.
   C.   City does not, and shall not, waive any rights against grantee which it
may have by reason of the indemnification provided for in this franchise,
because of the acceptance by city, or the deposit with city by grantee, of any
of the insurance policies described in this franchise.
   D.   The indemnification of city by grantee provided for in this franchise
shall apply to all damages and claims for damages of any kind suffered by
reason of any of the grantee's operations referred to in this franchise,
regardless of whether or not such insurance policies shall have been determined
to be applicable to any such damages or claims for damages.
   E.   Grantee shall not be required to indemnify city for negligence or
misconduct on the part of city or its officials, boards, commissions, agents,
or employees. City shall hold grantee harmless, subject to the limitations in
Minnesota statutes chapter 466, for any damage resulting from the negligence or
misconduct of the city or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or
employees in utilizing any PEG access channels, equipment, or facilities and
for any such negligence or misconduct by city in connection with work performed
by city and permitted by this agreement, on or adjacent to the cable system.
(Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-10-5: GRANTEE'S INSURANCE:
Grantee shall not commence any cable system reconstruction work or permit any
subcontractor to commence work until all insurance required under this
franchise has been obtained. Said insurance shall be maintained in full force
and effect until the expiration of this franchise.
   A.   In order for city to assert is rights to be indemnified, defended, and
held harmless, city must with respect to each claim:
      1.   Promptly notify grantee in writing of any claim or legal proceeding
which gives rise to such right;
      2.   Afford grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control
any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any claim or
proceeding; and
      3.   Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of grantee, at grantee's
expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement or
resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to
subsection A2 of this section. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-11: SALE, ABANDONMENT, TRANSFER AND REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
9-1-11-1: CITY'S RIGHT TO REVOKE:
   A.   In addition to all other rights which city has pursuant to law or
equity, city reserves the right to commence proceedings to revoke, terminate or
cancel this franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if it
is determined by city that after notice and an opportunity to cure as reordered
herein:
      1.   Grantee has violated material provision(s) of this franchise and has
not cured; or
      2.   Grantee has attempted to evade any of the provisions of the
franchise; or
      3.   Grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon city.
   B.   City may revoke this franchise without the hearing otherwise required
herein if grantee is adjudged a bankrupt. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-11-2: PROCEDURES FOR REVOCATION:
   A.   City shall provide grantee with written notice of a cause for
revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow grantee thirty (30) days
subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to
provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the franchise. In
the notice required therein, city shall provide grantee with the basis of the
revocation.
   B.   Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording due
process before the city council prior to the effective date of revocation,
which public hearing shall follow the thirty (30) day notice provided in
subsection A of this section. City shall provide grantee with written notice of
its decision together with written findings of fact supplementing said
decision.
   C.   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full force and
effect unless continuation of the franchise would endanger the health, safety
and welfare of any person or the public. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-11-3: ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE:
Grantee may not abandon the system or any portion thereof without having first
given three (3) months' written notice to city. Grantee may not abandon the
system or any portion thereof without compensating city for damages resulting
from the abandonment, including all costs incident to removal of the system.
(Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-11-4: REMOVAL AFTER ABANDONMENT, TERMINATION OR FORFEITURE:
   A.   In the event of termination or forfeiture of the franchise or
abandonment of the system, city shall have the right to require grantee to
remove all or any portion of the system from all rights of way and public
property within city.
   B.   If grantee has failed to commence removal of system, or such part
thereof as was designated by city, within thirty (30) days after written notice
of city's demand for removal is given, or if grantee has failed to complete
such removal within twelve (12) months after written notice of city's demand
for removal is given, city shall have the right to apply funds secured by the
letter of credit and performance bond toward removal. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff.
8-26-2002)
9-1-11-5: SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   No sale or transfer of the franchise, including a sale or transfer by
means of a fundamental corporate change including the sale or transfer of a
majority of a corporation's assets; merger, including a parent and its
subsidiary corporation; consolidation; or creation of a subsidiary corporation,
shall take place until a written request has been filed with city requesting
approval of the sale, transfer, or corporate change and such approval has been
granted or deemed granted; provided, however, that said approval shall not be
required where grantee grants a security interest in its franchise and/or
assets to secure an indebtedness.
   B.   Any sale, transfer, exchange or assignment of stock in grantee, or
grantee's parent corporation or any other entity having a controlling interest
in grantee, so as to create a new controlling interest therein, shall be
subject to the requirements of this section. The term "controlling interest" as
used herein is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual
working control in whatever manner exercised.
   C.   The grantee shall, upon request of the city, file in addition to all
documents, forms and information required to be filed by applicable laws, the
following:
      1.   All nonconfidential contracts, agreements or other documents that
constitute the proposed transaction and all exhibits, attachments, or other
documents referred to therein which are necessary in order to understand the
terms thereof; and
      2.   A list detailing all documents filed with any state or federal
agency related to the transaction including, but not limited to, the MPUC, the
FCC, the FTC, the FEC, the SEC or MNDOT. Upon request, grantee shall provide
city with a complete copy of any such document.
   D.   City shall have such time as is permitted by applicable laws in which
to review a transfer request.
   E.   In no event shall a sale, transfer, corporate change, or assignment of
ownership or control pursuant to subsection A or B of this section be approved
without the transferee becoming a signatory to this franchise and assuming all
rights and obligations thereunder, and assuming all other rights and
obligations of the transferor to the city including, but not limited to, any
adequate guarantees or other security instruments provided by the transferor.
   F.   In the event of any proposed sale, transfer, corporate change, or
assignment pursuant to subsection A or B of this section, city shall have the
right to purchase the system.
   G.   The city shall have a right to purchase the cable system upon
abandonment, expiration or revocation consistent with 47 USC section 547, or in
the event the grantee receives a bona fide offer to purchase the cable system
from any person. "Bona fide offer" as used in this section means a written
offer for one or more of the grantee's assets which has been accepted by
grantee. The price to be paid by the city shall be the fair market value as a
going concern. The city shall be deemed to have waived its right to purchase
the system pursuant to this section only in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon receipt of a transfer request, the city shall have sixty (60)
days to exercise its rights pursuant to this section.
      2.   It approves the assignment or sale of the franchise as provided
within this section.
   H.   The approval of any transfer of ownership pursuant to this section
shall not be deemed to waive any rights of city to subsequently enforce
noncompliance issues relating to this franchise even if such issues predated
the approval, whether known or unknown to city.
   I.   Franchisee shall not be required to provide a guarantee upon acceptance
of this franchise. However, in the event this franchise is ever transferred,
city may require a signed guarantee of performance, in a form acceptable to
city to be filed by a proposed transferee and/or parent company. (Ord. 827, 8-
5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-12: PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS:
9-1-12-1: DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against
subscribers or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, age, status as to public assistance, affectional preference, or
disability. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable
federal, state, and city laws, and all executive and administrative orders
relating to nondiscrimination. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-12-2: SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY:
   A.   No signals including signals of a class IV channel may be transmitted
from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing
patterns or practices without the express written permission of the subscriber.
Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed one
year which may be renewed at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall be
invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide or renew such authorization. The
authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty
of any kind whatsoever. Such permission shall be required for each type or
classification of class IV channel activity planned for the purpose of
monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices.
   B.   No lists of the names and addresses of subscribers or any lists that
identify the viewing habits of subscribers shall be sold or otherwise made
available to any party other than to grantee or its agents for grantee's
service business use, and also to the subscriber subject of that information,
unless grantee has received specific written authorization from the subscriber
to make such data available. Such written permission shall be for a limited
period of time not to exceed one year which may be renewed at the option of the
subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide
or renew such authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time
by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever.
   C.   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required for the
conducting of system wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for the
purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of billing.
Confidentiality of such information shall be subject to the provision set forth
in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-13: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
9-1-13-1: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS OR MODIFICATIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or
governmental body or agency, without the express consent of the grantee, to
make or possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing, any unauthorized
connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically,
inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of the system
or receive services of the system without grantee's authorization. (Ord. 827,
8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-13-2: REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, or corporation to
wilfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any
part or segment of the system for any purpose whatsoever. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002,
eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-13-3: PENALTY:
Any firm, person, group, company, or corporation found guilty of violating this
section
9-1-13 may be fined not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) and the costs of the
action nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the costs of the action
for each and every subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation
shall be considered a separate occurrence. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-14: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
9-1-14-1: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
Any renewal of this franchise shall be performed in accordance with applicable
laws. The term of any renewed franchise shall be limited to a period not to
exceed fifteen (15) years. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-14-2: WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS:
All applicable obligations of this franchise shall apply to any subcontractor
or others performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of this
franchise, however, in no event shall any such subcontractor or other
performing work obtain any rights to maintain and operate a system or provide
cable service. Grantee shall provide notice to city, upon request, of the name
(s) and address(es) of any entity, other than grantee, which performs
substantial services pursuant to this franchise. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-
26-2002)
9-1-14-3: AMENDMENT OF FRANCHISE ORDINANCE:
Grantee and city may agree, from time to time, to amend this franchise. Such
written amendments may be made subsequent to a review session pursuant to
section
9-1-9 of this chapter or at any other time if city and grantee agree that such
an amendment will be in the public interest or if such an amendment is required
due to changes in federal, state or local laws; provided, however, nothing
herein shall restrict city's exercise of its police powers. (Ord. 827, 8-5-
2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-14-4: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL LAWS:
   A.   If any federal or state law or regulation shall require or permit city
or grantee to perform any service or act or shall prohibit city or grantee from
performing any service or act which may be in conflict with the terms of this
franchise, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, either party
shall notify the other of the point in conflict believed to exist between such
law or regulation. Grantee and city shall conform to state laws and rules
regarding cable communications not later than one year after they become
effective, unless otherwise stated, and to conform to federal laws and
regulations regarding cable as they become effective.
   B.   If any term, condition or provision of this franchise or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be held
to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of
such term, condition or provision to persons or circumstances other than those
as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected
thereby, and this franchise and all the terms, provisions and conditions hereof
shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and complied with
provided the loss of the invalid or unenforceable clause does not substantially
alter the agreement between the parties. In the event such law, rule or
regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so
that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in
conflict with the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision
shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding
on grantee and city. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-14-5: NONENFORCEMENT BY CITY:
Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply with any of the
provisions of this franchise by reason of any failure or delay of city to
enforce prompt compliance. City may only waive its rights hereunder by
expressly so stating in writing. Any such written waiver by city of a breach or
violation of any provision of this franchise shall not operate as or be
construed to be a waiver of any subsequent breach or violation. (Ord. 827, 8-5-
2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-14-6: RIGHTS CUMULATIVE:
All rights and remedies given to city by this franchise or retained by city
herein shall be in addition to and cumulative with any and all other rights and
remedies, existing or implied, now or hereafter available to city, at law or in
equity, and such rights and remedies shall not be exclusive, but each and every
right and remedy specifically given by this franchise or otherwise existing or
given may be exercised from time to time and as often and in such order as may
be deemed expedient by city and the exercise of one or more rights or remedies
shall not be deemed a waiver of the right to exercise at the same time or
thereafter any other right or remedy. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-14-7: GRANTEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF VALIDITY OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee acknowledges that it has had an opportunity to review the terms and
conditions of this franchise and that under current law grantee believes that
said terms and conditions are not unreasonable or arbitrary, and that grantee
believes city has the power to make the terms and conditions contained in this
franchise. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-14-8: FORCE MAJEURE:
Neither party shall be liable for any failure of performance hereunder due to
causes beyond its reasonable control including, but not limited to: acts of
God, fire, explosion, vandalism, storm or other similar catastrophes; any law,
order, regulation, direction, action or request of the United States government
or any other government including state and local governments having
jurisdiction over either of the parties or of any department, agency,
commission, court, bureau, governments, or of any civil or military
authorities; national emergencies; insurrection; riots; wars; or strikes,
lockouts or work stoppages. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-15: PUBLICATION EFFECTIVE DATE; ACCEPTANCE:
9-1-15-1: PUBLICATION, EFFECTIVE DATE:
This franchise shall be published in accordance with applicable local and
Minnesota law. The effective date of this franchise shall be the date of
acceptance by grantee in accordance with the provisions of section
9-1-15-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
9-1-15-2: ACCEPTANCE:
   A.   Grantee shall accept this franchise within thirty (30) days of its
enactment by the city council, unless the time for acceptance is extended by
city. Such acceptance by the grantee shall be deemed the grant of this
franchise for all purposes; provided, however, this franchise shall not be
effective until all city ordinance adoption procedures are complied with and
all applicable time lines have run for the adoption of a city ordinance. In the
event acceptance does not take place, or should all ordinance adoption
procedures and time lines not be completed, this franchise and any and all
rights granted hereunder to grantee shall be null and void.
   B.   Upon acceptance of this franchise, grantee and city shall be bound by
all the terms and conditions contained herein.
   C.   Grantee shall accept this franchise in the following manner:
      1.   This franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by grantee
and delivered to city.
      2.   With its acceptance, grantee shall also deliver any grant payments,
performance bond and insurance certificates, and guaranties, as required
herein, that have not previously been delivered. (Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-
26-2002)
9-1-16: EXHIBITS:
   EXHIBIT A
   GRANTEE'S OWNERSHIP INFORMATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e9e1c3e25dc608a6d50e46747eb786a1604d15f5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1734.gif]
   EXHIBIT B
   GRANTEE COMMITMENT TO
   PEG ACCESS FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT
1.   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT (PEG) ACCESS CHANNELS
Grantee shall make up to two (2) video Channels available exclusively for PEG
use ("PEG Channels"). Initially one (1) Channel shall be provided by Grantee
for public, educational and governmental use. One (1) PEG Channel shall at all
times be located on Channel 8 throughout the term of the Franchise, unless
prohibited by Applicable Law. Grantee shall make available one (1) additional
Channel for PEG use upon ninety (90) days advance written notice from the City.
The PEG Channels shall be dedicated for PEG use for the term of the Franchise
Agreement, provided that Grantee may utilize any portions of the PEG Channels
not scheduled for PEG use. City and Grantee shall establish rules and
procedures for such scheduling in accordance with Section 611 of the Cable Act
(47 U.S.C. § 531).
City may not request additional Channel capacity beyond the two (2) Channels
for PEG use except in accordance with applicable State laws. City shall be
responsible for all programming requirements, including but not limited to
scheduling, playback, training, staffing, copyright clearances, and equipment,
maintenance and repair.
2.   PEG OPERATIONS
City may, in its sole discretion, negotiate agreements with neighboring
jurisdictions served by the same Cable System, educational institutions or
others to share the expenses of supporting the PEG Channels. City and Grantee
may negotiate an agreement for management of PEG facilities, if so desired by
both parties.
3.   TITLE TO PEG EQUIPMENT
City shall retain title to all PEG equipment and facilities purchased or
otherwise acquired by City.
4.   RELOCATION OF PEG CHANNELS
Grantee shall not relocate any PEG access Channel to a different Channel number
unless specifically required by Applicable Laws or unless otherwise agreed to
in writing by City. Grantee shall provide City and all Subscribers with at
least sixty (60) days prior written notice of any legally required relocation.
In the event any PEG access channel(s) is relocated, Grantee shall reimburse
City up to Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for all costs associated with such
move including change of letterhead, promotion of new channel location and
promotional spots for the new location and inform Subscribers of the new
channel location through bill inserts and newspaper advertisements.
5.   ACCESS OPERATING SUPPORT
Grantee shall provide City with a capital grant of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars
($25,000), on or before May 31, 2003. Grantee shall also collect, upon written
request by City allowing ninety (90) days advance notice, on behalf of City a
per Subscriber fee of up to thirty- five cents (35¢) per month in years one (1)
through five (5) of the Franchise; seventy-five (75¢) per month in years six
(6) through ten (10) of the Franchise; and one dollar ($1.00) per month in
years eleven (11) through fifteen (15) of the Franchise, solely to fund public,
educational and governmental access related expenditures (hereinafter "Access
Fee"). Any increase in the per month fee by City shall occur upon approval of
the City Council and upon ninety (90) days' advance written notice to Grantee.
Any and all payments by Grantee to City in support of PEG access programming
shall not be deemed "Franchise Fees" within the meaning of Section 622 of the
Cable Act (47 U.S.C. Section 542).
6.   TWO-WAY SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS
Grantee shall provide a two-way connection to the Channel 8 Studio, City Hall,
Fine Arts Center and High School to facilitate the exchange of programming,
including live cablecast programming from those buildings on the Grantee's
Cable System and the Grantor's network. Grantee shall further provide, free of
charge, all necessary interface equipment (modulator/demodulator) at the
agreed-upon point of interconnection to allow the City to cablecast programming
to Grantee's headend for cablecast on Grantee's Cable System.
7.   DROPS TO DESIGNATED BUILDINGS
   a.   Grantee shall provide free of charge throughout the term of this
Franchise, Installation of one (1) network Drop, one (1) cable outlet, and one
(1) Converter, if necessary, and the Basic Service Tier and cable programming
services tier (a/k/a expanded basic) excluding pay-per-view, pay-per-channel
(premium) programming, high-speed data services (unless considered a "cable
service") without charge to the institutions identified in Exhibit B-1, and
such other public institutions subsequently designated by City as determined in
City's sole discretion. This requirement shall not include any digital tier of
services Grantee may offer unless and until such time as Grantee's digital
programming reduces the amount of spectrum available for analog programming to
less than approximately sixty (60) Channels of analog programming. Grantee
shall be responsible for the costs of extension to subsequently designated
institutions for the first three hundred (300) feet as measured from Grantee's
nearest active plant. The institution shall pay the net additional Drop or
extension costs beyond the three hundred (300) feet.
   b.   Additional Subscriber network Drops and/or outlets in any of the
locations identified on Exhibit B-1 will be installed by Grantee at the lowest
actual cost of Grantee's time and material. Alternatively, said institutions
may add outlets at their own expense, as long as such Installation meets
Grantees standards and approval which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Grantee shall have three (3) months from the date of City designation of
additional accredited schools or public institutions or relocations to complete
construction of the Drop and the outlet unless weather or other conditions
beyond the control of Grantee requires more time.
   EXHIBIT B-1
   SERVICE TO PUBLIC AND PRIVATE BUILDINGS
1.   City Hall
2.   Channel 8 Studio
3.   Community Center
4.   Library
5.   Police Department
6.   Fire Department
7.   All K-12 state accredited public and private schools
8.   Fine Arts Center
   TWO-WAY LIVE
*To facilitate live programming from any one location at a given time.
1.   Channel 8
2.   City Hall
3.   Fine Arts Center
4.   High School
   EXHIBIT C
   DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM
1.   The Cable System shall be designed, constructed, routinely inspected, and
maintained to guaranty the Cable System meets or exceeds the requirements of
the most current editions of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) and the
National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI C2).
2.   General Requirements. Grantee shall use equipment used in high quality,
reliable modern Cable Systems of similar design. Within ninety (90) days after
the effective date, Grantee shall provide to the City a plan for construction
of the System indicating, at least, a general overview of the construction
schedule.
3.   General Description. The Cable System shall provide Subscribers with a
technically advanced and reliable Cable System. The System shall operate with
750 MHz of bandwidth, capable of delivering a minimum of 78 channels of
programming. The System will be two-way active, and it will have a return
capacity of 42 MHz. The design will provide the benefits of proven 78 Channel
electronics while positioning the System for expansion of bandwidth and Channel
capacity as technology and future services develop.
4.   Design. The design of the System shall be an analog system and shall be
capable of utilizing 78 channels of analog bandwidth. The system shall have the
option of delivering all channels above the basic service in a digital format
and that may require customers to utilize a digital customer terminal. There
shall be no more than six (6) active amplifiers in a cascade from the headend
to the residential dwelling. The incorporation of stand-by power supplies,
strategically placed throughout the system, will further reduce the likelihood
of service interruptions. The system will be designed in such a manner so that
it is capable of delivering advanced services, such as high- speed Internet
service and digital pay-per-view.
5.   Technical Specifications. The System shall meet or exceed FCC
requirements. In no event shall the System fall below the following standards:
   a.   The System shall be capable of meeting the following distortion
parameters:
1.   Carrier to RMS Noise 48 dB
2.   Carrier to Second Order 53 dB
3.   Carrier to Cross Modulation 51 dB
4.   Carrier to Composite Triple Beat 53 dB
   b.   The frequency response of a single Channel as measured across any 6 MHz
analog Channel shall not exceed +/ 2 dB.
   c.   The frequency response of the entire passband shall not exceed N/10+ 2
dB for the entire System where N is the number of amplifiers in cascade;
   d.   The System shall be designed such that at a minimum all technical
specifications of this Franchise Agreement are met.
   e.   The System shall be designed such that no noticeable degradation in
signal quality will appear at the Subscriber terminal.
   EXHIBIT D
   FRANCHISE FEE PAYMENT WORKSHEET
REVENUE SOURCE GROSS REVENUE 5% FRANCHISE FEE YEAR-TO-DATE
REVENUE SOURCE        GROSS REVENUE 5% FRANCHISE FEE YEAR-TO-DATE
Basic Cable Service                                 
Expanded Basic                                      
Digital Services                                    
Pay Service Channel                                 
Pay-Per-View                                        
Commercial Music                                    
Installation Charge                                 
Bulk Revenue                                        
Home Shopping Revenue                               
Advertising Revenue                                 
Equipment Rental                                    
Processing Fees                                     
Inside Wiring                                       
Bad Debt                                            
Franchise Fee Revenue                               
Other – Revenue                                   
   TOTAL                                         
 
REVENUE SOURCES INCLUDE:
INSTALLATION:
                          
Standard Installation     Commonly occurring normal Installation
Additional Outlet         Installation on additional sets within a Subscriber's
                          home
FM Service                Separate Installation of FM Service
VCR                       Installation of Converter to a VCR
Reconnection of Service   Reconnection of cable to a Subscriber's address
A/B Switch                Separate Installation of an A/B Switch
Relocation                Moving an outlet within a Subscriber's home
Non-Standard              Usually Installation of a commercial type of an
                          account
Change of Service         Charge for upgrading or switching a premium service
BASIC SERVICE:
Basic Service             Revenue derived from Basic Service
Bulk Rates                Revenue derived from non-standard billings (i.e.,
                          apt. complex)
Reduced Promotional Basic Revenue derived from a discounted basic service
PAY-PER-VIEW:
All Movies                Revenue derived from pay-per-view movies
Events                    Revenue derived from special events (i.e., concerts,
                          boxing matches, etc.)
ADVERTISING:
Sales                     Revenue generated locally, regionally or nationally
Ad Production             Revenue generated from the production of a locally
                          produced commercial
                          Revenue generated from the production of training
Production Income         tapes, studio rentals, personnel fees, or rental
                          income from renting vans or equipment
Tape Duplication          Revenue generated from duplication of L.O. or access
                          tapes
Bill Stuffer              Revenue generated as a result of providing a bill
                          stuffer to an advertiser
OTHER:
Returned Check Fees       Revenue generated from charges on returned checks
Pre-wired Cable Purchases Revenue generated from the sale of Cable Service to
                          Subscribers who pre-wire their home
Antenna Rental            Any revenue derived from renting space on towers
A/B Switch                Revenue generated from sale of an A/B Switch
Late Fee                  Revenue generated from receiving a late fee
OTHER:
DOES NOT INCLUDE:
                          Revenues from the Department of Transportation or
Reimbursements            other government entities for mandatory relocations
                          of Cable System. Revenue from employee reimbursements
                          for cash advances.
 
Verified and submitted this            day of                               ,
2002.
By:                     
Its:                     
(Ord. 827, 8-5-2002, eff. 8-26-2002)
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRIC FRANCHISES
ARTICLE A. NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY
SECTION:
9-2A-1: Definitions
9-2A-2: Adoption Of Franchise
9-2A-3: Location, Other Regulations
9-2A-4: Relocations
9-2A-5: Tree Trimming
9-2A-6: Indemnification
9-2A-7: Vacation Of Public Ways
9-2A-8: Change In Form Of Government
9-2A-9: Franchise Fee
9-2A-10: Provisions Of Article
9-2A-11: Amendment Procedure
9-2A-12: Previous Franchises Superseded
9-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following capitalized terms listed in
alphabetical order shall have the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Montevideo, county of Chippewa, state of Minnesota.
CITY UTILITY SYSTEM: Facilities used for providing public utility service owned
or operated by city or agency thereof, including sewer, storm sewer, water
service, street lighting and traffic signals, but excluding facilities for
providing heating, lighting or other forms of energy.
COMMISSION: The Minnesota public utilities commission, or any successor agency
or agencies, including an agency of the federal government which preempts all
or part of the authority to regulate electric retail rates now vested in the
Minnesota public utilities commission.
COMPANY: Northern States Power Company, a Minnesota corporation, DBA Xcel
Energy, its successors and assigns including all successors or assignees that
own or operate any part or parts of the electric facilities subject to this
franchise.
ELECTRIC FACILITIES: Electric transmission and distribution towers, poles,
conductors, lines, guys, anchors, conduits, fixtures, and necessary
appurtenances owned or operated by company for the purpose of providing
electric energy for public use.
NONBETTERMENT COSTS: Costs incurred by company from relocation, removal or
rearrangement of electric facilities that do not result in an improvement to
the electric facilities.
NOTICE: A writing served by either party on the other party. Notice to company
shall be mailed to the General Counsel, Legal Services, 414 Nicollet Mall, 5th
Floor, Minneapolis, MN 55401. Notice to the city shall be mailed to the City
Administrator, 103 Canton Ave., P.O. Box 517, Montevideo, MN 56265-0517. Either
party may change its respective address for the purpose of this article by
written notice to the other party.
PUBLIC GROUND: Land owned or otherwise controlled by the city for park, open
space or similar purpose, which is held for use in common by the public.
PUBLIC WAY: Public right of way within the city as defined in Minnesota
statutes section 237.162 subdivision 3. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-2: ADOPTION OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Grant Of Franchise: City hereby grants company, for a period of twenty
(20) years from the date this article is passed and approved by the city, the
right to transmit and furnish electric energy for light, heat and power or
similar electric energy purposes for public and private use within and through
the limits of the city as its boundaries now exist or as they may be extended
in the future. For these purposes, company may construct, operate, repair and
maintain electric facilities in, on, over, under and across the public ways and
public grounds of city, subject to the provisions of this article. Company may
do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes,
subject, however, to such reasonable regulations as may be imposed by the city
pursuant to this article and to the further provisions of this franchise
agreement.
   B.   Effective Date; Written Acceptance: This franchise shall be in force
and effect from and after the passage of this article and publication as
required by law and its acceptance by company. If company does not file a
written acceptance with the city within ninety (90) days after the date the
city council adopts this article, or otherwise places the city on notice before
that time that the company does not accept all terms of this franchise, the
city council by resolution may revoke this article or seek its enforcement in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   Service, Rates And Area: The service to be provided and the rates to be
charged by company for electric service in the city are subject to the
jurisdiction of the commission. The area within the city in which company may
provide electric service is subject to the provisions of Minnesota statutes,
section 216B.40.
   D.   Publication Expense: The expense of publication of this article will be
paid by city and reimbursed to city by company.
   E.   Dispute Resolution: If either party asserts that the other party is in
default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the complaining party
shall notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. The
notification shall be written. Representatives of the parties must promptly
meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the dispute. If the
dispute is not resolved within thirty (30) days of the written notice, the
parties may jointly select a mediator to facilitate further discussion. The
parties will equally share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a
mediator is not used or if the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within
thirty (30) days after first meeting with the selected mediator, either party
may commence an action in district court to interpret and enforce this
franchise or for such other relief as may be permitted by law or equity.
   F.   Continuation Of Franchise: If the city and company are unable to agree
on the terms of a new franchise by the time this franchise expires, this
franchise will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon, or until
ninety (90) days after the city or company serves written notice to the other
party of its intention to allow the franchise to expire, but in no event shall
this franchise continue for more than one year after expiration of the twenty
(20) year term set forth in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 886, 12-15-
2008)
9-2A-3: LOCATION, OTHER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Location Of Facilities: Electric facilities shall be located,
constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel along and over public ways and so as not to
disrupt normal operation of any city utility system. Electric facilities shall
be located on public grounds as determined by the city. Company's construction,
reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance location and relocation of
electric facilities shall be subject to any permit requirements authorized in a
separate ordinance and other reasonable regulations of the city, consistent
with authority granted the city to manage its public ways and public grounds
under state law, to the extent not inconsistent with a specific term of this
franchise agreement. Company may abandon underground electric facilities in
place, provided, at city's request, company will remove, at its own expense,
abandoned metal conduits or concrete encased conduit or other facilities
interfering with a city improvement project, to the extent such conduit is
uncovered by excavation conducted as part of the city's improvement project.
   B.   Street Openings: Company shall not open or disturb the surface of any
public way or public ground for any purpose without first having obtained a
permit from the city, if required by a separate ordinance, for which the city
may impose a reasonable fee. Permit conditions imposed on company shall not be
more burdensome than those imposed on other utilities for similar facilities or
work. Company may, however, open and disturb the surface of any public way or
public ground without permit if: 1) an emergency exists requiring the immediate
repair of electric facilities, and 2) company gives telephone, e-mail or
similar notice to the city before, if reasonably possible, commencement of the
emergency repair. Within two (2) business days after commencing the repair,
company shall apply for any required permits and pay any required fees.
   C.   Restoration: After undertaking any work requiring the opening of any
public way, company shall restore the public way in accordance with Minnesota
rules, part 7819.1100 and applicable city ordinances to the extent consistent
with law. Company shall restore the public ground to as good a condition as
formerly existed, and shall maintain any paved surface in good condition for
two (2) years thereafter, but shall have no obligation to water any grass or
other vegetation thereon. All work shall be completed as promptly as weather
permits. If company shall not promptly perform and complete the work, remove
all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and put the public ground in the
said condition, the city shall have, after demand to company to cure and the
passage of a reasonable period of time following the demand, but not to exceed
five (5) days, the right to make the restoration of the public ground at the
expense of company. Company shall pay to the city the cost of such work done
for or performed by the city. This remedy shall be in addition to any other
remedy available to the city for noncompliance with this subsection.
   D.   Performance Security: The city hereby waives any requirement in the
normal course of company operations, for company to post a construction
performance bond, certificate of insurance, letter of credit or any other form
of security or assurance that may be required under a separate existing or
future ordinance of the city, of a person or entity obtaining the city's
permission to install, replace or maintain facilities in a public way or the
public ground. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city reserves the right to
require a performance bond for new facilities installation, relocation,
replacement, or repairs, when the company's completion of its work is required
in order for the city to proceed with its work for constructing a public
improvement to the public way project on a timely basis.
   E.   Avoid Damage To Electric Facilities: Nothing in this article relieves
any person, including company, from liability arising out of the failure to
exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging electric facilities or other persons
or property while performing any activity.
   F.   Notice Of Improvements: The city shall give company reasonable written
notice of plans for improvements to public ways where the city has reason to
believe that electric facilities may affect or be affected by the improvement.
The notice must contain: 1) the nature and character of the improvements, 2)
the public ways upon which the improvements are to be made, 3) the extent of
the improvements, 4) the time when the city will start the work, and 5) if more
than one public way is involved, the order in which the work is to proceed. The
notice must be given to company a sufficient length of time, considering
seasonal working conditions, in advance of the actual commencement of the work
to permit company to make any necessary additions, alterations or repairs to
its electric facilities.
   G.   Shared Use Of Poles: Company shall make space available on its poles or
towers for city fire, water utility, police or other city facilities whenever
such use will not interfere with the use of such poles or towers by company, by
another electric utility, by a telephone utility, or by any cable television
company or other form of communication company. In addition, the city shall pay
for any added cost incurred by company because of such use by city.
   H.   Mapping Information: Company must promptly provide mapping information
for any of its underground electric facilities in accordance with Minnesota
rules parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-4: RELOCATIONS:
   A.   Relocation In Public Ways: Company shall comply with the requirements
of any applicable ordinance of the city relating to relocation of electric
facilities in public ways to the extent consistent with Minnesota rules, part
7819.3100 and applicable law.
   B.   Relocation In Public Ground: The city may require company at company's
expense to relocate or remove its electric facilities from public ground upon a
finding by city that the electric facilities have become or will become a
substantial impairment to the existing or proposed public use of the public
ground. Such relocation shall comply with applicable city ordinances consistent
with law.
   C.   Projects With Federal Funding: Relocation, removal, or rearrangement of
any electric facilities made necessary because of the extension into or through
city of a federally aided highway project shall be governed by the provisions
of Minnesota statutes section 161.46, as supplemented or amended. It is
expressly understood that the right herein granted to company is a valuable
property right and city shall not order company to remove or relocate its
facilities without compensation when a public way is vacated, improved or
realigned because of a renewal or a redevelopment plan which is financially
subsidized in whole or in part by the federal government or any agency thereof,
unless the reasonable nonbetterment costs of such relocation are first paid to
company. The city, however, is obligated to pay company only for those portions
of its relocation costs for which city has received federal funding
specifically allocated for relocation costs in the amount requested by the
company.
   D.   No Waiver: The provisions of this section apply only to electric
facilities constructed in reliance on a franchise from city and company does
not waive its rights under an easement or prescriptive right or state or county
permit. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-5: TREE TRIMMING:
Unless otherwise provided in any permit or other reasonable regulation required
by the city under separate ordinance, company may trim all trees and shrubs in
the public ways and public grounds of city to the extent company finds
necessary to avoid interference with the proper construction, operation, repair
and maintenance of any electric facilities installed hereunder, provided that
company shall save the city harmless from any liability arising therefrom.
(Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-6: INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Indemnity Of City: Company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless
from any and all liability on account of injury to persons or damage to
property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, the
issuance of permits, or the operation of the electric facilities located in the
public ways and public grounds. The city shall not be indemnified for losses or
claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or claims
arising out of or alleging the city's negligence as to the issuance of permits
for, or inspection of, company's plans or work.
   B.   Defense Of City: In the event a suit is brought against the city under
circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, company at its sole
cost and expense shall defend the city in such suit if written notice thereof
is promptly given to company within a period wherein company is not prejudiced
by lack of such notice. If company is required to indemnify and defend, it will
thereafter have control of such litigation, but company may not settle such
litigation without the consent of the city, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of
any defense or immunity otherwise available to the city; and company, in
defending any action on behalf of the city shall be entitled to assert in any
action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf.
This franchise agreement shall not be interpreted to constitute a waiver by the
city of any of its defenses of immunity or limitations on liability under
Minnesota statutes, chapter 466. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-7: VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS:
The city shall give company at least two (2) weeks' prior written notice of a
proposed vacation of a public way. Except where required for a city improvement
project, the vacation of any public way, after the installation of electric
facilities, shall not operate to deprive company of its rights to operate and
maintain such electric facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the
same and the loss and expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to
company. In no case, however, shall the city be liable to company for failure
to specifically preserve a right of way under Minnesota statutes section
160.29. In accordance with Minnesota rules, part 7819.3200, if the city's order
directing vacation of the public way does not require relocation of the
company's electric facilities, the vacation proceedings shall not be deemed to
deprive company of its right to continue to use the right of way of the former
public way for its electric facilities installed prior to such order of
vacation. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-8: CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
Any change in the form of government of the city shall not affect the validity
of this article. Any governmental unit succeeding the city shall, without the
consent of company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of the city
provided in this article. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-9: FRANCHISE FEE:
The city, at the time of adopting this franchise agreement, does not desire to
require that company collect a franchise fee from its customers in the city. At
a future date during the term of this franchise agreement, the city may
determine that it desires company to collect a franchise fee of not more than
five percent (5%) of the company's gross revenues. The term "gross revenues"
means all sums, excluding any surcharge or similar addition to the company's
charges to customers for the purpose of reimbursing the company for the cost
resulting from the franchise fee, received by the company from the sale of
electricity to its retail customers within the corporate limits of the city. In
such event, the city may give company notice to amend this franchise agreement
to authorize collection of a franchise fee, in a percent of not more than five
percent (5%) to be set by the city, by separate ordinance in an amount per
class of customer and upon such terms and conditions as company at that time is
willing to incorporate in its electric franchise agreements. Upon receipt of
such notice company shall negotiate in good faith with city to so amend this
franchise agreement. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-10: PROVISIONS OF ARTICLE:
   A.   Severability: Every section, provision, or part of this article is
declared separate from every other section, provision, or part; and if any
section, provision, or part shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any
other section, provision, or part; provided, however, if any provision is held
invalid, the parties agree to negotiate in good faith to substitute, to the
extent reasonably possible, amended provisions that validly carry out the
primary purpose of the invalid provisions. Where a provision of any other city
ordinance conflicts with the provisions of this article, the provisions of this
article shall prevail.
   B.   Limitation On Applicability: This article constitutes a franchise
agreement between the city and company as the only parties and no provision of
this franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any third person
(including the public at large) so as to constitute any such person as a third
party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof,
or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person not a party hereto.
(Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-11: AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
Either party to this franchise agreement may at any time propose that the
agreement be amended. This article may be amended at any time by the city
passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provisions of the amendment, which
amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the filing of company's
written consent thereto with the city clerk after city council adoption of the
amendatory ordinance. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
9-2A-12: PREVIOUS FRANCHISES SUPERSEDED:
This franchise supersedes any previous electric franchise granted to company or
its predecessor. (Ord. 886, 12-15-2008)
ARTICLE B. MINNESOTA VALLEY COOPERATIVE LIGHT AND POWER ASSOCIATION
SECTION:
9-2B-1: Franchise Granted
9-2B-2: Conditions And Provisions
9-2B-3: Trees And Shrubs
9-2B-4: Nonexclusive Provision
9-2B-5: Altering Service Districts
9-2B-6: Effective Date
9-2B-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
There be and hereby is granted to Minnesota Valley Cooperative Light And Power
Association, a Minnesota Corporation, hereinafter referred to as Grantee, its
successors and assigns, during the period of twenty five (25) years from the
date hereof, the right and privilege of erecting, enlarging, operating,
repairing and maintaining in, upon and across the streets, alleys and public
grounds of said City, electric transmission lines and electric distributing
system, including all necessary, usual or convenient poles, pole lines, masts,
wires, lamps, transformers and other fixtures and appurtenances usually,
conveniently or necessarily used in connection therewith, for the purpose of
transmitting and furnishing electric energy for light, heat, power and other
purposes for use on property within the City of Montevideo and for the purpose
of transmitting into and through said City such electric energy, provided that
such poles and transmission lines shall be so located as in no way to interfere
with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel along and over said streets
and alleys, and provided that said Grantee, its successors and assigns, in the
erection and maintenance of such poles, masts, wires, lamps, transformers,
fixtures and transmission lines, shall be subject to such reasonable
regulations as may be imposed by the City Council. (1998 Code)
9-2B-2: CONDITIONS AND PROVISIONS:
The rights herein granted to the Grantee, its successors and assigns, are
subject to the following conditions and provisions:
   A.   That the Grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part, all
of the terms of chapter 10 as well as all other pertinent provisions of the
Charter of the City of Montevideo.
   B.   That the Grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to exercise any
power to fix rates and charges, but that such rates and charges shall at all
times be just, fair and reasonable for the services rendered and shall in all
cases be fixed and from time to time changed in the manner provided in chapter
10 of the Charter of the City of Montevideo.
   C.   That said Grantee shall have the full right and authority to sell,
lease or assign to any person, persons, firm or corporation all the rights
conferred upon it by this Article; provided, however, that no sale, lease or
assignment of this franchise shall be effective until the assignee or lessee
shall have filed in the office of the City Clerk an instrument, duly executed,
reciting the fact of such sale, lease or assignment, accepting the terms of
this franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the
Grantee herein. The assignee or lessee shall also file a bond in such amount
and with such conditions as the Council may require, which bond shall run to
the City as obligee, with sureties satisfactory to the Council, and shall
obligate the assignee or lessee to discharge all obligations and liabilities
imposed by this franchise.
   D.   That permission herein contained for the erection of poles, masts or
other fixtures in the streets and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for
the laying of pipes or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the
placing in the streets or other public places of any permanent or semi-
permanent fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject to the condition that the
Council shall have the power to require such alteration therein or relocation
or rerouting thereof, as the Council may at any time deem necessary for the
safety, health or convenience of the public, and particularly that the Council
shall have the power to require the removal of poles, masts or other fixtures
bearing wires and the placing under ground of all wires for whatsoever purpose
used. Any action required of Grantee under this subsection shall be at
Grantee's sole cost and expense.
   E.   That the Grantee herein, its successor and assigns, shall, if it
accepts this Article and the rights hereby granted, file its written acceptance
within thirty (30) days from the date of the passage hereof, and before its
submission to a vote of the people in case of a referendum, and this franchise
shall not be binding upon the City until its acceptance by the Grantee. The
acceptance by the Grantee of this franchise shall be construed to be an
acceptance of and consent to all of the terms, conditions and limitations
contained in this Article granting the franchise as well as of the provisions
of the Charter of the City.
   F.   That the City shall have the right to acquire, at the end of every six
(6) year period of this franchise, the property of the Grantee located in the
City, the acquisition thereof by the City to be in accordance with the
provisions of the City Charter and with the laws of the State in such case made
and provided, and to be executed only if a majority of the voters of the City
vote in favor of said acquisition. Whenever two hundred (200) legal voters of
the City petition the Council to acquire a franchise, the Council shall within
thirty (30) days after the presentation of said petition, submit the same to
the voters of the City, at an election for that purpose; provided, that if any
other Municipal election is to occur within ninety (90) days after the
presentation of said petition, the Council may in its discretion submit said
matter at such election.
   G.   That the violation by the Grantee of any of the express provisions
hereinbefore prescribed shall be sufficient cause for the forfeiture of the
franchise by resolution of the Council. (1998 Code)
9-2B-3: TREES AND SHRUBS:
There is also granted to said Grantee, its successors and assigns, during the
term hereof, permission and authority to trim all trees and shrubs in the
streets, alleys and public grounds of said City interfering with the proper
erection and maintenance of any poles, cables, wires or any other fixtures
installed in pursuance of the authority hereby granted; provided, that said
Grantee shall save said City harmless from any liability in the premises. (1998
Code)
9-2B-4: NONEXCLUSIVE PROVISION:
Nothing in this Article contained shall be construed as giving to said Grantee,
its successors or assigns, any exclusive privilege in, on, over or across any
of the streets, alleys or public grounds of said City. (1998 Code)
9-2B-5: ALTERING SERVICE DISTRICTS:
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as altering any service districts as
established by State law. (1998 Code)
9-2B-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
publication as by the Charter provided. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GAS FRANCHISE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definitions
9-3-2: Franchise
9-3-3: Conditions Of Use
9-3-4: Relocations
9-3-5: Defense And Indemnification
9-3-6: Successors In Interest
9-3-7: Change In Form Of Government
9-3-8: Franchise Fee
9-3-9: Additions To City And Area Development Zones
9-3-10: Abandoned Facilities
9-3-11: Previous Franchises Superseded
9-3-12: Amendments
9-3-13: Severability
9-3-14: Limitation On Applicability
9-3-15: City's Right To Revoke
9-3-16: Procedures For Revocation
9-3-17: Abandonment Or Failure Of Service
9-3-18: Facilities Removal After Abandonment, Termination
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following capitalized terms shall have the
following meanings:
CITY: The city of Montevideo, county of Chippewa, state of Minnesota.
CITY UTILITY SYSTEM: Facilities used for providing public utility service owned
or operated by city or agency thereof, including, but not necessarily limited
to, sewer, storm sewer, water service, street lighting; traffic signals and
telecommunications, but excluding facilities for providing heating, lighting,
or other forms of energy.
COMMISSION: The Minnesota public utilities commission, or any successor agency
or agencies, including an agency of the federal government that preempts all or
part of the authority to regulate gas retail rates now vested in the
commission.
COMPANY: Great Plains Natural Gas Co., a division of MDU Resources Group, Inc.,
a Delaware corporation, its successors and assigns, including all successors or
assigns that own or operate any part or parts of the gas facilities subject to
this franchise.
EFFECTIVE DATE: The date on which this chapter becomes effective under
subsection
9-3-2B of this chapter.
ENGINEER: The Montevideo city engineer, or his or her designee.
GAS: Natural gas, manufactured gas, mixture of natural gas and manufactured gas
or other forms of gas energy.
GAS FACILITIES: Gas transmission and distribution pipes, mains, lines, ducts,
fixtures and all necessary facilities, equipment and appurtenances owned or
operated by the company or its agents for the purpose of providing gas energy
for public or private use.
NOTICE: A writing served by a party or parties on another party or parties.
Notice to company, when required, must be mailed to 705 West Fir Avenue, P.O.
Box 176, Fergus Falls, MN 56538-0176. Notice to city, when required, must be
mailed to 103 Canton Avenue, P.O. Box 517, Montevideo, MN 56265. Any party may
change its respective address for the purpose of this chapter by written notice
to the other party.
PUBLIC GROUND: Land owned or otherwise controlled by the city for parks, open
space or similar public purpose which is held for use in common by the public.
PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley or other public right of way within the city.
RIGHT OF WAY PERMIT: The permit required by this chapter and issued pursuant to
city's permit ordinance. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-2: FRANCHISE:
   A.   Grant Of Franchise: The city hereby grants company for a period of
twenty (20) years from the date this chapter is passed and approved by the
city, the right to import, manufacture, distribute and sell gas for public and
private use within and through the limits of the city as its boundaries now
exist or as they may be extended in the future. For these purposes, company may
construct, operate, repair and maintain gas facilities, in, on, over, under and
across the public ways and public grounds, subject to the provisions of this
chapter. Company may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to
accomplish these purposes, subject, however, to such reasonable regulations as
may be imposed by the city pursuant to ordinance or permit requirements and to
the further provisions of this franchise agreement.
   B.   Effective Date, Written Acceptance: This franchise shall be in force
and effect from and after the passage of this chapter and publication as
required by law and its acceptance by company. If company does not file a
written acceptance with the city within sixty (60) days after the date the city
council adopts this chapter, or otherwise informs the city, at any time, that
the company does not accept this franchise, the city council by resolution may
revoke this franchise or seek its enforcement in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   C.   Service And Gas Rates: The service to be provided and the rates to be
charged by company for gas service in the city are subject to the jurisdiction
of the commission.
   D.   Nonexclusive Franchise: This chapter does not grant an exclusive
franchise.
   E.   Publication Expense: Company shall pay the expense of publication of
this chapter.
   F.   Dispute Resolution: If either party asserts that the other party is in
default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the complaining party
must notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. Notification
shall be written. Representatives of the parties must promptly meet and attempt
in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the dispute. If the dispute is not
resolved within thirty (30) days of the written notice, the parties may jointly
seek a mediator to facilitate further discussion. The parties will equally
share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a mediator is not used or if
the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within thirty (30) days after
first meeting with the selected mediator, either party may commence an action
in district court, Chippewa County, Minnesota, to interpret and enforce this
franchise or for such other relief as may be permitted by law or equity.
   G.   Continuation Of Franchise: If the city and the company are unable to
agree on the terms of a new franchise by the time this franchise expires, this
franchise will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon, or until
ninety (90) days after the city or the company serves written notice to the
other party of its intention to allow the franchise to expire. However, in no
event shall this franchise continue for more than one year after expiration of
the twenty (20) year term set forth in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 922,
11-5-2012)
9-3-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
   A.   Location Of Facilities: Gas facilities must be located, constructed,
installed and maintained so as not to interfere with the city utility system or
the safety and convenience of ordinary travel along, over and under public
ways. The company's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair,
maintenance, location, and relocation of gas facilities is subject to other
reasonable ordinances and regulations of the city consistent with authority
granted to the city to manage its public ways and public grounds under state
law and to the extent not inconsistent with a specific term of this franchise.
   B.   Field Location: Field locations for their respective facilities will be
provided by the company and city in accordance with Minnesota statutes 216D,
under the Gopher State One Call system.
   C.   Right Of Way Permit Required: Except for the verification of field
location, the company may not open or disturb the surface of any public way or
public ground without first having obtained a right of way permit from the city
if required by a separate ordinance, for which the city may impose a reasonable
fee. The permit conditions imposed on the company may not be more burdensome
than those imposed on other entities for similar facilities or work. The
company may, however, open and disturb the surface of any public way or public
ground without a right of way permit if: 1) an emergency exists requiring the
immediate repair of gas facilities and 2) the company gives notice to the city
before, if possible, commencement of the emergency repair. Within two (2)
business days after commencing the repair, the company must apply for any
required permits and pay the required fees.
   D.   Restoration: After undertaking any work requiring the opening of any
public way, the company shall restore the public way in accordance with
Minnesota administrative rules, part 7819.1100 and applicable city ordinances
consistent with law. Company shall restore a public ground to as good a
condition as formerly existed. All work shall be completed as promptly as
weather permits, and if company shall not promptly perform and complete the
work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and put the public way
or public ground in the said condition, the city shall have, after demand to
company to cure and the passage of a reasonable period of time following the
demand, but not to exceed five (5) days, the right to make the restoration of
the public way or public ground at the expense of company.
This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available to the city for
noncompliance with this section, including, but not limited to, adherence to
the requirements of the right of way permit.
   E.   Avoid Damage To Gas Facilities: The company must take reasonable
measures to prevent the gas facilities from causing damage to persons or
property. The company must take reasonable measures to protect the gas
facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the gas facilities by
persons, property or the elements. The company must take protective measures
when the city performs work near the gas facilities, if given reasonable notice
by the city of such work prior to its commencement.
   F.   Notice Of Improvements: The city must give the company reasonable
written notice of plans for improvements to public ways or public grounds where
the city has reason to believe that gas facilities may affect or be affected by
the improvement. The notice will contain: 1) the nature and character of the
improvements, 2) the public ways or public grounds upon which the improvements
are to be made, 3) the extent of the improvements, 4) the time when the city
will start the work, and 5) if more than one public way or public ground is
involved, the order in which the work is to proceed. The notice will be given
to company a sufficient length of time, considering seasonal working
conditions, in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit company
to make any additions, alterations or repairs to its gas facilities the company
deems necessary. The company shall have the right to request additional time in
advance of the actual commencement of the work if required to make any
necessary additions, alterations or repairs to its gas facilities.
   G.   Mapping Information: The city may require the company to provide
complete and accurate mapping information for any of its gas facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Minnesota rules 7819.4100. At the request
of company, any information requested by the engineer which qualifies as a
"trade secret" under Minnesota statutes section 13.37(b) shall be treated as
trade secret information as detailed therein. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-4: RELOCATIONS:
   A.   Relocation Of Gas Facilities In Public Ways: The company shall comply
with Minnesota rules, part 7819.3100 and applicable city ordinances consistent
with law. The city must give reasonable written notice to the company that a
possible relocation of gas facilities is required. The engineer and company
representatives will meet in an attempt to resolve facilities conflict. To the
extent that an alternative to relocation of gas facilities which is reasonably
acceptable to city cannot be developed, the company must relocate its gas
facilities at its own expense. The city must give the company reasonable
written notice of plans to vacate for a city improvement project, or to grade,
regrade or change the alignment of any public way, or to construct or
reconstruct any city utility system.
   B.   Relocation Of Gas Facilities In Public Ground: The city may require the
company to relocate gas facilities from public ground upon a finding by the
city that the gas facilities have become or will become a substantial
impairment of the public use to which the public ground is or will be put. The
relocation or removal will be at the company's expense and shall comply with
applicable city ordinances consistent with law. The provision of this
subsection applies only to gas facilities constructed in reliance on this
franchise and the company does not waive its rights under an easement or
prescriptive right in the public ground.
   C.   Vacation Of Public Ways: The city must give the company at least two
(2) weeks' notice of a proposed vacation of a public way. The city and the
company shall comply with Minnesota rules 7819.3200 and applicable ordinances
consistent with law. Except where required for a city street or other
improvement project or as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section,
the vacation of a public way, after the installation of gas facilities, does
not deprive the company of its rights to operate and maintain the gas
facilities until the reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and
expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to the company by the
city or the party requesting the vacation. The city is not liable to the
company for failure to specifically preserve a right of way in the manner
permitted by law.
   D.   Projects With Federal Funding: Relocation, removal or rearrangement of
any gas facilities made necessary because of the extension into or through the
city of a federally aided highway project will be governed by the provisions of
Minnesota statutes section 161.46. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-5: DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Indemnification Of City: Company shall indemnify and hold harmless the
city from any and all liability on account of injury to persons or damage to
property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection of,
the issuance of permits, or the operation of the gas facilities located in the
public ways and public grounds. The city shall not be indemnified or held
harmless for liability, losses, claims, proceedings or causes of action caused
through its own negligence except for liability, losses, claims, proceedings or
actions arising out of or alleging the city's negligence as to the issuance of
permits for, or inspection of, the gas facilities or company's plans.
   B.   Defense Of City: In the event a suit, action, claim or proceeding is
brought against the city under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify
applies, the company shall, at its sole cost and expense, defend the city in
such suit, action, claim or proceeding if written notice thereof is promptly
given to the company within a period of time wherein the company is not
prejudiced by lack of such notice. If the company is required to indemnify and
defend the city, the company shall have control of the defense. Company may not
settle such suit, action, claim or proceeding without the consent of the city,
which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, and
shall not be interpreted or shall not constitute as to third parties, a waiver
of any defense or immunity available to the city. The company, in defending any
suit, action, claim or proceeding on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to
assert in such suit, action, claim or proceeding every defense or immunity the
city could assert on its own behalf. This franchise agreement shall not be
interpreted to constitute a waiver by the city of any of its defenses of
immunity or limitations on liability pursuant to Minnesota law or statute.
   C.   Bond: If the city has reasonable cause to believe that MDU Resources
Group, Inc., does not have the financial ability to perform its obligations
under this chapter, the city may require the company to post a bond for any
damages or loss suffered by city as a result of such failure including attorney
fees and costs. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-6: SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST:
This chapter and the rights and obligations conferred hereby, is binding on and
inures to the benefit of the city and its successors and on the company and its
successors and permitted assigns. This chapter and the franchise it confers may
not be assigned by the company without the written consent of the city, said
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The city shall be entitled to
reimbursement from company for all reasonable and direct legal, administrative
and consulting costs and fees associated with city's review of any request to
assign or transfer. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-7: CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
Any change in the form of government of the city shall not affect the validity
of this chapter. Any governmental unit succeeding the city shall, without the
consent of company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of the city
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-8: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   Separate Ordinance: The city hereby reserves the right to implement, by
passage of a separate ordinance, a franchise fee to be collected and remitted
by the company to the city. Said franchise fee will be in accordance with state
law and regulations. In the event such a franchise fee is implemented, the
company agrees to make available for inspection by the city, at reasonable
times all records necessary to audit the company's determination of the
franchise fee payments. The separate ordinance shall not be adopted until at
least thirty (30) days after written notice enclosing such proposed ordinance
has been served upon the company. The fee shall become effective ten (10) days
after written notice enclosing such adopted ordinance has been served upon the
company by certified mail.
   B.   Condition Of Fee: The separate ordinance imposing the fee shall not be
effective against the company unless it lawfully imposes a fee of the same or
substantially similar amount on the sale of gas energy within the city by any
other gas energy supplier, provided that, as to such supplier, the city has the
authority or contractual right to require a franchise fee or similar fee
through a previously agreed upon franchise.
   C.   Collection Of Fee: The franchise fee shall be payable not less than
quarterly during complete billing months of the period for which payment is to
be made. The franchise fee formula may be changed from time to time, however,
the change shall meet the same notice requirements and the fee may not be
changed more often than annually. Such fee shall not exceed any amount that the
company may legally charge to its customers prior to payment to the city. Such
fee is subject to subsequent reductions to account for uncollectibles and
customer refunds incurred by the company. The company agrees to make available
for inspection by the city at reasonable times all records necessary to audit
the company's determination of the franchise fee payments.
   D.   Continuation Of Franchise Fee: The franchise fee, if any, being imposed
by the city at the time the most recent of any previous franchise granted to
the company by the city expired remains in effect until it is changed in the
manner provided for implementation of such fee. If this franchise expires and
city and the company are unable to agree upon terms of a new franchise, the
franchise fee, if any, being imposed by the city at the time this franchise
expires, will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon. (Ord. 922,
11-5-2012)
9-3-9: ADDITIONS TO CITY AND AREA DEVELOPMENT ZONES:
   A.   Additions Of Territory: In case any additions of territory are made to
the city, company shall serve all inhabitants of such additional territory in
the same manner and on the same terms as those of the territory now within its
limits. In the event that such additional service requires extension of the gas
facilities, such extensions shall be subject to the provisions of the
applicable rate schedules and general terms attached to the rate schedules as
filed by the company with the Minnesota public utilities commission, all of
which are by reference made part of this franchise. Should said extension of
gas facilities be deemed by the company as not economically feasible, company
shall allow a third party to make a contribution in aid of construction in the
amount of the difference in cost between the total project cost and the amount
that is determined to be financially feasible by the company. This contribution
in aid of construction shall not constitute an ownership position of the gas
facilities by the contributing third party. Failure on the part of the company
to allow a third party to make such a contribution may be considered a default
in the performance hereof, subject to subsection
9-3-2F of this chapter. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-10: ABANDONED FACILITIES:
The company shall comply with city ordinances, Minnesota statutes, section
216D.01 et seq., and Minnesota rules part 7819.3300, as they may be amended
from time to time. The company shall maintain records describing the exact
location of all abandoned and retired gas facilities within the city, produce
such records at the city's request and comply with the location requirements of
section 216D.04 with respect to all gas facilities, including abandoned and
retired gas facilities. The company will compensate the city for any physical
damage to city owned property or infrastructure caused by the removal of the
company's facilities. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-11: PREVIOUS FRANCHISES SUPERSEDED:
This franchise supersedes and replaces previous franchises granted to the
company or its predecessors. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-12: AMENDMENTS:
This chapter may be amended at any time by mutual agreement between the city
and the company. Any amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the
filing of the company's written consent thereto. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-13: SEVERABILITY:
Every section, provision, or part of this chapter is declared separate from
every other section, provision, or part; and if any section, provision, or part
shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other section, provision, or
part. Where a provision of any other city ordinance conflicts with the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord.
922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-14: LIMITATION ON APPLICABILITY:
This chapter constitutes a franchise agreement between the city and company as
the only parties and no provision of this franchise shall in any way inure to
the benefit of any third person (including the public at large) so as to
constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of the agreement or of
any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of
action in any person not a party hereto. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-15: CITY'S RIGHT TO REVOKE:
In addition to all other rights which the city has pursuant to law or equity,
city reserves the right to commence proceedings to revoke, terminate or cancel
this franchise subject to the procedures set forth in section
9-3-16 of this chapter, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if
the commission determines to the city that:
   A.   Company has violated a material provision(s) of this franchise; or
   B.   Company has attempted to evade any of the material provisions of the
franchise; or
   C.   Company has practiced fraud or deceit upon city;
   D.   The company fails to provide continuous natural gas service for any
reason within its reasonable control, specifically including, but not limited
to, company insolvency or other circumstance, other than excused by force
majeure, that render the company unable to provide services to customers in the
city. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-16: PROCEDURES FOR REVOCATION:
   A.   The city shall provide company with notice of a cause for revocation
and the intent to revoke and shall allow company thirty (30) days subsequent to
receipt of the notice in which to correct or commence action to correct the
violation or to provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with
the franchise. In the notice required therein, city shall provide company with
the basis of the revocation.
   B.   Company shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording due
process before the city council prior to the effective date of revocation,
which public hearing shall follow in the event the company does not correct or
commence action to correct the violation or to provide adequate assurance of
performance in compliance with the franchise within thirty (30) days of the
notice provided in subsection A of this section. The city shall provide company
with notice of its decision together with written findings of fact
supplementing said decision.
   C.   After the public hearing and upon notice of the determination by the
city council to revoke the franchise, company may appeal said decision with an
appropriate state or federal court or agency.
   D.   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full force and
effect unless the term thereof sooner expires or unless continuation of the
franchise would endanger the health, safety and welfare of any person or the
public. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-17: ABANDONMENT OR FAILURE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Company may not abandon the system or any portion thereof without
having first given six (6) months' notice to city.
   B.   Unless service is discontinued for cause, if company fails to provide
continuous gas utility service to any group of customers, for any reason within
the company's reasonable control, including, but not limited to, insolvency or
due to a dispute with its gas source(s) or gas transporters, that the
commission deems to be a failure of service, the company hereby agrees that the
city and affected customers may be irreparably harmed and that the city may
take emergency action as necessary, in any court or administrative agency of
competent jurisdiction. In that event, company shall cooperate and do all
things within its control to restore service or allow the city to step in or
retain third parties to step in to restore safe and reliable service to the
affected customers with adequate compensation to company for services provided
by the company and for the use of its facilities. (Ord. 922, 11-5-2012)
9-3-18: FACILITIES REMOVAL AFTER ABANDONMENT, TERMINATION:
In the event of termination of the franchise or abandonment of the gas
facilities or system, the city shall have the right to require company to
discontinue providing service to natural gas customers within the city (or a
portion thereof) and to take all steps reasonably necessary to maintain the
safety of the existing system after service is discontinued or abandoned. (Ord.
922, 11-5-2012)
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
10-1-1: Building Codes Adopted
10-1-2: Organization And Enforcement
10-1-3: Permits And Fees
10-1-4: Demolition Of Buildings
10-1-5: Violation And Penalties
10-1-6: Construction Erosion Control
10-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
The Minnesota state building code, as adopted by the commissioner of
administration pursuant to Minnesota statutes, including all of the amendments,
rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by
the Minnesota commissioner of administration, through the building codes and
standards division is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the
optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this section. The Minnesota
state building code is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out
herein. (Ord. 838, 6-2-2003)
10-1-2: ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The application, administration, and enforcement of the building code shall be
in accordance with the Minnesota state building code. The code shall be
enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota statutes,
16B.62., subdivision 1, when so established by this code. (Ord. 838, 6-2-2003)
10-1-3: PERMITS AND FEES:
The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in
Minnesota statutes. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this
code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city
council. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued
for work governed by this code in accordance with state statute. (Ord. 838, 6-
2-2003)
10-1-4: DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS:
Any person who hereafter demolishes a building shall conform with the
provisions of this section:
   A.   Definition: "Demolition of a building" shall mean the destruction,
razing or removal of any building or structure of any kind without replacing a
building or structure on the same location.
   B.   Removal Of Debris: Any person who demolishes a building shall remove
all debris from the premises, shall remove foundations, fill any hole with
gravel and/or dirt to the original grade of the premises, and seed or sod the
site and shall remove all submerged tanks located on the premises. (Ord. 699,
2-18-1992)
   C.   Utilities: Such person shall disconnect all utilities to the demolished
building. The water and sewer connections shall be disconnected at a location
and in a method approved by the utilities superintendent. (Ord. 885, 11-17-
2008)
   D.   Demolition Permit: Prior to starting such demolition, the property
owner shall obtain a demolition permit from the building official and pay the
fee therefor, which fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Exceptions:
      1.   The city council may grant an exception to the strict application of
the provisions of this section without a public hearing. The city council shall
grant an exception in the following situations:
         a.   Where the lot on which the demolition takes place is not
buildable;
         b.   Where an adjoining property owner or owners purchase the lot on
which the demolition takes place to add to an existing lot or lots;
         c.   Where the lot on which the demolition takes place will be
redeveloped within one year from the date of the demolition and the
undemolished or unremoved portions of the building will be used in the
redevelopment.
      2.   The city council may grant an exception in other situations of
hardship. In considering such an exception, the council shall consider the
health, safety, convenience and welfare of the neighborhood and the general
public, and the impact on the property involved. The council may designate
conditions and require guaranties in the granting of any such exception.
   F.   Recording: Any exception shall be recorded at the office of the county
recorder in which the premises are located. The property owner shall pay the
recording fee to the city prior to the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 699, 2-18-
1992)
10-1-5: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in the building
code as adopted from time to time. (Ord. 727, 8-2-1993)
10-1-6: CONSTRUCTION EROSION CONTROL:
All construction will meet or exceed, for purposes of water quality and erosion
control, the most current version of the "General Permit Authorization To
Discharge Storm Water Association With Construction Activity Under The National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)/State Disposal System (SDS)
Permit Program" administered by the Minnesota pollution control agency, the
state of Minnesota, and as amended from time to time and the requirements of
title 8, chapter 6 of this code. (Ord. 919, 8-6-2012)
CHAPTER 2
HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
10-2-1: Code Adopted
10-2-2: Additional Rental Housing Provisions
10-2-3: Rental Units Registration
10-2-4: Authority Enforcement And Responsibility
10-2-5: Failure To Comply
10-2-6: Appeals
10-2-7: Penalty
10-2-1: CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   Adoption By Reference: The uniform housing code adopted by the
international conference of building officials, with amendments thereto, is
hereby adopted and shall be in full force and effect in the city insofar as the
same is applicable to housing therein and is hereby made a part of this chapter
in its entirety and as fully as though the same were written herein.
   B.   Compliance: All housing in the city shall be in accordance with the
provisions of said housing code.
   C.   Availability Of Code To Public: Three (3) copies of this chapter,
including the code as aforesaid, shall be filed by the city clerk in the
clerk's office for inspection and use of the public and shall be marked with
the words, "City of Montevideo - Official Copy". (Ord. 632, 7-15-1985; amd.
1998 Code)
10-2-2: ADDITIONAL RENTAL HOUSING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. Whenever the words "dwelling",
"dwelling unit", "rooming units", "premises", or "structure" are used in this
chapter they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or
any part thereof". Words used in the singular include the plural, and the
plural the singular; the masculine gender includes the feminine and the
feminine the masculine. Words not specifically defined in this section shall
have the common definitions set forth in a standard dictionary.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A detached building or structure in a
secondary or subordinate capacity from the main or principal building or
structure on the same premises.
   APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY: That person within the governmental structure of the
city unit who is charged with the administration of the appropriate code or
that agency which is specifically designated to deal with situations related to
a specific issue pertaining to this chapter. This is generally meant to be the
city manager or their designee.
   APPROVED: Approved by the local or state authority having such
administrative authority.
   ASHES: The residue from the burning of combustible materials.
   ATTIC: Any story situated wholly or partly within the roof, and so
designated, arranged or built as to be used for business, storage or
habitation.
   BASEMENT: Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four (4) sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   BUILDING: A fixed construction with walls, foundation and roof, such as a
house, factory, garage, etc.
   BULK CONTAINER: Any metal garbage, rubbish and/or refuse container having a
capacity of two (2) cubic yards or greater and which is equipped with fittings
for hydraulic and/or mechanical emptying, unloading and/or removal.
   CELLAR: A room or group of rooms totally below the ground level and usually
under a building.
   CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM: A single system supplying heat to one or more
dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming unit.
   CHIMNEY: A vertical masonry shaft of reinforced concrete, or other approved
noncombustible heat resisting material enclosing one or more flues, for the
purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gaseous fuel.
   DILAPIDATED: No longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was
originally intended.
   DORMITORY: A building or a group of rooms in a building used for
institutional living and sleeping purposes by four (4) or more persons.
   DWELLING: Any enclosed space wholly or partly used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating; provided that, temporary housing as
hereinafter defined shall not be classified as a dwelling. Industrialized
housing and modular construction which conform to nationally accepted industry
standards and used or intended for use for living, sleeping, cooking and eating
purposes shall be classified as dwellings. Mobile homes are included in this
definition.
   DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a
single habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used by a single
family for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes.
   EGRESS: An arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of exit
from buildings.
   EGRESS WINDOW: A window meeting the specifications in IRC section R310.
   EXEMPT DWELLING UNITS: Nursing homes or other state licensed facilities, and
those facilities under state law considered single-family dwellings (group
homes).
   EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, or
trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods
approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority.
   FAIR MARKET VALUE: A price at which both buyers and sellers are willing to
do business.
   FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons not all so related,
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. See also
definition of Household.
   FLUSH WATER CLOSET: A toilet bowl which is flushed with water which has been
supplied under pressure and equipped with a water sealed trap above the floor
level.
   GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food.
   GRADE: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level
adjoining the building at exterior or walls. Where the finished ground level
slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established
by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or,
where the lot line is more than six feet (6') (1,829 mm) from the building,
between the building and a point six feet (6') (1,829 mm) from the building.
   GUEST: An individual who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for
not more than thirty (30) days.
   HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and
utility rooms of less than fifty (50) square feet of floor space, foyers, or
communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops,
hobby and recreation areas.
   HEALTH OFFICER: The city of Montevideo health inspector.
   HEATED WATER: Water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred
twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F) at the outlet.
   HEATING DEVICE: All furnaces, unit heaters, domestic incinerators, cooking
and heating stoves and ranges, and other similar devices.
   HOUSEHOLD: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons not all so
related, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit and
sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities. See also
definition of Family.
   INFESTATION: The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
   KITCHEN: Any room used for the storage of foods, preparation of foods and
containing the following equipment: sink and/or other device for dishwashing,
stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cool
storage of food, cabinets and/or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils,
and counter or table for food preparation.
   KITCHENETTE: A small kitchen or an alcove containing cooking facilities.
   LEAD BASED PAINT: Any paint containing more lead than the level established
by the U.S. consumer safety commission as being the "safe" level of lead in
residential paint and paint products.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
   OCCUPANT: Any individual, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in or having possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit; except
that, in dwelling units a guest shall not be considered an occupant.
   OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care, control or management of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   ORDINARY SUMMER CONDITIONS: A temperature ten degrees Fahrenheit (10°F)
below the highest recorded temperature in the locality for the prior ten (10)
year period.
   ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS: A temperature fifteen degrees Fahrenheit (15°F)
above the lowest recorded temperature in the locality for the prior ten (10)
year period.
   OWNER: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
      1.   Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      2.   Shall have charge, care, or control of any premises, dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this chapter and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same
extent as if he were the owner.
   PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY: The maximum number of individuals permitted to reside
in a dwelling unit, rooming unit or dormitory.
   PERSON: Shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation,
association, partnership, cooperative or governmental agency.
   PLUMBING: Shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities
and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal
units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, and the installation
thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
   PREMISES: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land
or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling
structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other
structure thereon.
   PRIVACY: The existence of conditions which will permit an individual or
individuals to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or
interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted individuals.
   PROPERLY CONNECTED: Connected in accordance with all applicable codes and
ordinances of this city as from time to time enforced; provided, however, that
the application of this definition shall not require the alteration or
replacement of any connection in good working order and not constituting a
hazard to life or health.
   RAT HARBORAGE: Any conditions or place where rats can live, nest or seek
shelter.
   RATPROOFING: A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress
of rats to or from a given space or building or from gaining access to food,
water or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every
opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground
or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings and other places
that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing or other methods
by the use of materials pervious to rat gnawing and by other methods approved
by the appropriate authority.
   REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solids, except body wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
   REFUSE CONTAINER: A watertight container that is constructed of metal or
other durable material impervious to rodents and insects, that is capable of
being serviced without creating insanitary conditions, or such other containers
as have been approved by the appropriate authority. Openings into the container
such as covers and doors shall be tightfitting.
   RENTAL UNIT: Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit
which is leased to another party and any renter-occupied mobile home, except
for the following:
      1.   A unit on which there is a signed purchase agreement which is rented
to the purchaser for up to sixty (60) days prior to a closing;
      2.   A unit on which there is a signed purchase agreement which is rented
to the seller for up to sixty (60) days following a closing;
      3.   A unit that is rented to a parent, grandparent, child or grandchild
of an owner and for which no rent is paid other than real estate taxes,
insurance and maintenance of the unit.
   ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling other than a hotel or motel, or that part of any
dwelling, containing one or more rooming units, and/or one or more dormitory
rooms and in which persons either individually or as families are housed with
or without meals being provided, except for nursing homes or assisted living
facilities licensed by the state of Minnesota.
   ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
purposes.
   RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of either:
      1.   Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers,
yard clippings and wood; or
      2.   Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass and crockery.
   SAFETY: The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which
may cause accidents or disease.
   SPACE HEATER: A self-contained heating appliance of either the convection
type or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only a limited space or
area such as one room or two (2) adjoining rooms.
   SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control of the
owner, operator or agent.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure
used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the
same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
   TOXIC SUBSTANCE: Any chemical product applied on the surface of or
incorporated into any structural or decorative material which constitutes a
potential hazard to human health at acute or chronic exposure levels.
   VARIANCE: A difference between that which is required or specified and that
which is permitted.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   Responsibilities Of Owners And Occupants:
         a.   No owner or other person shall let to another person any rental
unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy,
and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the state and the city.
         b.   Every owner of a rental unit containing two (2) or more dwelling
units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public
area of the dwelling and premises thereof.
         c.   Every occupant of a rental unit shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition that part or those parts of the rental unit and premises
thereof that the occupant occupies and controls.
         d.   Every occupant of a rental unit shall store and dispose of all
his garbage, rubbish, refuse and any other organic waste which might provide
food for insects and/or rodents, in a clean, sanitary, safe manner. All garbage
cans and refuse containers shall be ratproof, insectproof, watertight,
structurally strong to withstand handling stress, easily filled, emptied and
cleaned; shall be provided with tightfitting covers or similar closures; and
refuse containers shall be maintained at all times in a clean sanitary
condition. Plastic bags may be used as refuse container liners, but shall not
be used without the container for on site storage of garbage or refuse.
         e.   The total capacity of all provided garbage and/or refuse cans and
bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants
of the dwelling.
         f.   Every rental unit must have access to a refuse container. In the
case of multi-family dwellings, a bulk refuse container may be used.
         g.   The owner of a rental unit shall be responsible for providing and
hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are
required under the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, except where there is a written agreement between the owner
and occupant. In the absence of such an agreement, maintenance or replacement
of screens, storm doors and windows, once installed in any one season, becomes
the responsibility of the occupant. The occupant's responsibility shall be
exclusive to his or her dwelling unit.
         h.   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit
shall be responsible for the extermination of insects and/or rats, on the
premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more
than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever
that dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the
owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonable insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation
exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the
shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling
units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
         i.   No occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate
rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal or any other materials in such a manner
that may provide a rat harborage or fire hazard in or about any dwelling or
dwelling unit.
         j.   No owner of a dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling
units shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber,
scrap metal or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat
harborage or fire hazard in or about the shared or public areas of a dwelling
or its premises.
         k.   No owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store,
place or allow to accumulate any materials which may serve as food for rats in
a site accessible to rats.
         l.   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied
fixtures and facilities therein in a clean, sanitary and operable condition and
shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and
operation thereof.
         m.   In every dwelling unit and/or rooming unit when the control of
the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person other than the occupant, a
temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) shall be
maintained in all habitable rooms, bathroom and water closet compartments at a
distance of thirty six inches (36") above the floor level.
         n.   Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall provide and
maintain the dwelling or dwelling unit free from hazards to health due to the
presence of toxic substances.
         o.   No owner or occupant shall apply a lead based paint to any
surface in any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house and/or rooming unit.
         p.   Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain a
record of the full name of every occupant of such dwelling or dwelling unit.
The owner shall require proof of identity for every such occupant over the age
of eighteen (18) in the form of a driver's license, photo identification issued
by any state, passport or other similarly reliable form of picture
identification. Such record shall be maintained all during the occupancy of an
occupant and for one year following the end of such occupancy.
   C.   Minimum Standards For Basic Equipment And Facilities: No person shall
let to another person for occupancy any rental unit, for the purpose of living,
sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen with all parts properly
connected and in good working condition which shall have adequate circulation
area. A stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices need not be installed when a
dwelling unit is not occupied or when there is a written agreement between the
owner and the occupant by which the occupant is expected to provide same.
      2.   Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room which
affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a flush
water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet shall be
equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, be properly connected to a water
system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under
pressure to cause the water closet to be operated properly and shall be
properly connected to a sewer system which is approved by the appropriate
authority.
      3.   Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink. Said
lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet or, if located
in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close proximity to the
door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The
lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and properly connected to a
water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which
provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water
under pressure, and which is properly connected to a sewer system approved by
the appropriate authority. Water inlets for lavatory sinks shall be located
above the overflow rim of these facilities.
      4.   Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords
privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or
shower in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same
room as the flush water closet or in another room and shall be properly
connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate
authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system
approved by the appropriate authority. Water inlets for bathtubs shall be
located above the overflow rim of these facilities. (Ord. 856, 12-19-2005)
      5.   Every dwelling unit shall have at least two (2) means of egress (2
doors or 1 door and 1 egress window), one of which leads to safe and open space
at ground level. Every dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling shall have
immediate access to two (2) or more approved means of egress, one of which
leads to safe and open space at ground level, or as required by the laws of
this state and this city. All sleeping areas in every dwelling shall have an
egress (emergency escape) window. (Ord. 929, 9-15-2014)
      6.   Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps
containing four (4) risers or more. Porches, patios, and/or balconies located
more than thirty inches (30") higher than the adjacent area shall have
structurally sound protective guard or handrails.
      7.   Access to or egress from each dwelling unit shall be provided
without passing through any other dwelling unit.
      8.   All exterior doors leading directly into the dwelling or dwelling
unit shall be equipped with functioning locking devices.
   D.   Minimum Standards For Light And Ventilation: No person shall let to
another for occupancy any rental unit, for the purpose of living therein, which
does not comply with the requirements of this subsection:
      1.   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
facing outdoors provided that if connected to a room or area used seasonally
(e.g., porch) adequate daylight must be possible through this interconnection.
      2.   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
facing directly outdoors which can be opened easily or such other device as
will ventilate the room adequately, provided that if connected to a room or
area used seasonally then adequate ventilation must be possible through this
interconnection.
      3.   Every bathroom and water closet compartment and every nonhabitable
room used for food preparation shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirement for habitable rooms contained in subsections D1 and D2 of this
section, except that no window or skylight shall be required in such rooms if
they are equipped with a ventilation system in working condition which is
approved by the appropriate authority.
      4.   Every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be
supplied with electric service, outlets and fixtures which shall be properly
installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be
connected to a source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. The minimum capacity of such
services and the minimum number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
         a.   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with at least one 15-
ampere circuit and such circuit shall not be shared with another dwelling unit.
         b.   Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate wall
type duplex electric convenience outlets or one such duplex convenience outlet
and one supplied wall or ceiling type electric light fixture. No duplex outlet
shall serve more than two (2) fixtures or appliances.
         c.   Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as
permanent wiring.
         d.   All electric lights and outlets in bathrooms shall be controlled
by switches which are of such design as shall minimize the danger of electric
shock, and such lights and outlets shall be installed and maintained in such
condition as to minimize the danger of electrical shock.
      5.   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted by natural or artificial light at all times, so as to
provide in all parts thereof at least ten (10) foot-candles of light at the
tread of floor level. Every public hall and stairway in structures containing
not more than two (2) dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located
light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on
when needed instead of full time lighting.
   E.   Minimum Thermal Standards: No person shall occupy or let to another for
occupancy any rental unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Every dwelling shall have heating equipment and appurtenances which
are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and
are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) at a distance of
thirty six inches (36") above floor level under ordinary winter conditions.
      2.   No owner or occupant shall install, operate or use a heating device,
including hot water heating units, which employs the combustion of carbonaceous
fuel, which is not vented to the outside of the structure in an approved
manner, and which is not supplied with sufficient air to continuously support
the combustion of the fuel. All heating devices shall be constructed, installed
and operated in such a manner as to minimize accidental burns.
      3.   When facilities for interior climate control (heating, cooling, and/
or humidity) are integral functions of structures containing dwelling units or
rooming units, such facilities shall be maintained and operated in a continuous
manner and in accordance with the designed capacity of the installed equipment.
   F.   Safe And Sanitary Maintenance Of Parts Of Dwellings And Dwelling Units:
No person shall let to another for occupancy any rental unit, for the purpose
of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling,
inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto, shall be
safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every
inside and outside stair or step shall have uniform risers and uniform treads.
      2.   Every foundation, roof and exterior wall, door, skylight and window
shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and damp free and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair. Floors, interior walls and ceilings shall be
sound and in good repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay
resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint which
is not lead based paint or by other protective covering or treatment. Walls
shall be capable of affording privacy for the occupants. Repainting or other
"cosmetic" repairs may be required when conditions requiring the repair pose a
threat to the health or safety of the occupants, or when the structural/
physical integrity of the dwelling is adversely affected.
      3.   Every premises shall be graded, drained, free of standing ground
water, and maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
      4.   Unless other provisions are made, existing gutters, leaders and
downspouts shall be maintained in good working condition as to provide proper
drainage of storm water or shall be removed from the property.
      5.   Every window, exterior door and hatchway or similar device shall be
so constructed to exclude insects during that portion of the year when there is
a need for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects.
      6.   Every dwelling, multiple dwelling, rooming house or accessory
structure and the premises on which located shall be maintained in a rat free
and ratproof condition.
      7.   Accessory structures present or provided by the owner, agent or
tenant-occupant on the premises of a dwelling shall be structurally sound and
be maintained in good repair and free of insects and rats, or such structures
shall be removed from the premises. The exterior of such structures shall be
made weather resistant through the use of decay resistant materials or the use
of lead free paint or other preservatives. Repainting or other "cosmetic"
repairs may be required when conditions requiring the repair adversely affect
the physical/structural integrity of the accessory structure.
      8.   Every plumbing fixture and all water and waste pipes shall be
properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition.
      9.   Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
      10.   Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue and smoke
pipe, and every other facility, piece of equipment or utility which is present
in a dwelling or dwelling unit, or which is required under this chapter, shall
be properly constructed and connected.
      11.   No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from or
shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or
occupied by him; except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary
while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate
authority.
      12.   All construction and materials, ways and means of egress and
installation and use of equipment shall conform with the appropriate statutes,
ordinances and regulations dealing with fire protection of this city and the
state (smoke detectors, fire extinguishers, etc.).
   G.   Maximum Density, Minimum Space, Use And Location Requirements: No
person shall let to be occupied any rental unit, for the purpose of living
therein, unless there is compliance with the requirements of this subsection:
      1.   The maximum occupancy of any dwelling unit shall not exceed the
following requirement: For the first occupant there shall be at least one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space and there shall be at least one
hundred (100) square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof;
the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
      2.   The ceiling height of any habitable room shall be at least seven
feet (7'); except that in any habitable room under a sloping ceiling at least
one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall have a ceiling height of at least seven
feet (7'), and the floor area of that part of such a room where the ceiling
height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered as part of the floor
area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of
determining the maximum permissible occupancy.
      3.   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping
rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water
closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room
can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room
arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room. A bathroom or water closet compartment shall not
be used as the only passageway to any habitable room, hall, basement or cellar
or to the exterior of the dwelling unit.
   H.   Rooming House, Rooming Units, Dormitories, Dormitory Rooms: In addition
to other provisions of this chapter, the following provisions shall apply to
all rooming houses and dormitories:
      1.   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
appropriate authority and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each
six (6) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including
members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said
facilities, provided that:
         a.   In a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush
urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) the required number
of water closets and provided that there shall be at least one water closet.
         b.   All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to
be reasonably accessible to all persons sharing such facilities and from a
common hall or passageway and provided that such facilities are not located
more than one floor above or below the rooming unit or units served.
         c.   Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower stall be supplied with
heating and unheated water under pressure at all times.
      2.   Cooking in dormitory rooms and rooming units is prohibited.
      3.   Communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house are
prohibited, except as approved by the appropriate authority in writing.
      4.   All food service and dining facilities provided in a rooming house
or dormitory for the occupants of same shall comply with applicable food
service legislation.
      5.   Access doors to rooming units and dormitory rooms, shall have
operating locks to ensure privacy.
      6.   Every rooming unit shall comply with all the requirements of this
subsection pertaining to a habitable room. Every rooming unit occupied by one
person shall contain at least one hundred ten (110) square feet of floor space
and every rooming unit occupied by more than one person shall contain at least
ninety (90) square feet for each occupant thereof. Every rooming unit shall
contain closet/storage space for each occupant. (Ord. 856, 12-19-2005)
10-2-3: RENTAL UNITS REGISTRATION:
   A.   Registration of the operation of all residential rental units and
structures inclusive of rental units in mixed use structures and renter-
occupied mobile homes.
      1.   No person shall operate a rental unit unless the person holds a
current, unrevoked registration issued by the appropriate authority for the
specific named rental unit. Failure to comply with this requirement shall
result in penalties to the owner according to this chapter. Exempt dwelling
units shall not be subject to this requirement.
      2.   Every registration shall be issued for a period of time in
accordance with this chapter.
      3.   The appropriate authority is hereby authorized, upon application
therefor, to issue new registration, and renewals thereof, in the names of
applicant-owners or operators of rental housing units. No such registrations
shall be issued unless the rental housing unit in connection with which the
registration is sought is found, after inspection, to meet all applicable
requirements of this chapter and applicable rules and regulations pursuant
thereto. No such registration shall be issued to an owner who has delinquent
real estate taxes on real estate in the city of Montevideo.
      4.   No registration shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant-
owner or operator has first made application therefor on an application form
provided by the appropriate authority. The appropriate authority shall develop
such forms and make them available to the public.
      5.   No registration shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant-
owner or operator agrees in the application to such inspection pursuant to this
chapter as the appropriate authority may require to determine whether the
rental housing unit in connection with which such registration is sought is in
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and with applicable
rules and regulations pursuant thereto.
      6.   No registration shall be issued or renewed unless the completed
application form is accompanied by payment of the proper registration fee.
      7.   No registration shall be issued or renewed for a nonresident
applicant (a property owner living outside Chippewa, Lac Qui Parle or Yellow
Medicine County), unless such applicant designates, in writing to the
appropriate authority, the name of an agent for the receipt of service of
notice of violation of the provisions of this chapter, for service of process
pursuant to this chapter and to contact in the event of an emergency condition
with respect to the rental unit.
      8.   No registration shall be issued or renewed for a resident applicant
unless such applicant has first designated an agent for the receipt of service
of violations of the provisions of this chapter, or to contact in the event of
an emergency condition with respect to the rental unit when said applicant is
absent from this city for thirty (30) or more days. Such a designation shall be
made in writing and shall accompany each application form. The applicant may
designate any person residing in Chippewa, Lac Qui Parle or Yellow Medicine
County as an agent for this purpose or may designate the appropriate authority
as an agent for this purpose.
      9.   No registration shall be renewed unless an application therefor has
been made within sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the present
operating license.
      10.   Each registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within
the rental housing units. Any registration for a particular property shall be
transferable to another person, except a person with uncorrected violations of
any provision of this chapter on another property or delinquent real estate
taxes on any property in the city of Montevideo, provided that the person
holding the registration must give notice, in writing, to the appropriate
authority within fifteen (15) working days after having transferred or
otherwise disposed of the legal control of the registered rental housing unit.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person or persons
succeeding to the ownership or control of such rental housing unit. Failure to
provide proper notification of a transfer of property, or a transfer to an
ineligible person, shall be cause for the property to be reregistered and the
appropriate fee charged.
      11.   The registration fee shall be set by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 856, 12-19-2005)
10-2-4: AUTHORITY ENFORCEMENT AND RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Authority: The appropriate authority is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. For such purposes, they shall
be known and appointed as housing inspectors/enforcement officers having the
authority to issue notices of violation and criminal citations for violations
of this chapter.
The appropriate authority shall have the power to render interpretations of
this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in
order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules
and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
   B.   Right Of Entry: When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, or when the appropriate authority has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises
a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter, they may
enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the
duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building or premises is
occupied that credentials will be presented to the occupant and entry
requested. If such building or premises is unoccupied, they shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control
of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the
appropriate authority shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to
secure entry.
Exception: Registered rental properties are subject to inspection for purposes
of this chapter without requirement for warrants.
   C.   Emergencies:
      1.   Whenever, in the judgment of the appropriate authority, an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or
welfare, the appropriate authority may issue an order without a hearing,
directing the owner, occupant, operator or agent to take such action as is
appropriate to correct or abate the emergency. If circumstances warrant, the
appropriate authority may act to correct or abate the emergency.
      2.   The owner, occupant, operator or agent shall be afforded the
opportunity to appeal, as soon as practicable, any order issued according to
this section by following the procedure detailed in this chapter. Such appeal
shall in no case stay the abatement or correction of such emergency.
   D.   Housing Inspection Schedule: Inspections for the purpose of carrying
out the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted pursuant to the following
schedule:
      1.   Inspection Schedule:
         a.   Exempt facilities: No scheduled inspections
         b.   Every year beginning in 2006:
Dormitories
Precode mobile homes, renter-occupied
Rooming house
         c.   Every other year beginning in 2006:
All other mobile homes, renter-occupied
         d.   Once every three (3) years, beginning in 2006:
Duplex or triplex
Fourplex
Single-family rental property
Structures containing five (5) to eight (8) units
Alternatively, at the election of the property owner, one-third (1/3) of the
units in structures containing five (5) to eight (8) units may be inspected
every year so that in every three (3) year period, all the units in each such
structure will be inspected.
         e.   Once every four (4) years beginning in 2006:
   Structures containing more than eight (8) units
Alternatively, at the election of the property owner, one-fourth (1/4) of the
units may be inspected every year, so that in every four (4) year period, all
the units in each such structure will be inspected.
      2.   Inspection Process: To begin the inspection process, each owner of
the above described properties must file an application to register that
property with the City of Montevideo, 103 Canton Avenue, Montevideo, Minnesota.
At the time of registration, a fee shall be paid in accordance with the fee
schedule set by the council.
Upon payment of the fee, the Montevideo building inspector shall schedule an
inspection of the applicable property. If the property is found after the
inspection to meet all applicable requirements of this chapter and the
applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto, a registration shall be
issued and effective as follows:
Rooming houses, dormitories and precode mobile homes, renter-occupied: One year
Other mobile home, renter-occupied: Two (2) years
Single-family rental property: Three (3) years
Duplex or triplex: Three (3) years
Fourplex: Three (3) years
Five (5) to eight (8) unit structure: Three (3) years
More than eight (8) unit structure: Four (4) years
Applications to renew the registration must be made at least sixty (60) days
prior to the expiration date, and the property owners or operators must adhere
to provisions of the housing code regarding licensing.
   E.   Exemption: Rental units already covered under a county, state or
federal inspection program that is similar in nature to the city code
requirements can request an exemption from the fee and inspection requirements
by submitting proof of inspections to the building official. (Ord. 856, 12-19-
2005)
10-2-5: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Whenever it is determined that any property upon inspection fails to
meet the requirements set forth in this chapter or in applicable rules and
regulations issued pursuant thereto, a notice shall be issued to property owner
(s). The notice shall state the violation, the action required to correct the
violation, the time period to correct the violation, that unless the violation
is corrected, the registration will be revoked, and the method to appeal the
determination. The notice shall be sent to the owner and any agent by first
class mail at the address provided in the registration. The property owner(s)
by order of the notice shall be given a certain period of time for the
correction of any alleged violation and, upon expiration of said time period,
the Montevideo building inspector shall reinspect the property. If, upon
reinspection, the violations are determined not to have been corrected, the
city shall issue a notice to the property owner(s) or designated representative
informing them that: 1) the registration is revoked; 2) legal proceedings for
the immediate correction of the alleged violations may be initiated; and/or 3)
if necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, an order may be
issued that the property be vacated within thirty (30) days. In addition,
administrative fines may be imposed upon the property owner(s).
   B.   The failure of any owner to comply with the requirements of this
chapter regarding registration, the undertaking of repairs necessary to correct
alleged violations to this chapter, and the payment of any penalties assessed
may be referred to the city attorney of the city of Montevideo for appropriate
legal action. (Ord. 856, 12-19-2005)
10-2-6: APPEALS:
   A.   There is hereby created a two (2) tiered appeals process. All appeals
decisions and findings shall be made part of the public record:
      1.   Step One: Any person aggrieved by a notice of the appropriate
authority issued in connection with any alleged violation of this chapter or of
any applicable rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto, or by any order
requiring repair or demolition, may apply to the city manager for an
administrative conference for reconsideration of such notice or order provided
such application is made within fourteen (14) days after the date the notice or
order was issued. Upon conclusion of an administrative conference for
reconsideration of the notice or order, the appropriate authority shall prepare
a summary of the conference and shall state the decision reached. Such summary
and statement shall become part of the public record.
      2.   Step Two: If the appeal is not settled in step one of the process,
any person aggrieved by a notice of the appropriate authority issued in
connection with any alleged violation of this chapter, or of any applicable
rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto, or by any order requiring repair or
demolition, may apply to the city council for a reconsideration of such notice
or order provided such application is made within fourteen (14) days after the
date of the decision reached in step one.
   B.   The city council, upon receipt of an appeal, shall set a time and place
for a hearing and shall advise the applicant in writing by mail, postage
prepaid to address of applicant, of such time and place, at least seven (7)
days prior to the date of the hearing. At such a hearing the appellant shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why such notice or order
should be modified, extended, withdrawn, or a variance granted.
   C.   The city council shall decide that they sustain, modify, or withdraw
the notice or order. In recommending an extension or variance of any notice or
order, the council shall observe the following conditions:
      1.   The city council may order an extension of time for the compliance
with any order or notice for not more than twelve (12) months subject to
appropriate conditions and provided that the city council make specific
findings of fact based on evidence related to the following:
         a.   That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
carrying out the strict letter of any notice or order; and
         b.   That such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
      2.   The city council may issue a variance in a specific case and from a
specific provision of this chapter subject to appropriate conditions and
provided the city council makes specific findings of fact based on evidence
related to the following:
         a.   That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
carrying out the strict letter of any notice or order;
         b.   That the effect of the application of the provisions would be
arbitrary in the specific case;
         c.   That an extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for
these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships; and
         d.   That such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety, and general
welfare. (Ord. 856, 12-19-2005)
10-2-7: PENALTY:
   A.   The city council, by resolution, may establish administrative penalties
for failure to correct housing violations and failure to register.
   B.   In addition to any administrative fines, any violation of this chapter
is a misdemeanor and is subject to all penalties provided for such violations.
   C.   It is a misdemeanor for any person to prevent, delay or provide false
information to any city official, or his/her representative, while they are
engaging in the performance of their duties as set forth in this chapter.
   D.   In addition to bringing criminal charges for violation of this chapter,
the city of Montevideo may seek a civil injunction against any licensee or
occupant who violates any terms of this chapter.
   E.   All applicants must include in any lease (written or oral) a copy of
this chapter and must further advise all tenants that a violation of this
chapter by the applicant (landlord) or any occupant of the premises could
result in termination or revocation of the rental license and immediate
eviction of all tenants. (Ord. 856, 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 3
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
SECTION:
10-3-1: Code Adopted
10-3-1: CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   Adopted By Reference: The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings adopted by the International Conference of Building Officials, with
amendments thereto, is hereby adopted and shall be in full force and effect in
the City insofar as the same is applicable to buildings therein and is hereby
made a part of this Chapter in its entirety and as fully as though the same
were written herein.
   B.   Compliance: All buildings in the City shall be in accordance with the
provisions of said Code.
   C.   Code Available To Public: Three (3) copies of this Chapter, including
the Code as aforesaid, shall be filed by the City Clerk in the Clerk's office
for inspection and use of the public and shall be marked with the words, "City
of Montevideo - Official Copy". (Ord. 631, 7-15-1985; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
FIRE PREVENTION CODE; REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Adoption Of Uniform Fire Code
10-4-2: Establishment And Duties Of City Fire Marshal
10-4-3: Definitions
10-4-4: Penalty
10-4-1: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM FIRE CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the City Council for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain Code known as the Uniform Fire Code recommended by the
Western Fire Chiefs Association and the International Conference of Building
Officials, reference 1980 NFPA volumes, except volume 101, Life Safety Code, of
which Code not less than three (3) copies have been and are now filed in the
office of the City Clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein, and from the effective date hereof, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord.
570, 7-6-1981, eff. 8-6-1981; amd. 1998 Code)
10-4-2: ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF CITY FIRE MARSHAL:
   A.   Enforcement Of Code: The Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced by the
City Fire Marshal in the City Fire Department which is hereby established and
which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department and the City Manager.
   B.   Appointment Of Fire Marshal: The City Fire Marshal shall be appointed
by the City Manager on the basis of examination to determine qualifications.
   C.   Authority Of Fire Chief: The Chief of the Fire Department may detail
such members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary. The Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the City Manager
the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made,
shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the
position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the Fire
Department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite
term. (Ord. 493, 4-5-1976; amd. 1998 Code)
10-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it
shall be held to mean the City of Montevideo.
   B.   Wherever the term "Corporation Counsel" is used in the Uniform Fire
Code, it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of Montevideo.
   C.   Wherever the words "person in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention"
are used they shall be held to mean "City Fire Marshal". (Ord. 493, 4-5-1976)
10-4-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the City or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 493, 4-5-1976; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PRE-CODE MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOMES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Definition
10-5-2: Minimum Requirements For Pre-Code Homes
10-5-1: DEFINITION:
"Pre-code manufactured (mobile) homes" are defined as homes built prior to HUD
CFR 3280 Standards, effective June 15, 1976, or built prior to Minnesota
inspection and certification requirements in accordance with ANSI Standards
A119.1, July 1, 1972. (Ord. 760, 3-20-1995)
10-5-2: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR PRE-CODE HOMES:
   A.   Egress Windows And Exits:
      1.   Each home shall have at least one egress window in each bedroom that
meets the minimum specifications of HUD 3280.106 and .404 for manufactured
homes. These standards require that the window be at least twenty two inches
(22") in the horizontal or vertical least dimension and at least five (5)
square feet in area, the bottom of the window opening shall be not more than
thirty six inches (36") above the floor, and that locks and latches which need
to be operated to permit exiting not be located more than fifty four inches
(54") above the finished floor. If the requirements of the State Building Code
and/or ANSI A119.1, 1972 are met, the home shall be deemed to be in compliance
with this subsection.
      2.   The home shall have two (2) exterior exit doors located remote from
each other as required in HUD 3280.105. These standards require single section
manufactured homes to have the doors not less than twelve feet (12') center to
center from each other and multi-section manufactured home doors to be not less
than twenty feet (20') center to center from each other measured in a straight
line direction regardless of the length of path of travel between doors. One of
the required exit doors must be accessible from the doorway of each bedroom
without traveling more than thirty five feet (35'). Exterior swing doors shall
have a minimum twenty eight inch by seventy four inch (28" x 74") clear opening
and sliding glass doors shall have a twenty eight inch by seventy two inch (28"
x 72") clear opening. Each exterior door other than screen/storm doors shall
have a key-operated lock that has a deadlocking latch or a key-operated dead
bolt with a passage latch, and locks shall not require the use of a key or
special tool for operation from the inside of the home.
   B.   Flame Spread:
      1.   Walls and ceilings adjacent to or enclosing a furnace or water
heater shall have an interior finish with flame spread rating not exceeding 25.
Sealants and other trim materials two inches (2") or less used to finish
adjacent surfaces within these spaces are exempt from this provision provided
all joints are supported by framing members or materials with a 25 or less
flame spread rating. Combustible doors providing interior or exterior access to
furnace and water heater spaces shall be covered with materials of limited
combustion (i.e., 5/16 inch gypsum board, etc.) with the surface allowed to be
interrupted for louvers ventilating the space. However, the louvers shall not
be of materials of greater combustibility than the door itself (i.e., plastic
louvers and a wooden door). Reference HUD 3280.203.
      2.   Exposed interior finished surfaces, including vertical surfaces
between range top and overhead cabinets and/or ceiling, shall have a flame
spread rating not exceeding 50 as required by HUD 3280.203. Back splashes not
exceeding six inches (6") in height are exempted. Vertical clearance above cook
tops and ranges shall be not less than twenty four inches (24") as required by
HUD 3280.709.
   C.   Smoke Detectors:
      1.   A smoke detector shall be installed on any wall in the hallway or
space communicating with each bedroom area between the living area and the
first bedroom as required by HUD 3280.208. Homes with bedroom areas separated
by any one or a combination of common-use areas such as a kitchen, dining room,
living room, or family room (but not a bathroom or utility room) shall be
required to have one detector for each bedroom area.
      2.   Smoke detectors shall not have switches in the circuit to the
detector between the over-current protection device protecting the branch
circuit and the detector. The detector shall be attached to an electrical
outlet box and connected by a permanent wiring method into a general electrical
circuit. The detector shall not be placed on a branch circuit or any circuit
protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter.
   D.   Solid Fuel-Burning Stoves And Fireplaces:
      1.   Solid, fuel-burning factory-built fireplaces and fireplace- stoves
may be used in manufactured (mobile) homes; provided, that they are listed for
use in manufactured homes and installed as per their listing/manufacturers'
instructions and the minimum requirements of HUD 3280.710.
      2.   A solid fuel-burning fireplace or fireplace-stove shall be equipped
with integral doors designed to close the fire chamber opening and shall
include complete means for venting through the roof, a combustion air inlet, or
hearth extension, and means to securely attach the unit to the manufactured
home structure.
         a.   A listed factory-built chimney designed to be attached directly
to the fireplace/fireplace-stove and equipped with, in accordance with the
listing, a termination device and spark arrester shall be required. The chimney
shall extend at least three feet (3') above the part of the roof through which
it passes and at least two feet (2') above the highest elevation of any part of
the manufactured home within ten feet (10') of the chimney.
         b.   An air intake assembly shall be installed in accordance with the
terms of listings/manufacturers' instructions. A combustion air inlet shall
conduct the air directly into the fire chamber and shall be designed to prevent
material from the hearth dropping onto the area beneath the manufactured home.
         c.   The hearth extension shall be of noncombustible material a
minimum of three-eighths inch (3/8") thick, shall extend a minimum of sixteen
inches (16") in front and eight inches (8") beyond each side of the fireplace/
fireplace-stove opening. The hearth shall also extend over the entire surface
beneath a fireplace-stove and beneath an elevated or overhanging fireplace.
   E.   Support Systems: Pre-code homes built prior to June 15, 1976, are
required to be installed (set-up) in accordance with the standards of the State
Building Code, chapter 1350.
   F.   Aluminum Wiring: All electrical systems shall be tested for continuity
to assure that metallic parts are properly bonded, tested for operation to
demonstrate that all equipment is connected and in working order, and undergo a
polarity check to determine that connections are proper. The electrical system
shall be properly protected for the required amperage load. If the unit is of
aluminum conductors, all receptacles and switches rated 20 amperes or less
directly connected to the aluminum conductor shall be marked CO/ALR. Exterior
receptacles other than heat tape receptacles shall be of the ground fault
circuit interrupter (GFI) type. Conductors of dissimilar metals (copper/
aluminum/or copper-clad aluminum) must be connected in accordance with the
National Electrical Code.
   G.   Replacement Furnaces And Water Heaters:
      1.   If the manufactured (mobile) home has had or is to receive a
replacement furnace or water heater, it shall be listed for use in a
manufactured (mobile) home. Vents, roof jacks, and chimneys necessary for the
installation shall be listed for use with the furnace or water heater.
      2.   The furnace and water heater shall be secured in place to avoid
displacement. Every furnace and water heater shall be accessible for servicing
and/or replacement.
      3.   Furnaces and water heaters shall be installed to provide complete
separation of the combustion system from the interior atmosphere of the
manufactured home as required by HUD 3280.709.
      4.   The floor area in the water heater area shall be free from damage
from moisture, etc., to assure that the floor will support the weight of the
water heater and water contained within.
   H.   Gas Line Testing: The gas piping for each pre-code home shall be tested
with the appliance valves removed from the piping and capped at those areas.
The piping shall withstand a pressure of at least six inches (6") mercury or
three (3) pounds per square inch gauge for a period of not less than ten (10)
minutes without showing any drop in pressure. Pressure shall be measured with a
mercury manometer or a slope gauge calibrated so as to read in increments of
not greater than one-tenth (1/10) pound or equivalent device. The source of
normal operating pressure shall be isolated before the pressure test is made.
After the appliance connections are reinstalled, the piping system and
connections shall be tested with line pressure of not less than ten inches
(10") nor more than fourteen inches (14") water column air pressure. The
appliance connections shall be tested for leakage with soapy water or bubble
solution. (Ord. 760, 3-20-1995)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Intent And Purpose
11-1-3: Applicability
11-1-4: Separability
11-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the MONTEVIDEO ZONING
ORDINANCE. (1998 Code)
11-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This Title is adopted for the purpose of:
   A.   Protecting the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare.
   B.   Dividing the City into zones and districts, restricting and regulating
therein the location, and use of structures and the land.
   C.   Promoting orderly development of the residential, business, industrial,
recreational and public areas.
   D.   Providing adequate light, air and convenience of access to property.
   E.   Limiting congestion in the public rights of way.
   F.   Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures
by regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in
relation to the land and buildings surrounding them.
   G.   Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City.
   H.   Securing safety from flood.
   I.   Reducing waste from excessive mileage of roads.
   J.   Providing for the administration of this Title and amendments thereto.
   K.   Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies, as provided hereinafter.
   L.   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Title
or any amendment thereto. (1998 Code)
11-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
This Title is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Minnesota
Municipal Planning Act, Minnesota Statutes, sections 462.351 to 462.363.
   A.   Application: This Title shall be applicable to all lands and waters
within the corporate limits of the City.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this Title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
   C.   Use Of Yard, Open Space, Lot: No part of the yard or open space
required for a given building shall be included as a part of the yard or other
space required for another building, and no lot shall be used for more than one
principal building.
   D.   Use Not Specifically Permitted Or Denied: Whenever in any zoning
district a use is neither specifically permitted or denied, the use shall be
considered prohibited. In such case the City Council or the Planning
Commission, on their own initiative or upon request, may conduct a study to
determine if the use is acceptable and if so what zoning district would be most
appropriate and the determination as to conditions and standards relating to
development of the use. The City Council, Planning Commission or property
owner, upon receipt of the staff study shall, if appropriate, initiate an
amendment to this Title to provide for the particular use under consideration
or shall find that the use is not compatible for development within the City.
   E.   Conformity Required: Except as in this Title specifically provided, no
structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered; and
no structure or land shall be used for any purpose in any manner which is not
in conformity with this Title.
   F.   Access: No dwelling shall hereafter be erected or altered unless there
is direct access to it from a street or highway through an open space at least
ten feet (10') in width. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered so
as to close the present means of access to an existing dwelling or so as to
diminish this means of access to a width less than the width of the existing
dwelling.
   G.   Garage Sales: "Garage sales" as hereinafter defined shall be permitted
in all zoning districts.
   H.   Residential Occupancy Requirements: All structures used for residential
occupancy shall have a minimum width of twenty four feet (24') on its narrowest
dimension, excluding porches and entryways, a minimum floor area of nine
hundred sixty (960) square feet and shall be affixed to a permanent foundation
which complies with the Minnesota State Building Code. (1998 Code)
11-1-4: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention that the several provisions of this
development code are separable in accordance with the following:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of
this Title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of
this Title not specifically included in said judgment.
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this Title to a particular property, building,
or structure, such judgment shall not affect other proper buildings or
structures. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Rules Of Construction
11-2-2: General Definitions
11-2-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   A.   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
   B.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
the present.
   C.   The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
   D.   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition.
   E.   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest one-
tenth of a foot (0.1').
   F.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Title are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any
other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements shall prevail. (1998 Code)
11-2-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this Title, are defined
as follows:
ABANDON: To cease a specific use of a property for a period of twelve (12)
months or more.
ABUT: To border upon a parcel of land, to share all or part of a common
property line with another parcel of land.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure or portion of a structure subordinate to and
serving the principal use structure on the same lot and customarily incidental
thereto.
ACCESSORY USE: A use subordinate to the principal use on a lot and exclusively
used for purposes incidental to those of the principal use.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any buildings or structures existing or
erected which are used principally for agricultural purposes, with the
exception of dwelling units.
AGRICULTURAL USE: The use of land for the growing and/or production of field
crops, livestock, and livestock products for the production of income,
including but not limited to the following:
   A.   Field crops, including: barley, soy beans, corn, hay, oats, sugar
beets, rye, sorghum, and sunflowers.
   B.   Livestock, including: dairy and beef cattle, goats, horses, sheep,
hogs, poultry, game birds and other animals including dogs, ponies, deer,
rabbits and mink.
   C.   Horticulture or nursery stock, fruit, vegetables, timber trees.
   D.   Livestock products, all dairy, poultry and apiary products, including:
milk, butter, cheese, eggs, meat, fur and honey.
   E.   Wetlands, pasture, forest land, wildlife land and other uses that
depend on the inherent productivity of the land.
ALLEY: A public right of way less than thirty feet (30') in width which
normally affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities available which is
occupied as a residence by a single family, or a group of individuals living
together as a single-family unit. This includes any unit in buildings with four
(4) or more dwelling units.
APARTMENT BUILDING: Four (4) or more apartments grouped in one building with
common areas and facilities, e.g., entrances, lobby, elevator, stairs,
mechanical space, walls and grounds.
ATTORNEY: The attorney employed by the City unless otherwise stated.
AUTO OR MOTOR VEHICLE REDUCTION YARD: A lot or yard where one or more
unlicensed motor vehicles, or the remains thereof, are kept for the purpose of
dismantling, wrecking, crushing, repairing, rebuilding, sale of parts, sale as
scrap, storage or abandonment. (See definition of Salvage/Recycle Center.)
AUTO OR MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION: A building designed primarily for the
supplying of motor fuel, oil, lubrication and accessories to motor vehicles or
any portion thereof.
AWNING: A nonrigid hood or cover projecting from a building, which may be
folded, collapsed or retracted against the building.
BASEMENT: Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or
base subgrade (below ground level) on all four (4) sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation, below ground level.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS: A residential structure, other than a hotel
or motel, where rooms, breakfast and hospitality are provided and all costs are
included in the room price. Meals are served to guests only and owner/innkeeper
resides on same or adjoining property.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and
public or private open space, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, shorelines,
waterways, or City corporate limits.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: An officially constituted body whose principal duties are
to hear appeals and, where appropriate, grant variances from the strict
application of this Title.
BOULEVARD: The portion of the street right of way between the curb line and the
property line.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a lot for building purposes after the
setback and open space requirements of this Title have been met.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind and when said structures
are divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so
separate shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING FACE: The wall of a building fronting a street or avenue.
BUILDING FACE AREA: The quantitative measure of the wall surface area
calculated by multiplying the wall height by the wall width.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any story
level of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or any part
of the building is set back from said right-of-way line.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance to be measured from the mean elevation
of the finished lot grade along the street yard face of the structure to the
highest point of flat roofs; to the mean height level between the eaves and
ridges of gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs, or to the deck line of a mansard
roof.
BUILDING SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the building and a
lot line.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or services are offered for compensation.
CANNABIS RETAIL: A cannabis business with a license authorizing the retail sale
of cannabis flower, plants, cannabis products, and lower-potency hemp products.
CANOPY OR MARQUEE: A permanent rooflike shelter either freestanding or
extending from part or all of a building facia over a public right-of-way or a
portion of the premises and constructed of some durable material such as metal,
glass or plastic.
CHILD DAYCARE FACILITY: A facility in which a licensed child daycare program is
operated which provides children with care, training, supervision, or
developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty four
(24) hours per day for an child, in a place other than the person's own home
that is not otherwise excluded from the regulation of Municipal Zoning
Ordinances as provided by Minnesota law.
CHURCH: See definition of religious facility.
CITY: The City of Montevideo.
CLEAR-CUTTING: The entire removal of a stand of vegetation.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision development planned and constructed so as to
group housing units into patterns while providing a unified network of open
space and wooded areas, and meeting the overall density regulations of this
title.
CLUSTERING/CLUSTER HOUSING: The development pattern and technique whereby
structures are arranged in closely related groups to make the most efficient
use of the natural amenities of the land.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A plan prepared by the City including a compilation of
policy statements, goals, standards and maps indicating the general locations
recommended for the various functional classes of land use and for the general
physical development of the community and includes any plan or parts thereof.
CONCEPT PLAN OR SKETCH PLAN: A generalized plan of a proposed subdivision
indicating lot layouts, streets, park areas, and water and sewer systems
presented to the City officials at the pre-application meeting.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use that may be appropriate in a given zoning district, but
which requires special planning considerations in each instance, and which will
only be allowed in a specific location under conditions specified by this title
and by the City Council.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of individual ownership with a multi-family building with
joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs. In a condominium, each
apartment or townhouse is owned outright by its occupant.
CONTOUR MAP: A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines
connecting points of equal elevations. Contour interval is the vertical height
between contour lines.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail sales establishment that, in addition to other
retail sales and rentals, may sell gasoline at pumps, car washes and takeout
foods, but not including gasoline or automobile service stations.
COOPERATIVE: A multi-unit development operated for and owned by its occupants.
Individual occupants do not own their specific housing unit outright as in a
condominium, but they own shares in the enterprise.
COPY: A print or reproduction.
COUNTY: Chippewa, Yellow Medicine or Lac Qui Parle.
COUNTY BOARD: Chippewa, Yellow Medicine or Lac Qui Parle County Board of
Commissioners.
COURT: An open unoccupied space bounded on two (2) or more sides by the
exterior walls of a building or buildings on the same lot.
CURB LEVEL: The grade elevation established by the City Engineer of the curb in
front of the center of the building. Where no curb level has been established,
the engineering consultant shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for
the purpose of this title.
DENSITY: A measure of the intensity of residential use on the land, expressed
in terms of lot area per dwelling unit or dwelling units per acre. For such
calculations, the land area shall be exclusive of water area and floodplain,
but may include protected wetlands and hydric soils.
DEVELOPMENT: The act of building structures and installing site improvements.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan guiding the development of the property to the
ultimate land use. Such plan shall include but is not limited to: site analysis
information, staging plan, grading plan, drainage plan and end-use plan.
DISTRICT: A section of the City for which the regulations governing the height,
area, use of buildings and premises are the same.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A watercourse or indenture for the drainage of surface water.
DRIVE-IN: An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or by
packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive service, obtain
goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles, regardless of
whether or not services and goods are also provided within a building.
DRIVEWAY: A private road or path which is located on the lot which it services
and which affords vehicle access to a public road.
DUMPSTER: A large, usually metal, trash receptacle designed to be hoisted up by
a garbage truck in order to be emptied.
DWELLING, DETACHED: One which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same
lot with no common party walls.
DWELLING UNIT: A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy
by a single family but not including hotels or motels. There are three (3)
principal types:
Multiple-Family: A type of residential structure where building entrances,
stairways, halls and other common elements are shared among several units, with
separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
Single-Family Attached: A residential building containing two (2) or more
separate dwelling units with a common wall.
Quadplex: A residential building containing four (4) dwelling units with one
common wall, each unit so oriented as to have all exits open to the outside.
Townhouse: A one-family dwelling attached to two (2) or more one-family
dwellings by a common vertical wall.
Twin Home: A residence designed for or occupied by two (2) families only, with
separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
Single-Family Detached: A residential structure designed for or occupied by one
family only, not attached to another dwelling, meeting all of the following
standards:
   A.   A permanent masonry or wood foundation meeting the requirements of the
State Building Code that shall be solid for the complete circumference of the
structure;
   B.   A minimum of nine hundred sixty (960) square feet of floor area on the
ground floor;
   C.   Minimum width of twenty four feet (24') as measured across the
narrowest width. The dimension of a building addition to a dwelling shall not
be used to establish the twenty four foot (24') minimum dimension;
   D.   Conventional siding, lapping the foundation by a minimum of one inch
(1"); and
   E.   A pitched roof with a minimum four-twelfths (4/12) pitch and twelve
inch (12") eaves.
EARTH SHELTERED BERM: An earth covering on the above grade portions of building
walls.
EARTH SHELTERED BUILDING: A building constructed so that fifty percent (50%) or
more of the completed structure is covered with earth. Earth covering is
measured from the lowest level of livable space in residential units and of
usable space in nonresidential buildings. An earth sheltered building is a
complete structure that does not serve just as a foundation or substructure for
aboveground construction. A partially completed building shall not be
considered earth sheltered.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the
purpose of constructing and maintaining walkways; roadways; utilities,
including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines,
telephone lines, cable television, storm sewer or storm drainageways and gas
lines.
ENGINEER: The registered engineer employed by the City unless otherwise stated.
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT: A method of determining the location of floodway
boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of
conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Overhead or underground electrical, cable television, gas,
steam or water transmission or distribution systems and structure of
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems and structures used by
public utilities or governmental departments or commissions or as are required
for the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, including
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes and accessories in connection therewith but not
including buildings.
EXTERIOR STORAGE (INCLUDES OPEN STORAGE): The storage of goods, materials,
equipment, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a
building.
EXTRACTION AREA: Any nonagricultural artificial excavation of earth exceeding
fifty (50) square feet of surface area of two feet (2') in depth, other than
activity involved in preparing land for earth sheltered or conventional
construction of residential, commercial, and industrial buildings, excavated or
made by the removal from the natural surface of the earth of sod, soil, sand,
gravel, stone or other natural matter, or made by turning, or breaking or
undermining the surface of the earth, except that public improvement projects
shall not be considered extraction areas.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons not all so related,
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
FARM: A tract of land which is principally used for agricultural activities
such as the production of cash crops, livestock, poultry, or fish farming. Such
farms may include agricultural dwellings and accessory buildings and structures
necessary to the operation of the farm.
FEEDLOT, LIVESTOCK: A lot or building or combination of lots and buildings
intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising or holding of animals and
specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or
where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be
maintained within the enclosure. For purposes of these rules, open lots used
for the feeding and rearing of poultry (poultry ranges) shall be considered to
be animal feedlots. Pastures shall not be considered animal feedlots under
these rules.
FENCE: Any partition, structure, wall, gate or planting specifically placed to
form a divider marker, barrier or enclosure and located along the boundary, or
within the required yard.
FILL: Sand, gravel, earth or other materials deposited on, moved onto, or
placed on a parcel of land.
FILLING: The placement of fill on a parcel of land.
FINAL PLAT: The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of
subdivision is presented to the city council for approval and which, if
approved, will be submitted to the county recorder.
FLAG LOTS: A large lot or lots that are accessed to the public road by a
narrow, private right of way or driveway. The private right of way is known as
the "stem".
FLOOD: A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of
a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood
stage or discharge may be equalled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the flood
insurance study for the city of Montevideo.
FLOOD PLAIN: The area subject to inundation by a 100-year flood (regional
flood) as designated and mapped by the federal emergency management agency.
FLOODPROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments
to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction
or elimination of flood damages.
FLOODWAY: The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or for a
structure without walls (e.g., a carport), the total ground area covered by a
roof, not including area under a typical overhang dimension.
FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE: The floor area of a dwelling excluding all areas occupied
by basements, garages, porches, attics, stairways, storage, utility and heating
rooms.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The floor area of the building or buildings on a zoning
lot divided by the area of such zoning lot, or, in the case of planned unit
developments, by the net size area. The floor area ratio requirements shall
determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings,
including both principal and accessory buildings, in direct ratio to the gross
area of the zoning lot.
FOOT-CANDLE: A standard unit of illumination intensity.
FREQUENCY: The oscillations per second in a sound wave.
FRONTAGE: The part of a lot fronting on one side of a street between the side
lot lines or between a street right of way and a side lot line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended for and used to store private passenger vehicles.
GARAGE SALE: Sale by property residents at resident's address of personal
property of a kind usually and customarily found in and about residential
property. It shall not include personal property purchased for the purpose of
resale.
GARAGE, TRUCK: A building used or intended to be used for the storage of motor
trucks, truck trailers, tractors, and commercial vehicles exceeding one and
one-half (11/2) tons capacity.
GOVERNING BODY: Montevideo City Council.
GRADE: The average of the finished level at the center of the exterior walls of
the building.
GRADE, STREET: The established elevation of the street in front of the building
measured at the center of such front. Where no street grade has been
established, the City Engineer shall establish such street grade or its
equivalent for the purpose of this Title.
HALFWAY HOUSE: A home for not more than nine (9) persons who have demonstrated
a tendency toward chemical abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal
conduct, together with not more than two (2) persons providing supervision and
other services to such persons, eleven (11) of whom live together as a single
housekeeping unit.
HANDICAPPED OR INFIRM INSTITUTION: An institutional facility housing more than
nine (9) persons who are physically or mentally handicapped or infirm, and
providing primarily residential care rather than medical treatment.
HARDSHIP: The property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if used
under conditions allowed by the official controls. Economic conditions alone
will not constitute a hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under
the terms of this Title.
HEDGE: A row of bushes or small trees planted close together to form a fence or
enclosure.
HOME OCCUPATION: Occupation or profession approved by this Title that is
managed by the occupant of the dwelling.
HORTICULTURE: The use of land for the growing or production for income, of
fruits, vegetables, flowers, nursery stock, and trees, including forestry,
ornamental plants and trees, and cultured sod.
HOTEL/MOTEL: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting
rooms, entertainment and recreational facilities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A material providing a hard surface which substantially
prevents the absorption of water into the ground.
INTERIM USE: A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the
occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit
it as determined by the City Council.
INTERMEDIATE CARE HOME: A facility providing accommodations for not more than
seven (7) occupants needing medical care and supervision at a lower level than
that provided in a nursing care institution but at a higher level than that
provided in institutions for the handicapped or infirm.
KENNEL: Any structure or premises on which more than three (3) dogs over six
(6) months of age are kept for sale, breeding, profit, etc.
KEY MAP: A map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitely shows the
area proposed to be platted and the areas surrounding it to a given distance.
JUNKYARD: Land or buildings where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, stored, exchanged, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled on a
commercial basis, including, but not limited to, scrap metal, rags, paper,
hides, rubber products, glass products, lumber products and products resulting
from the wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles.
LAND RECLAMATION: Reclaiming of land by the depositing of material so as to
elevate the site. Any site upon which four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of
fill is to be deposited shall be considered land reclamation.
LANDSCAPING: Plantings, including trees, grass, ground cover, shrubs and other
natural materials such as rock and wood chips and decorative features including
sculpture, patterned walks, and fountains. Raised walkways shall not exceed six
inches (6") in height and four feet (4') in width.
LOADING SPACE OR LOADING AREA: The portion of a lot or plot designed to serve
the purpose of loading or unloading all types of vehicles.
LOT: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separate
from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of
survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.
LOT AREA: The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot bordered on at least two (2) sides by streets.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of the zoning lot occupied by the principal buildings
and accessory buildings. Earth berms are not to be included in calculating lot
coverage. Only the above grade portions of an earth sheltered building should
be included in lot coverage calculations.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: Lots which have a front line abutting on one street and a
back or rear line abutting on another street.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: The property line bounding a lot, except that where any portion of a
lot extends into the public right of way, shall be the lot line for purposes of
this title.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street, and in case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest dimension
on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front line
shall be designated by the owner.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If
the rear line is less than ten feet (10') in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet (10') in length
within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and
filed, or one unit of an auditor's subdivision or a registered land survey that
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder for Montevideo or
Chippewa County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date hereof.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD: A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in
the office of the County Recorder upon or prior to the effective date hereof,
which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks or other
dimensional standards of this Title.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured
at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building setback
line.
MANUFACTURED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure, not affixed to or part of
real estate, transportable in one or more sections, which in a traveling mode
is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet, or more in
length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square
feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
single-family dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained in it, except for accessory manufactured single-
family dwellings and temporary manufactured single-family dwellings, as defined
herein. A manufactured single-family dwelling shall be construed to remain a
manufactured single-family dwelling, subject to all regulations applying
thereto, whether or not wheels, axles, hitch, or other appurtenances of
mobility are removed and regardless of the nature of the foundation provided. A
manufactured single-family dwelling shall not be construed to be a travel
trailer or other form of recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site, lot field, or tract of land under single
ownership, designed, maintained or intended for the placement of two (2) or
more occupied manufactured homes. "Manufactured home park" shall include any
buildings, structure, vehicle, or enclosure intended for use as part of the
equipment of such manufactured home park.
MANUFACTURED HOME STAND: The part of an individual manufactured home lot which
has been reserved for placement of the manufactured home, appurtenant
structures, or additions.
METES AND BOUNDS: A method of property description by means of their direction
and distance from an easily identifiable point.
MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The guides, principles and specifications
for the preparation of subdivision plats indicating, among other things, the
minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the plan.
MINING: Any artificial excavation of the earth within the limits of the City
operated for the commercial exploitation of earthly deposits in the amount of
four hundred (400) cubic yards or more.
MODULAR MANUFACTURED OR PREFABRICATED HOME: A nonmobile housing unit that is
entirely or mostly fabricated off site and transported to a building site where
final installations are made, permanently affixing the module to the site. A
modular manufactured home shall be considered the same as a single-family
dwelling under the standards in this Title, provided it meets the standards for
floor area and other minimum standards.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively on railroad
tracks, and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle,
including but not limited to cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles, campers,
recreational vehicles, and trailers.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY WORK: Repair or straightening of automobile body, frame, or
fender, including painting.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR: Repairs, replacement of parts, and motor service to
automobiles, not including body work or painting.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES: The sale or trade of new or used motor vehicles, whether
cars, trucks, buses, campers, motorcycles, or other motorized vehicles,
including the display of new or used vehicles, or the possession of new or used
vehicles for sale or trade.
MULTI-FAMILY CONVERSION: The alteration of an existing building for use as a
multiple-family dwelling, meeting all applicable building codes and standards
in this Title.
MUNICIPAL WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS: Water, wastewater and storm water utility
systems serving a group of buildings, lots, or an area of the City, with the
design and construction of such utility systems as approved by the City
Engineer.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and/or the address of a building, or the
name of an occupant thereof and/or the practice of a permitted occupation
therein.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any legal structure or legal use existing upon the effective
date hereof and which does not conform to the provisions of this Title.
NURSERY: A business growing and selling trees, flowering and decorative plants
and shrubs and which may be conducted within a building or without, for the
purpose of landscaping.
NURSING HOME/CARE CENTER: A building facility for the care of children, the
aged, infirm, or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorder. Facilities
shall be licensed by the State Board of Health as provided for in Minnesota
Statutes.
OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill structure or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood plain which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
OPEN SALES LOT (EXTERIOR STORAGE): Any land used or occupied for the purpose of
buying and selling any goods, materials, or merchandise and for the storing of
same under the open sky prior to sale.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL OR ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: The boundary of "public
waters" and "wetlands," as defined by Minnesota Statutes section 105.37, an
elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a
sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that
point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to
predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is
the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation,
trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide
the same under these regulations.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS: Public lands and open spaces in the City dedicated or
reserved for and usable for recreational purposes.
PARKING SPACE: A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately
owned property, either within or outside of a building, of sufficient size to
store one standard automobile.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public or private right of way across or within a block, to be
used by pedestrians.
PERCENTAGE OF GRADE: On street center line means the distance vertically (up or
down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred
feet (100') of horizontal distance.
PERSON: Includes an individual, a firm, a partnership, a corporation, a
company, an unincorporated association of persons such as a club, and an owner.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Montevideo Planning Commission.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A form of development characterized by unified site
design that includes the clustering of units, mixing of housing types and the
development of common elements and open space.
PLAT: The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record and
containing all elements and requirements set forth in applicable local
regulations adopted.
PLOT: A tract of land, other than one unit of a recorded plat or subdivision
occupied and used or intended to be occupied and used as a building site and
improved or intended to be improved by the erection thereon of a building and
accessory building and having a frontage upon a public street or highway and
including such open spaces as required under this Title.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL: Official action taken by the City on an application to
create a subdivision which establishes the rights and obligations set forth in
Minnesota Statutes section 462.358 and the applicable subdivision regulation.
In accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 462.358, and unless otherwise
specified in the applicable subdivision regulation, preliminary approval may be
granted only following the review and approval of a preliminary plat or other
map or drawing establishing without limitation the number, layout, and location
of lots, tracts, blocks, and parcels to be created, location of streets, roads,
utilities and facilities, park and drainage facilities, and lands to be
dedicated for public use.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission and City
Council for their consideration.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE: One which determines the predominant use as
contrasted to accessory use or structure.
PRIVATE STABLE OR PADDOCK: A facility for the exclusive use of the owners or
occupants of the premises on which it is located that is either:
   A.   A building having stalls or compartments for the shelter of horses; or
   B.   An enclosed area used for pasturing or exercising horses.
PRIVATE STREET: A street serving as vehicular access to one or more parcels of
land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one or more private
parties.
PROPERTY LINE: The legal boundaries of a parcel of property which may also
coincide with a right-of-way line of a road, cartway and the like.
PROTECTED WATERS: Any waters of the State as defined in Minnesota Statutes
section 105.37, subdivision 14. However, no lake, pond or flowage of less than
ten (10) acres in size and no river or stream having a total drainage area less
than two (2) square miles shall be regulated for the purposes of these
regulations.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties and
constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values.
PUBLIC ACCESS: An area owned and/or operated by a governmental entity for the
launching and retrieval of watercraft from the public waters, or other
recreational activities adjacent to public waters.
PUBLIC LAND: Land owned or operated by Municipal, school district, County,
State or other governmental units.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned open area, including but not limited to
the following: parks, playgrounds, school sites, and parkways.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation, Municipal department, or board
fully authorized by the City to furnish to the public, electricity, gas, steam,
communication services, telegraph services, transportation, water, or other
essential public service.
PUBLIC WATERS: Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 105.37,
subdivisions 14 and 15.
REACH: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge
crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL: Includes all uses such as bowling alleys, roller and
skating rinks, driving ranges, and movie theaters, but not limited to, those
uses that are privately owned and operated with the intention of earning a
profit by providing entertainment for the public.
RECREATION, PUBLIC: Includes all uses such as tennis courts, ball fields,
picnic areas, and the like that are commonly provided for the public at parks,
playgrounds, community centers, and other sites owned and operated by a unit of
government for the purpose of providing recreation.
REGIONAL FLOOD: A flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood"
used in the Flood Insurance Study.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEY 1 : A survey map of registered land designed to simplify
a complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract
or tracts of a registered land survey number.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot (1') above the elevation
of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
RELIGIOUS FACILITY: A building, together with its accessory building and uses,
where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building,
together with its accessory building and uses, is maintained and controlled by
a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
RIGHT OF WAY: The publicly owned land along a street or highway corridor a
portion of which is covered by the street or highway pavement.
SALVAGE/RECYCLABLE CENTER: Land or buildings where waste, discarded, salvaged,
or recyclable materials are bought, sold, stored, exchanged, sorted, cleaned,
packed, disassembled or handled on a commercial basis including but not limited
to, scrap metal, aluminum, rags, paper, hides, rubber products, glass products,
lumber products and products resulting from the wrecking of automobiles or
other vehicles.
SCREEN: A barrier accomplished by a variety of means, intended to prevent
visibility through the barrier. If accomplished by landscape materials, the
screen must be at least eighty percent (80%) opaque.
SELECTIVE CUTTING: The removal of single scattered trees.
SEMI-PUBLIC USES: Uses owned by private or private nonprofit organizations
which are open to some but not all of the public such as: denominational
cemeteries, private schools, clubs, lodges, recreation facilities and religious
facilities.
SETBACK: The minimum distance between a structure and a property line.
SETBACK OR SETBACK LINE: The mean horizontal distance between the property line
or street right of way, or street easement and the line of the structure or the
allowable building line as defined by the yard regulations of this Title.
SHOPPING CENTER: Any group of four (4) or more retail/service businesses with a
single architectural plan.
SHORE IMPACT ZONE: Land located between the ordinary high water level of a
public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty percent (50%) of
the required structure setback.
SHORELAND: Any land adjacent to public waters as defined by the shoreland
management section of this Code.
SIGN: Any structure, device or representation, with or without lettering,
designed or intended to bring attention to the location, products or services
or an individual, residence, business or institution.
SIGN, ABANDONED: A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any
person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity
conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed.
SIGN, APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT: Sign which identifies an apartment complex of
eight (8) or more units.
SIGN AREA: The area that is framed either physically or visually by the
construction, design, or layout of a sign itself but not including supporting
structures.
SIGN, AWNING: Any sign that is painted on or attached to an awning.
SIGN, BANNER: An attention-getting device intended to be hung either with or
without a frame. Such signs are typically made of plastic, paper or other
fabric and are hung for a limited amount of time.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: A sign erected along a State trunk or Federal highway for the
purpose of advertising a product, event, person or subject not offered or sold
on the premises on which said sign is located.
SIGN, BUILDING PLAN: An illustration that shows all signs on a building or
group of related buildings.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted upon the premises at which the sign is located, and which may refer
to goods or services produced, offered for sale or obtained at such premises.
SIGN, CANOPY OR MARQUEE: A sign attached to or constructed on the facia or hung
from a canopy or marquee.
SIGN, CHANGING (AUTOMATIC): Any sign such as electronically or electrically
controlled public service information signs, message centers or reader boards
where different automatic changing messages of an informative or commercial
nature of interest to the traveling public are shown.
Electronic Reader Board: A sign which contains a traveling message, or a
message which appears to be traveling, and usually in a horizontal manner. The
characters incorporated into any message remain constant, and do not change in
hue or intensity, as they travel or appear to travel across or through the
automatic changing copy of the sign.
Message Center: A sign which contains a changing message within the copy area
which remains on for a specified minimum period of time and blacks out for a
specified minimum of time between messages.
Public Service Information Sign: Any sign intended primarily to promote
messages of general interest to the community such as time, temperature, date,
atmospheric conditions, news or traffic control, etc.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A sign placed at a construction site identifying the
project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or other
involved parties.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign that contains no advertising of any kind and provides
direction or instruction to guide persons or vehicles to facilities intended to
serve the public.
SIGN, EXEMPT: Signs exempted from normal permit requirements.
SIGN, FARM PRODUCT: Sign located on a farm residence property advertising farm
products, merchandise or services sold, produced, manufactured or furnished on
such farm.
SIGN, FLASHING: An illuminated sign upon which the artificial light is not kept
constant in terms of intensity or color at all times when the sign is
illuminated.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any stationary, self-supporting sign standing on the ground
not affixed to any other structure. Includes monument, ground or pedestal
signs.
SIGN, GARAGE SALE: Signs advertising a garage sale.
SIGN, HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade or
upper surface of the nearest street curb to the highest point of said sign.
SIGN, HISTORICAL: Any sign that is of historical significance or that is an
historical resource within the meaning of Minnesota Statutes chapter 116B.
SIGN, HOLIDAY/SPECIAL EVENT: Signs or displays which contain or depict messages
pertaining to a holiday or special event, including holiday lighting.
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION: A sign identifying a residential professional office or
home occupation, which has received a conditional use permit, conducted in a
portion of the home.
SIGN, HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: Sign which identifies the name of a housing
development subdivision of eight (8) or more units.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign that is lighted by an artificial light source
either directed upon it or illuminated from an interior source.
SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL: A sign identifying a religious or public institution or
public recreational facility, including airport, library, community center,
park, religious facility, hospital, armory, school, nature center or cemetery.
SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL: Signs providing direction or instruction to a
governmental, public or religious institution.
SIGN, MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Sign identifying a manufactured home park of
eight (8) or more units.
SIGN, MEMORIAL: Names on buildings, date of construction, commemorative tablet
and the like, which are constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material
and which are an integral part of the building or structure.
SIGN, MOBILE OR PORTABLE: Signs on wheels or otherwise capable of being moved
from place to place.
SIGN, MOTION: Any sign that revolves, rotates, has any moving parts or gives
the illusion of motion.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: A sign that states the name and/or address of the business,
industry or occupant.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING (LEGAL): Any advertising structure or sign which was
lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the
purview of this Title, and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform
to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Title.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A sign on behalf of a candidate for office or measures on
election ballots.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is
supported by a wall of a building or structure.
SIGN, PUBLIC: Signs of a public, noncommercial nature including safety signs,
danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic or
historic points of interest, memorial plaques and the like, when signs are
erected by or on order of a public officer or employee in the performance of
official duty.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A business sign placed upon a property advertising that
particular property for sale, for rent or for lease.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT: A temporary sign for the purpose of selling or
promoting a subdivision plat or development project.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign that is erected, constructed or attached wholly or in part
upon or over the roof of a building.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, braces and framework of the sign.
SIGN, UNLAWFUL: A sign which violates the Code or which the Administrator may
declare as unlawful if it becomes dangerous to public safety by reason of
dilapidation or abandonment.
SIGN, WALL: A sign attached to or painted on, or erected against the wall of a
building with the exposed face of the sign plane parallel to the plane of the
said wall.
SIGN, WINDOW: Signs placed inside a building for the purpose of viewing from
the exterior through a window.
SLOPE: The amount a land surface rises or falls from a horizontal plane. Slope
can be expressed as a fraction or percentage, arrived at by dividing the
distance of the vertical rise or fall from the horizontal plane by the
horizontal distance.
SPORT COURT: Private recreational uses and structures for the exclusive use of
surrounding property owner(s) as an accessory use. Such uses and structures
include tennis courts, hockey rinks, volleyball or basketball courts, which may
not be used for commercial purposes or non-recreational uses.
STORAGE POD: Any temporary structure, purchased or leased, that is employed for
the storage of vehicles, goods, or other personal property, which is not
affixed to real property and does not contain wheels which are inseparable from
the structure itself.
STREET: A public right of way which affords primary means of access to abutting
property, and shall also include avenue, highway, or roadway.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street which serves or is designed to serve as a traffic
way for a neighborhood or as a feeder to a major street.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A street turnaround with only one outlet.
STREET, LOCAL: A street intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting
properties.
STREET, MAJOR OR ARTERIAL: A street which serves, or is designed to serve,
heavy flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic
between communities and/or other heavy traffic generating areas.
STREET PAVEMENT: The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used by
vehicular traffic.
STREET, SERVICE: Marginal access street, or otherwise designated as a minor
street, which is parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare and which provides
access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
STREET WIDTH: The width of the right of way, measured at right angles to the
center line of the street.
STORY: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above, including below ground portions of earth
sheltered buildings.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building such
as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial changes in the
roof and exterior walls.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person commencing proceedings under the ordinance to effect a
subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION: The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into
two (2) or more lots either by plat or by metes and bounds description.
TANGENT: A straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve where a
tangent meets a curve.
TOWER: A structure that is intended to send and/or receive radio, television
and telecommunication signals.
TOWNHOUSE: A single structure consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units
having a private entrance on the first story at or near the ground level with
no other dwelling unit connected to the other dwelling unit except by a party
wall with no openings.
TRACING: A plat or map drawn on transparent paper or cloth which can be
reproduced by using regular reproduction procedure.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or
maintained.
USE, PERMITTED: A public or private use which of itself conforms with the
purposes, objectives, requirements, regulations, and performance standards of a
particular district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory use. A "principal use" may be either permitted or
conditional.
VARIANCE: A modification or variation of the provisions of this Title where it
is determined that by reason of special and unusual circumstances relating to a
specific lot, that strict application of this title would cause an undue
hardship.
VERTICAL CURVE: The surface curvature on a street centerline located between
lines of different percentage of grade.
WETLAND: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soils.
YARD: A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a
structure from its lowest level to the sky except as permitted in this title.
The yard extends along the lot line at right angles to such lot line to a depth
or width specified in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which
such lot is located. For earth sheltered buildings and buildings covered with
earth berms, the line of the building is measured from the exterior surface of
the building regardless of whether it is above or below grade.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines and extending from the abutting street right-of-way line
to the depth required in the setback regulations for the zoning district in
which such lot is located.
YARD, REAR: The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building
located between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line and
extending for the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: The yard extending along the side lot line between the front yard
and rear yards to a depth or width required by setback regulations for the
zoning district in which such lot is located.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The duly appointed person charged with enforcement of
this title.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the limits of the City for which the
regulations and requirements governing use are uniform as defined by this
title.
ZONING MAP: The map or maps incorporated into this title as a part thereof
designating the zoning districts.
ZONING ORDINANCE: A Zoning Ordinance or Resolution controlling the use of land
as adopted by the City.
(1998 Code; amd. Ord. 828, 8-19-2002; Ord. 911, 3-7-2011; Ord. 953, 7-15-2019;
Ord. 968, 4-8-2022; Ord. 995, 10-6-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. M.S.A. § 508.47.
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Zoning Administrator
11-3-2: Planning Commission
11-3-3: Zoning Permits And Certificates
11-3-4: Building Permit
11-3-5: Certificate Of Occupancy
11-3-6: Interim Use Permit
11-3-7: Conditional Use Permits
11-3-8: Variances
11-3-9: Amendments
11-3-10: Appeals
11-3-11: Enforcement
11-3-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The City Manager shall appoint a Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Duties: The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Title and shall
perform the following duties:
      1.   Issue Certificates: Issue certificates of zoning compliance and
maintain records thereof.
      2.   Inspections: Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and uses of
land to determine compliance with the terms of this Title.
      3.   Notice Of Violations: Notify, in writing, any person responsible for
violating a provision of this Title, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it.
      4.   Order Discontinuance: Order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings or structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures,
additions, alterations; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or
take any other action authorized by this Title to ensure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions, including cooperation with the City
Attorney in the prosecution of complaints.
      5.   Zoning Ordinance: Maintain permanent and current records of the
Zoning Ordinance, including all maps, amendments, conditional uses, and
variances.
      6.   Records: Maintain a current file of all permits, all certificates of
zoning compliance, and all copies of notices of violation, discontinuance, or
removal for such time as necessary to ensure a continuous compliance with the
provisions of this Title and, on request, provide information to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in any specific property.
      7.   Assistance: Provide clerical and technical assistance to the
Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Adjustment.
      8.   Monthly Summary: Submit each month to the Planning Commission an
itemized summary of certificates and permits granted and other significant
activity of the preceding month.
      9.   Applications: Receive, file and forward to the Board of Zoning
Adjustment or Planning Commission all applications for conditional use permits,
variances or amendments. (1998 Code)
11-3-2: PLANNING COMMISSION:
The Planning Commission shall provide assistance to the City Council and Zoning
Administrator in the administration of this Title. Recommendations of the
Planning Commission shall be advisory in nature. Specifically, the Planning
Commission shall review, hold public hearings, and make recommendations to the
City Council on all applications for zoning amendments and conditional use
permits. (1998 Code)
11-3-3: ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Zoning Permit Required: No building permit or other permit pertaining
to the use of land or buildings shall be issued unless such building is
designed and arranged to conform to the provisions of this Title. No building
permit shall be issued without a zoning permit.
   B.   Application: Every application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied
by a site plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale showing actual dimensions of the
following, if applicable:
      1.   The lot or lots to be built upon;
      2.   The location and size of the structures;
      3.   Improvements or uses to be erected, altered or placed on the lot;
      4.   Location of required parking and loading areas;
      5.   Size of yards and open spaces;
      6.   Existing and proposed streets and alleys adjoining or within the
lot; and
      7.   Such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of this Title.
   C.   Certificate Of Zoning Compliance: No land shall be occupied or used and
no building hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally altered shall be
occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a
certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
The certificate of zoning compliance shall state that the building and the use
appears to comply with all of the provisions of this Title applicable to the
building or premises of the use in the district in which it is to be located.
   D.   Change In Use: No change in use shall be made in any building or part
thereof, now existing or hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered, without a certificate of zoning compliance having been issued by the
Zoning Administrator, and no such permit shall be issued to make such a change
unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this Title.
   E.   Issuance: A certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued within ten
(10) days after the lawful erection, reconstruction or structural alteration is
completed. (1998 Code)
11-3-4: BUILDING PERMIT 1 :
   A.   Permit Required: Hereafter, no person shall construct, enlarge, repair,
alter, move or demolish a structure or building or part thereof without first
securing a permit.
   B.   Application:
      1.   Form: Persons requesting a building permit shall provide information
to the Building Official on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator.
      2.   Submission; Fee: Completed building permit forms and a fee as may be
established by resolution of the City Council shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
   C.   Issuance: If the proposed development conforms in all respects to this
Title and State Building Code, a building permit shall be issued by the Zoning
Administrator within a period of ten (10) days.
   D.   Submission To Planning Commission Or Board Of Zoning Adjustment: If the
proposed development involves a zoning amendment, variance, or conditional use
permit, the application, together with a building permit, shall be submitted
either to the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Adjustment for review and
appropriate action. (1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  11-3-3A of this Chapter.
11-3-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no buildings hereafter erected,
altered or moved shall be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Building Official. Such certificate shall show that the building
or premises or part thereof and the use thereof conform to all the requirements
of this Title. (1998 Code)
11-3-6: INTERIM USE PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is to:
      1.   Allow a use for a limited period of time that reasonably utilizes
the property where it is not reasonable to utilize it in the manner provided in
the comprehensive plan; and
      2.   Allow a use that is presently acceptable but that, with anticipated
development, will not be acceptable in the future.
   B.   Application, Public Hearing, Notice And Procedure: The application,
public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for an interim use
permit shall be the same as those for zoning amendments as provided in section
11-3-9 of this chapter.
   C.   Standards: The planning commission shall recommend an interim use
permit and the council shall issue such interim use permits only if it finds
that such use at the proposed location:
      1.   Meets the standards of a conditional use permit set forth in
subsection
11-3-7D of this chapter;
      2.   Will terminate upon a date or event that can be identified with
certainty;
      3.   Will not impose, by agreement, additional costs on the public if it
is necessary for the public to take the property in the future; and
      4.   Will be subjected to, by agreement with the owner, any conditions
that the city council has deemed appropriate for permission of the use,
including a condition that the owner will provide an appropriate financial
surety to cover the cost of removing the interim use and any interim structures
upon the expiration of the interim use permit.
   D.   Termination: An interim use permit shall terminate upon the occurrence
of any of the following events, whichever first occurs:
      1.   The termination date stated in the permit;
      2.   A violation of conditions under which the permit was issued;
      3.   A change in the city's zoning regulations which renders the use
nonconforming; or
      4.   The use has been discontinued for a minimum of six (6) months. (1998
Code)
11-3-7: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: "Conditional use" means a land use or development as defined
by ordinance that would not be appropriate generally, but may be allowed with
appropriate restrictions as provided by official controls upon a finding that:
      1.   Certain conditions as detailed in this title exist;
      2.   The use or development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan
of the community; and
      3.   The use or development is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   B.   Application: Although specific submission required to complete an
application for a conditional use permit may vary with the specific use and the
district in which it is located, all applications for such permits must include
at minimum a site plan that clearly illustrates the following: proposed land
use, building mapping and functions, circulation and parking areas, planting
areas and treatment, sign locations and type, basic lighting concerns, the
relationship of the proposed project to neighboring uses, environmental impacts
and demand for municipal services.
   C.   Procedures: The procedures for obtaining a conditional use permit are
as follows:
      1.   Meet With Zoning Administrator: The property owner or designated
agent shall meet with the zoning administrator to explain the situation, learn
the procedures and obtain an application form.
      2.   Application; Fee: The applicant shall file the completed application
form, together with the required exhibits, with the zoning administrator and
shall pay a filing fee as established by the city council.
      3.   Transmittal To Planning Commission; Notice To Property Owners: The
zoning administrator shall transmit the application and required exhibits to
the planning commission within thirty (30) days after receipt, and shall notify
all property owners within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the outer
boundaries of the property in question; however, failure of any property owner
to receive such notification shall not invalidate the proceedings.
      4.   Notice Of Hearing: The zoning administrator shall set the date for a
public hearing and shall have notice of such hearing published in the legal
newspaper at least once, not less than ten (10) days and not more than thirty
(30) days prior to said hearing.
      5.   Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed conditional use permit and shall make a decision on the proposal
within thirty (30) days. The planning commission may impose such restrictions
and conditions upon the premises benefited by a conditional use permit as may
be necessary to comply with the standards established by this title, or to
reduce or minimize the effect of such conditional use permit upon other
properties in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the intent of the
conditional use permit. The planning commission shall take one of three (3)
actions, i.e., approval, denial or conditional approval.
      6.   Action By City Council: The city council shall act upon the
application within thirty (30) days after receiving the recommendation of the
planning commission.
      7.   Right To Appeal: The applicant shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the planning commission to the city council within ten (10) days
after the decision by the commission.
   D.   Standards: The planning commission shall recommend a conditional use
permit and the council shall issue such conditional use permits only if it
finds that such use at the proposed location:
      1.   Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience or general welfare of the neighborhood or the city.
      2.   Will be harmonious with the general and applicable specific
objectives of the city's comprehensive plan and this title.
      3.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
compatible in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general
vicinity and will not change the essential character of that area.
      4.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
      5.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services, including streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer systems and schools, or will be served
adequately by such facilities and services provided by the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use.
      6.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community.
      7.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property
or the general welfare because of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare, or odors.
      8.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property that do not create
traffic congestion or interfere with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares.
      9.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural,
scenic or historic features of major importance.
      10.   Will not depreciate surrounding property values.
   E.   Conditions: In reviewing applications for conditional use permits, the
planning commission or council may attach whatever reasonable conditions they
deem necessary to mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with these
uses, to protect the value of property within the district, and to achieve the
goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. Such conditions may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Controlling the number, area, bulk, height and location of such
uses.
      2.   Regulating ingress and egress to the property and the proposed
structures thereon with particular references to vehicle and pedestrian safety
and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other
catastrophe.
      3.   Regulating off street parking and loading areas where required.
      4.   Utilities with reference to location, availability and
compatibility.
      5.   Berming, fencing, screening, landscaping or other means to protect
nearby property.
      6.   Compatibility of appearance.
In determining such conditions, special consideration shall be given to
protecting immediately adjacent properties from objectionable views, noise,
traffic and other negative characteristics associated with such uses.
   F.   Denial For Noncompliance: If the planning commission recommends denial
of a conditional use permit or the council orders such denial, it shall include
in its recommendation or determination findings indicating in which areas the
proposed use does not comply with the standards required by this title.
   G.   Permittee: A conditional use permit shall be issued for a particular
use and not for a particular person, except in the case of a permit granted for
the uses of land reclamation, mining or soil or mineral processing. In such
cases, a permit shall be issued to the particular person making application for
such permit and such permit shall not be transferred or assigned for use by
another without the written consent of the city. However, such consent by the
city shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   H.   Periodic Review, Term Of Permit: A periodic review of the use may be
attached as a condition of approval of a conditional use permit. Unless
otherwise stipulated, the term shall be the life of the use.
   I.   Revocation: Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a
conditional use permit, or any other violation of this title, shall be a
misdemeanor and shall also constitute sufficient cause for the termination of
the conditional use permit by the city council following a public hearing.
   J.   Expiration: If substantial construction has not taken place within six
(6) months of the date on which the conditional use permit was granted, the
permit is void except that, on application, the council, after receiving
recommendation from the planning commission, may extend the permit for such
additional period as it deems appropriate. If the conditional use is
discontinued for six (6) months, the conditional use permit shall become void.
This provision shall apply to conditional use permits issued prior to the
effective date hereof, but the six (6) month period shall not be deemed to
commence until the effective date hereof. (Ord. 826, 7-15-2002)
11-3-8: VARIANCES:
   A.   Criteria For Granting Variances: A variance to the provision of this
title may be recommended by the board of zoning adjustment to provide relief to
the landowner in those cases where this title imposes undue hardship or
practical difficulties to the property owner in the use of the land. No use
variances may be issued. A variance may be granted only in the event that all
of the following circumstances exist:
      1.   Exception or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which
do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity and
result from lot size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the
owners of property since enactment of this title have had no control.
      2.   The literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this title.
      3.   That the special conditions or circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
      4.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to owners of other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
      5.   That the variance requested is the minimum variance. Economic
conditions alone shall not be considered a hardship.
      6.   The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of
this title, or to other property in the same zone.
      7.   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of the
public streets, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
   B.   Required Exhibits For Variances:
      1.   Required Information: A boundary description and preliminary
building and site development plan subject to approval of the zoning
administrator. The board of zoning adjustment may require a certified survey.
      2.   Proof Of Ownership: Evidence of ownership or enforceable option on
the property.
   C.   Procedures: The procedure for obtaining a variance from the regulations
of this title are as follows:
      1.   Meet With Zoning Administrator: The property owner or designated
agent shall meet with the zoning administrator to explain the situation, learn
the procedures and obtain an application form.
      2.   Application; Fee: The applicant shall file the completed application
form together with the required exhibits with the zoning administrator and
shall pay a filing fee as established by the city council.
      3.   Transmittal To Board Of Zoning Adjustment; Notice To Property
Owners: The zoning administrator shall transmit the application and required
exhibits to the board of zoning adjustment within thirty (30) days after
receipt, and shall notify all property owners within the affected zone and
within one hundred feet (100') of the outer boundaries of the property in
question; however, failure of any property owner to receive such notification
shall not invalidate the proceedings.
      4.   Notice Of Hearing: The zoning administrator shall set the date for a
public hearing and shall have notice of such hearing published in the legal
newspaper at least once, not less than ten (10) days and not more than thirty
(30) days prior to said hearing.
      5.   Hearing: The board of zoning adjustment shall hold a public hearing
on the proposed variance and shall make a decision on the proposal within
thirty (30) days. The board of zoning adjustment may impose such restrictions
and conditions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards established by this title, or to reduce or minimize
the effect of such variance upon other properties in the neighborhood, and to
better carry out the intent of the variance. The board of zoning adjustment
shall take one of three (3) actions, i.e., approval, denial or conditional
approval.
      6.   Action By City Council: The city council shall act upon the
application within thirty (30) days after receiving the recommendation of the
board of zoning adjustment.
      7.   Right To Appeal: The applicant shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the board of zoning adjustment to the city council within ten (10)
days after the decision by the board.
      8.   Reapplication: No application by a property owner for a variance
shall be submitted to the board of appeals within a six (6) month period
following a denial of such a request, except the board may permit a new
application if, in the opinion of the board, new evidence of change or
circumstances warrant it.
      9.   Expiration: A variance shall be deemed to authorize only one
particular use and shall expire if work does not commence within six (6) months
of the date of granting such variance or if that use ceases for more than six
(6) consecutive months.
      10.   Revocation: The city council may revoke a variance if any
conditions established as part of granting the variance request are violated,
following a public hearing. (1998 Code)
11-3-9: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Criteria For Granting Zoning Amendments: The city council may adopt
amendments to this title and zoning map in relation to land uses within a
particular district or to the location of the district line. Such amendments
shall not be issued indiscriminately, but shall only be used as a means to
reflect changes in the goals and policies of the city as reflected in the
comprehensive plan or changes in conditions in the city.
   B.   Kinds Of Amendments:
      1.   A change in a district's boundary (rezoning).
      2.   A change in a district's regulations.
      3.   A change in any other provision of this title.
   C.   Initiation Of Proceedings: Proceedings for amending this title shall be
initiated by at least one of the following three (3) methods:
      1.   By petition of an owner or owners of property that is proposed to be
rezoned, or for which district regulation changes are proposed.
      2.   By recommendation of the planning commission.
      3.   By action of the city council.
   D.   Required Exhibits For Rezoning Or District Regulation Changes Initiated
By Property Owners:
      1.   Required Information: A boundary description and preliminary
building and site development plan subject to approval of the zoning
administrator. The city council may require a certified survey. If a survey is
required, the property shall also be properly monumented with metal stakes and
caps.
      2.   Proof Of Ownership: Evidence of ownership or enforceable option on
the property. (1998 Code)
   E.   Procedure To Initiate Rezoning Or Change In District Regulation:
      1.   Petition By Property Owner:
         a.   Meet With Zoning Administrator: The property owner or his
designated agent shall meet with the zoning administrator to explain the
situation, learn the procedures, and obtain an application form.
         b.   Application; Fee: The applicant shall file the completed
application form together with the required exhibits with the zoning
administrator and shall pay a filing fee as established by the city council.
         c.   Transmittal To Planning Commission: The zoning administrator
shall transmit the application and required exhibits to the planning commission
within thirty (30) days after receipt.
         d.   Notice Of Hearing: The zoning administrator shall set the date
for a public hearing and shall have notice of such hearing published in the
legal newspaper at least once, not less than ten (10) days and not more than
thirty (30) days prior to said hearing. When an amendment involves changes in
district boundaries affecting an area of five (5) acres or less, the notice
shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the day of the hearing to each
owner of affected property situated wholly or partly within three hundred fifty
feet (350') of the property to which the amendment relates.
         e.   Hearing: The planning commission shall hold the public hearing
and then shall recommend to the city council within thirty (30) days, one of
three (3) actions, i.e., approval, denial, or conditional approval.
         f.   Action By City Council: The city council shall act upon the
application within thirty (30) days after receiving the recommendation of the
planning commission.
         g.   Reapplication: No application of a property owner for an
amendment to the text of this title or the zoning map shall be considered by
the planning commission within the one year prior following a denial of such
request. However, the planning commission may permit a new application, if in
the opinion of the planning commission, new evidence or a change of
circumstances warrant it.
      2.   Recommendation By Planning Commission Or Action By City Council:
         a.   Staff Report: The zoning administrator shall transmit a staff
report and required exhibits to the planning commission within thirty (30) days
of the receipt of the application.
         b.   Notice Of Hearing: The zoning administrator shall set the date
for a public hearing and shall have notice of such hearing published in the
legal newspaper at least once, not less than ten (10) days and not more than
thirty (30) days prior to said hearing. When an amendment involves changes in
district boundaries affecting an area of five (5) acres or less, the notice
shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the day of the hearing to each
owner of affected property situated wholly or partly within three hundred fifty
feet (350') of the property to which the amendment relates.
         c.   Hearing: The planning commission shall hold the public hearing
and then shall recommend to the city council within thirty (30) days, one of
three (3) actions, i.e., approval, denial, or conditional approval. (Ord. 942,
7-18-2016)
         d.   Action By City Council: The city council shall act upon the
application within thirty (30) days after receiving the recommendation of the
planning commission. (1998 Code)
11-3-10: APPEALS:
   A.   Board Of Zoning Adjustment: The board of zoning adjustment shall act
upon all questions as they may arise in the administration of this title,
including the interpretation of zoning maps; and it shall hear and decide
appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by such an administrative official charged with enforcing this title. Such
appeal may be made by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board
or bureau of the city. The board of zoning adjustment shall also have the power
to grant variances subject to approval and confirmation of the city council to
the provisions of this title under certain conditions. The conditions for the
issuance of a variance are as indicated in section
11-3-8 of this chapter. No use variances (uses different from those allowed in
the district) shall be issued by the board of zoning adjustment.
   B.   Hearings: Hearings by the board of zoning adjustment shall be held
within such time and upon such notice to interested parties as provided in this
title and its adopted rules for the transaction of its business. The board
shall, within a reasonable time, make its order deciding the matter and shall
serve a copy of such order upon the appellant or petitioner by mail. Any party
may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or attorney.
   C.   Decisions: The board of zoning adjustment may reverse or affirm wholly
or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as
in its opinion ought to be made. The reasons for the board's decision shall be
stated. A majority vote of the board of zoning adjustment shall be necessary to
reverse any decisions of an administrative office of the city or to decide in
favor of the applicant. (1998 Code)
11-3-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcing Officer: It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to
cause the provisions of this title to be properly enforced through the proper
legal channels.
   B.   Violations:
      1.   Violation; Refusal To Comply: Any person who shall violate or refuse
to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to the
provisions of this section.
      2.   Continuing Violation: Each day that the violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
      3.   Conditional Use Permit: Violation of any condition of a conditional
use permit may result in immediate termination of such permit by the city
council, following public hearing.
      4.   Notice; Public Hearing: Notice and public hearing of violations and
termination proceedings on all nonconforming, any conditional, incompatible,
accessory or conditional uses or home occupation uses, shall be given by the
city council to the interested party or parties by certified mail or in lieu
thereof by one legal published notice at least ten (10) days before the hearing
date.
   C.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty for
a misdemeanor as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Additional Remedies: In addition to other remedies, the zoning
administrator may institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the
city, and hereby shall have the powers of a police officer to prevent the
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violations
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
DISTRICTS; MAPS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Zoning Districts
11-4-2: Annexation
11-4-3: Zoning Map
11-4-4: Zoning District Requirements Table
11-4-1: ZONING DISTRICTS:
The zoning districts are so designed as to assist in carrying out the intents
and purposes of the comprehensive plan and are based upon the comprehensive
plan which has the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare. For the purpose of this title, the city is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts:
AO  Agriculture-open space
R-1 Single-family residential (low density)
R-2 Multi-family residential (medium density)
R-3 Multi-family residential (high density)
B-1 Business district
B-2 Highway business district
MB  Medical business district
I-1 Light industry district
I-2 Heavy industry district
CD  Conservancy district
RO  River overlay district
 
(1998 Code; amd. Ord. 840, 9-22-2003)
11-4-2: ANNEXATION:
Any land that is annexed to the city shall be included in the AO agriculture-
open space district unless the resolution annexing the land specifies a
different zoning designation, in which case, that zoning designation shall
apply. The zoning designation shall apply until such time that the city council
rezones the land to another district after recommendation by the planning
commission. In the event the resolution annexing land specifies a zoning
designation, such designation shall be reviewed by the planning commission
prior to passage of the resolution by the city council. (Ord. 858, 1-17-2006)
11-4-3: ZONING MAP:
   A.   Incorporation: The location and boundaries of the districts established
by this title are set forth on the official zoning map, dated May 1, 2013,
which is hereby incorporated as part of this title. (Ord. 925, 8-19-2013)
   B.   Boundaries: District boundary lines recorded on the city zoning map are
intended to follow lot lines, the centerline of streets or alleys, the
centerlines of streets or alleys projected, railroad right of way lines, the
center of watercourses or the corporate limit lines as they exist at the time
of the enactment of this title.
   C.   Vacation Of Public Way: Whenever any street, alley or other public way
is vacated, the zoning district adjoining that of such vacated street, alley or
public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacated area
and all included therein shall be then and henceforth subject to all
regulations of the extended district.
   D.   Maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator
to maintain and amend the zoning map. The zoning administrator shall make or
cause to have made any corrections or amendments to the map after all of the
procedures outlined in this title for the making of such revisions or
amendments have been followed by the planning commission and the city council.
   E.   Recording Amendments: Amendments to the zoning map shall be recorded on
the map within fifteen (15) days after official publication.
   F.   Copy On File: The copy of the official zoning map shall be kept on file
in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection at all
times during which the office of the zoning administrator is customarily open.
(1998 Code)
11-4-4: ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS TABLE:
ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
          Lot Area
 Zoning   Per Unit  Lot Width Lot Depth Front   Side    Rear Setback Maximum
 District (Square                       Setback Setback              Height
          Feet)
ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
                Lot Area
   Zoning       Per Unit Lot      Lot      Front   Side     Rear      Maximum
   District     (Square  Width    Depth    Setback Setback  Setback   Height
                Feet)
AO Agriculture/ 10 acres 200 feet 200 feet 50 feet 30 feet  50 feet   45 feet
   open space
   Single-      12,000
R1 family       SF       100 feet 120 feet 25 feet 10 feet  20 feet   45 feet
   residential
   Multi-family
R2 residential  9,600 SM 80 feet  120 feet 25 feet 10 feet  20 feet   45 feet
   (medium      5,000 FM
   density)
   Multi-family                                                       3 stories
R3 residential  2,180 MF 80 feet  120 feet 25 feet 10 feet  20 feet   or 45
   (high        5,000 MF                                              feet
   density)
B1 Business     None     None     None     10 feet 0 feet   0 feet    45 feet
   district
   Highway                                                            21/
B2 business     15,000   None     None     25 feet 10 feet  20 feet   2 stories
   district                                                           or
                                                                      35 feet
                                                   See      See
   Medical                                         section  section
MB business     None     None     None     10 feet 11-7C-   11-7C-    45 feet
   district                                        5 of     5 of this
                                                   this     title
                                                   title
   Light
I1 industry     20,000   100 feet 200 feet 25 feet 10 feet  20 feet   50 feet
   district
   Heavy
I2 industrial   20,000   100 feet 200 feet 50 feet 50 feet  20 feet   50 feet
   district
   River
RO overlay      SEE UNDERLYING ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
   district     Key: SF - single-family residential MF - multi-family
FP Floodplain   residential
CD Conservancy
   district
 
(1998 Code; amd. Ord. 840, 9-22-2003)
CHAPTER 5
AO AGRICULTURE-OPEN SPACE
SECTION:
11-5-1: Purpose
11-5-2: Permitted Uses
11-5-3: Accessory Uses
11-5-4: Conditional Uses
11-5-5: Performance Standards
11-5-1: PURPOSE:
The major purpose of this district is to allow open space and agricultural uses
in the outlying parts of the City that do not have central sewer services.
Limited residential development will be allowed in this district. (1998 Code)
11-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
Agriculture uses, including single-family dwellings and agricultural related
buildings and structures subject to Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, but
not including feedlots and other commercial operations.
Child daycare facilities.
Nurseries and tree farms, farm drainage and irrigation systems, roadside stands
for the sale of agricultural products, historic sites, signs subject to the
standards in chapter 14 of this title, essential services, including necessary
equipment, structures and railway.
Permitted home occupations.
Public parks, recreation areas, wildlife areas and game refuges. (Ord. 953, 7-
15-2019)
11-5-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any incidental machinery, fencing, structure or buildings necessary to the
conduct of existing agricultural and other permitted uses.
Private garages, carports, screen houses, swimming pools and storage buildings
for use of occupants of the principal structures. (1998 Code)
11-5-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Airports.
Cemeteries.
Commercial communication towers.
Dog kennels and commercial riding stables.
Golf courses and driving ranges.
Gun clubs.
Hobby farms and stables.
Home occupations.
Mausoleums and columbariums.
Mining, sand and gravel operations.
Religious facilities.
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses designated
in this chapter and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the
general public's health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019)
11-5-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations:
      1.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of all buildings shall not exceed
forty five feet (45').
      2.   Exceptions: This height limitation shall not apply to grain
elevators, silos, windmills, elevator legs, cooling towers, water towers,
chimneys and smokestacks, church spires.
   B.   Front Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a front yard of not less than fifty
feet (50').
      2.   Double Frontage Lot: Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two (2) or more roads or highways, there shall be a front yard setback on each
road or highway side of each corner lot.
   C.   Side Yard Regulations: There shall be a side yard width of not less
than thirty feet (30') on each side of the buildings.
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations: There shall be a rear yard of not less than
fifty feet (50').
   E.   Lot Width And Depth Regulations: The minimum lot width and minimum lot
depth shall be two hundred feet (200').
   F.   Lot Area Regulations And Density:
      1.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
      2.   Density: The maximum density shall be one unit per forty (40) acres.
   G.   Location Of Structures: Structures shall be so located on each lot as
to permit resubdivision if and when central sewer and water systems become
available.
   H.   General Requirements: Additional requirements for parking, signs,
sewage systems and other regulations as set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this
title. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SECTION:
11-6A-1: Purpose
11-6A-2: Permitted Uses
11-6A-3: Accessory Uses
11-6A-4: Conditional Uses
11-6A-5: Performance Standards
11-6A-1: PURPOSE:
The major purpose of this district is to allow the continuation of existing
residential development and infilling of existing lots in the older residential
areas of the City and also new dwelling units in the developing areas of the
City. (1998 Code)
11-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Essential services including necessary equipment and structures.
Food Trucks.
Historic sites.
Permitted home occupations.
Public recreation including parks and playgrounds.
Signs subject to standards in chapter 14 of this title.
Single-family residential structures.
Solar and earth-sheltered residential structures.
Sport Courts not exceeding one-hundred twenty (120) square feet.
Twin homes. (1998 Code; amd. Ord. 970, 4-18-2022; Ord. 976, 3-6-2023)
11-6A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any incidental structures or buildings necessary to the conduct of a permitted
use, including private garages, carports, screen houses, swimming pools,
storage buildings for use of occupants of the principal structures and
television towers and satellite dishes when erected in the rear yard. (1998
Code)
11-6A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfasts.
Child daycare facilities.
Condominiums.
Golf courses.
Home occupations.
Hospitals.
Nursing home/care center.
Planned unit developments (PUDs).
Private garages on existing lots fifty feet (50') in width or less which
contain no principal structure.
Public office buildings.
Public swimming pools.
Religious facilities.
Schools (public and private).
Sport Courts exceeding one-hundred twenty (120) square feet.
Townhouses.
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses designated
in this article and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the
general public's health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord.
970, 4-18-2022)
11-6A-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations: The maximum height of all buildings shall not
exceed forty five feet (45').
   B.   Front Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a front yard of not less than
twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Double Frontage Lot: Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two (2) or more roads or highways there shall be a front yard setback on each
road or highway side of the corner lot.
      3.   Uniform Setback: Where a uniform front yard setback on a street
between intersections exists that is less than twenty five feet (25'), any
building or structure hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged must
conform to the established setback, but in no case shall a setback of less than
fifteen feet (15') be allowed.
      4.   No Uniform Setback: Where a uniform front yard setback on a street
between intersections does not exist, the minimum required setback shall be the
average of the setback of the two (2) adjacent principal buildings; but in no
case shall a setback of less than fifteen feet (15') be allowed.
   C.   Side Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum side yard of not less
than ten feet (10') for principal structures and attached accessory structures.
      2.   Substandard Lot: The minimum side yard for existing substandard lots
less than one hundred feet (100') in width shall be not less than ten percent
(10%) of the lot width.
      3.   Detached Accessory Structure: There shall be a minimum side yard of
not less than three feet (3') for detached accessory structures located in the
rear yard.
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations: There shall be a rear yard of not less than
twenty feet (20') for principal buildings including attached accessory
buildings and three feet (3') for detached accessory buildings.
   E.   Lot Area And Density:
      1.   The minimum lot area shall be twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
      2.   The minimum lot area for twin homes, condominiums and townhomes
shall be seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet per unit.
      3.   The maximum density shall be five (5) units per acre.
   F.   Lot Width And Depth Regulations: Minimum lot width shall be one hundred
feet (100'). Minimum lot depth shall be one hundred twenty feet (120').
   G.   General Regulations: Additional requirements for parking, signs, sewage
systems and other regulations are set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this
title.
   H.   Yard/Green Space: The Yard/Green Space shall be landscaped except
vegetation areas left in a natural state during initial construction may remain
if properly maintained. The Yard/Green Space shall occupy not less than twenty-
five percent (25%) of the exposed ground area of the lot. The Yard/Green Space
shall include not less than fifty percent (50%) live materials (vegetation)
with the balance being permeable landscaping decorative materials such as
landscape rock or mulch. The Yard/Green Space may include a sport court for
which a conditional use permit has been obtained.
   I.   Sport Court: Sport Courts may not be constructed on right of way ,
easements or within setbacks without a variance. (1998 Code; amd. Ord. 970, 4-
18-2022)
ARTICLE B. R-2 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (MEDIUM DENSITY)
SECTION:
11-6B-1: Purpose
11-6B-2: Permitted Uses
11-6B-3: Accessory Uses
11-6B-4: Conditional Uses
11-6B-5: Performance Standards
11-6B-1: PURPOSE:
To provide areas within the City for multi-family residential development with
the maximum density of eight (8) dwelling units per acre including condominiums
and townhouses. (1998 Code)
11-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Condominiums.
Essential services, including necessary equipment and structures.
Food trucks.
Permitted home occupations.
Public recreation including parks and playgrounds.
Quad-plex.
Signs subject to standards in chapter 14 of this title.
Single-family dwellings.
Solar and earth-sheltered residential structures.
Townhouses.
Twin homes. (1998 Code; amd. Ord. 976, 3-6-2023)
11-6B-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any incidental structure or buildings necessary to the conduct of a permitted
use including private garages, carports, screen houses, swimming pools and
storage buildings for use of occupants of the principal structures and
television towers and satellite dishes when erected in the rear yard. (1998
Code)
11-6B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfasts.
Child daycare facilities.
Home occupations.
Hospitals.
Manufactured home parks.
Mortuaries.
Nursing home/care center.
Planned unit developments (PUD).
Private garages on existing lots fifty feet (50') in width or less which
contain no principal structure.
Public buildings.
Religious facilities.
Schools (public and private).
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses designated
in this article and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the
general public's health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019)
11-6B-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations: The maximum height of all buildings shall not
exceed forty five feet (45').
   B.   Front Yard Regulations: There shall be a minimum front yard of not less
than twenty five feet (25').
      1.   Uniform Setback: Where a uniform front yard setback on a street
between intersections exists that is less than twenty five feet (25'), any
building or structure hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged must
conform to the established setback, but in no case shall a setback of less than
fifteen feet (15') be allowed.
      2.   No Uniform Setback: Where a uniform front yard setback on a street
between intersections does not exist, the minimum required setback shall be the
average of the setback of the two (2) adjacent principal buildings; but in no
case shall a setback of less than fifteen feet (15') be allowed.
      3.   Double Frontage Lot: Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two (2) or more roads or highways, there shall be a front yard setback on each
road or highway side of each corner lot.
   C.   Side Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum side yard of not less
than ten feet (10').
      2.   Substandard Lot: The minimum side yard for existing substandard lots
less than eighty feet (80') in width shall be not less than ten percent (10%)
of the lot width.
      3.   Detached Accessory Structure: There shall be a minimum side yard of
not less than three feet (3') for detached accessory structures located in the
rear yard.
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations: There shall be a rear yard of not less than
twenty feet (20') for principal buildings including attached accessory
buildings and three feet (3') for detached accessory buildings.
   E.   Lot Area And Density Standards:
      1.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be nine thousand six hundred
(9,600) square feet for single-family residences and five thousand (5,000)
square feet per unit for twin homes, quad-plex, townhouses and condominiums.
      2.   Density: The maximum density shall be eight (8) units per acre.
   F.   Lot Width And Depth Regulations: There shall be a minimum lot width of
eighty feet (80') and a minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty feet (120').
   G.   General Regulations: Additional requirements for parking, signs, sewage
systems and other items are set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this title.
(1998 Code)
ARTICLE C. R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (HIGH DENSITY)
SECTION:
11-6C-1: Purpose
11-6C-2: Permitted Uses
11-6C-3: Accessory Uses
11-6C-4: Conditional Uses
11-6C-5: Performance Standards
11-6C-1: PURPOSE:
To provide areas within the City for multiple-family residential development
with the maximum density of twenty (20) dwelling units per acre. (1998 Code)
11-6C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Apartments.
Condominiums.
Essential services including necessary equipment and structures.
Food trucks.
Hospital.
Multi-family dwellings.
Nursing home/care center.
Permitted home occupations.
Public recreation including parks and playgrounds.
Senior citizen housing.
Signs subject to standards in chapter 14 of this title.
Single-family dwellings.
Townhouses.
Twin homes. (1998 Code) (Ord. 955, 10-21-2019; amd. Ord. 976, 3-6-2023)
11-6C-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any incidental structure or buildings necessary to the conduct of a permitted
use including private garages, carports, screen houses, swimming pools and
storage buildings for use of occupants of the principal structures. (1998 Code)
11-6C-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfasts.
Child daycare facilities.
Convenience stores.
Home occupations.
Manufactured home parks.
Planned unit developments (PUD).
Public buildings.
Religious facilities.
Schools (public and private).
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses designated
in this article and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the
general public's health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019)
11-6C-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations: The maximum height of all buildings shall not
exceed three (3) stories or forty five feet (45').
   B.   Front Yard Regulations: There shall be a minimum front yard of not less
than twenty five feet (25').
      1.   Uniform Setback: Where a uniform front yard setback on a street
between intersections exists that is less than twenty five feet (25'), any
building or structure hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged must
conform to the established setback, but in no case shall a setback of less than
fifteen feet (15') be allowed.
      2.   No Uniform Setback: Where a uniform front yard setback on a street
between intersections does not exist, the minimum required setback shall be the
average of the setback of the two (2) adjacent principal buildings; but in no
case shall a setback of less than fifteen feet (15') be allowed.
      3.   Double Frontage Lot: Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two (2) or more roads or highways, there shall be a front yard setback on each
road or highway side of each corner lot.
   C.   Side Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum side yard of not less
than ten feet (10').
      2.   Detached Accessory Structure: There shall be a minimum side yard of
not less than three feet (3') for detached accessory structures located in the
rear yard.
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations: There shall be a rear yard of not less than
twenty feet (20') for principal buildings including attached accessory
buildings and three feet (3') for detached accessory buildings.
   E.   Lot Area And Density Standards:
      1.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area for each multi-family dwelling unit
shall be two thousand one hundred fifty (2,150) square feet and five thousand
(5,000) square feet per unit for twin homes, townhomes and condominiums.
      2.   Density: The maximum density shall be twenty (20) units per acre.
   F.   Lot Width And Depth Regulations: Minimum lot width shall be eighty feet
(80'); minimum lot depth shall be one hundred twenty feet (120').
   G.   General Regulations: Additional requirements for parking, signs, sewage
systems and other items are set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this title.
(1998 Code)
CHAPTER 7
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-7A-1: Purpose
11-7A-2: Permitted Uses
11-7A-3: Accessory Uses
11-7A-4: Conditional Uses
11-7A-5: Performance Standards
11-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this district is to encourage the continuation of a viable
business area by allowing retail, service, office and entertainment facilities
as well as public and semi-public uses. In addition, residential uses will be
allowed as a conditional use. (1998 Code)
11-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Business establishments offering merchandise or services to the general public
in return for compensation. Such establishments to include but not be limited
to the following:
Art gallery.
Auto-related retail and service use located inside a building.
Automobile parking lot, parking garage, bus and transportation station.
Bakery.
Barber/beauty shop.
Bowling alley.
Business and professional office.
Camera and photographic supplies and studio.
Child daycare facility.
Convenience store.
Drug store.
Dry-cleaning.
Essential services.
Financial institution.
Fitness center and dance studio.
Florist shop.
Food trucks.
Funeral home.
Furniture store.
Grocery, fruit or vegetable store, but not including sales from moveable,
motorized vehicles.
Hardware and enclosed building materials sales.
Hospital with medical center.
Laundromat.
Licensed daycare, group family daycare, and residential facilities.
Locksmith.
Meat market, but not including slaughtering facilities.
Motel and hotel.
Newspaper publishing.
Restaurant/delicatessen.
Retail sales and service.
Shoe repair.
Tavern, off-sale liquor, private club and lodge.
Theater. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord. 976, 3-6-2023)
11-7A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Uses incidental to the principal uses such as off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas, storage buildings, fencing and signage. (1998 Code)
11-7A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Animal clinics or hospitals.
Bed and breakfast.
Car washes (drive through, mechanical and self-service).
Commercial communication towers.
Custom or limited manufacturing, compounding, assembly or treatment of articles
or merchandise from previously prepared materials.
Drive-ins and convenience food establishments.
Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
Open or outdoor service, sales and rental as a principal or accessory use
including motor vehicle and recreational equipment sales.
Public or semi-public recreational buildings or uses and neighborhood or
community centers; public and private educational institutions; religious
institutions; and governmental and public buildings and structures.
Service stations, auto repair and auto body repair.
Single- and multiple-family dwellings.
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted uses designated in this article
and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the general public's
health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019)
11-7A-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations: The maximum height of any building shall be forty
five feet (45').
   B.   Front Yard Regulations: There shall be a front yard setback having a
depth of not less than ten feet (10') except in a block where two (2) or more
structures have been built facing the same street, the setback for the
remaining lots in that block fronting on the same street shall be determined by
the average setback of existing buildings.
   C.   Side Yard Regulations: There shall be no minimum side yard requirements
except that no building shall be located within ten feet (10') of any side lot
line abutting a lot in any Residential District not buffered by a street or
alleyway.
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations: There shall be no minimum rear yard requirements
except that no building shall be located within ten feet (10') of any rear lot
line abutting a lot in any Residential District not buffered by a street or
alleyway.
   E.   Lot Area Restrictions: None.
   F.   Screening And Fencing: Screening or fencing of commercial uses must be
considered during a site plan review and may be required on side and rear yards
which face Residential Districts.
   G.   General Regulations: Requirements for signs, parking and other
regulations are set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this title. (1998 Code)
ARTICLE B. B-2 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-7B-1: Purpose
11-7B-2: Permitted Uses
11-7B-3: Accessory Uses
11-7B-4: Conditional Uses
11-7B-5: Performance Standards
11-7B-1: PURPOSE:
This district is established to accommodate the type of businesses that are
oriented to the traveling public and require highway access. A B-2 District
shall typically be located adjacent to existing or proposed County State aid
and State trunk highways or Municipal State aid streets. Multi-family
residential uses will be allowed to locate within the commercial establishment
area as a conditional use. (1998 Code)
11-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Auto sales and service.
Barber/beauty shops.
Business and professional offices.
Cannabis retail.
Child daycare facilities.
Commercial recreational and entertainment facilities when contained within a
building.
Convenience stores.
Essential services.
Farm implement sales and service.
Financial institutions.
Food trucks.
Grocery store.
Hotels and motels.
Laundromat/dry cleaning.
Nursery and landscape supplies.
Photography studios.
Recreation vehicles and equipment sales and service.
Restaurants.
Retail sales and service uses.
(Ord. 953, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord. 976, 3-6-2023; Ord. 995, 10-6-2025)
11-7B-3: ACCESSORY USES:
The same accessory uses as permitted in the B-1 District and including outdoor
garden centers and sidewalk cafes in conjunction with a freestanding
restaurant. (1998 Code)
11-7B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Adult entertainment.
Animal hospitals or clinics.
Bed and breakfasts.
Building material sales.
Car wash operation.
Commercial communication towers.
Light manufacturing.
Manufactured home sales.
Mini-storage.
Multiple dwellings when integrated into multiuse structures.
Off sale liquor.
Outdoor display, sales or storage conducted on an accessory use to a permitted
or conditional HB use.
Private clubs and lodges not operated for a profit.
Rental shop.
Seasonal produce stands.
Service stations, auto or truck repair and auto body repair.
Small engine and appliance repair.
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses designated
in this article and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the
general public's health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019)
11-7B-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations: The maximum height of all buildings shall not
exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'). (1998 Code)
   B.   Front Yard Regulations: There shall be a front yard of not less than
twenty five feet (25'), provided, however, on lots bordering heavily traveled
State highways, the front yard setback shall be one hundred ten feet (110'),
unless already served by a frontage road. For purposes of this section, heavily
traveled State highways shall mean:
      1.   State Highway 7 east from Benson Road to the City limits;
      2.   State Highway 29 north from County Road 41/Wolfe Avenue to the City
limits;
      3.   State Highway 59 northwest from Pioneer Drive/Highway 7 to the City
limits;
      4.   Highways 59/212 west from Gravel Road/Minnesota River Bridge to the
City limits;
      5.   Highway 212 southeast from Gravel Road to the City limits. (Ord.
835, 2-18-2003)
   C.   Side Yard Regulations: There shall be a minimum side yard of not less
than ten feet (10').
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations: There shall be a minimum rear yard of not less
than twenty feet (20').
   E.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet.
   F.   Screening And Fencing: Screening and fencing must be considered during
a site plan review and may be required along any lot line adjacent to a
Residential District.
   G.   General Standards: Other standards and regulations related to parking,
signs, etc., are set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this title.
   H.   Cannabis Retail:
      1.   Cannabis Retail businesses shall be located a minimum distance of
five hundred feet (500') from any school, church, daycare (home or center) or
park that is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic
build.
      2.   A Cannabis Retail business may not sell cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products between
nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) a.m. the following day.
(1998 Code; amd. Ord. 995, 10-6-2025)
ARTICLE C. MB MEDICAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-7C-1: Purpose
11-7C-2: Permitted Uses
11-7C-3: Accessory Uses
11-7C-4: Conditional Uses
11-7C-5: Performance Standards
11-7C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this district is to encourage the continuation of viable medical
institutions and businesses and encourage the expansion and creation of other
medically related offices, businesses and institutions. In addition, related
residential uses will be allowed. (Ord. 840, 9-22-2003)
11-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Institutional, public, commercial, and business establishments offering medical
services or products to the general public or the medical community. Such
establishments to include, but not be limited to, the following:
Child daycare facilities.
Essential services.
Food trucks.
Hospitals.
Medical business and medical professional offices.
Medical centers.
Medical clinics.
Medical retail sales or service.
Nursing homes.
Pharmacies.
Residential hospice facility.
Vocational rehabilitation, occupational, or physical therapy. (Ord. 840, 9-22-
2003; amd. Ord. 952, 4-1-2019; Ord. 953, 7-15-2019; Ord. 976, 3-6-2023)
11-7C-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Uses incidental to the principal uses such as off street parking, loading and
unloading areas, storage buildings, fencing and signage. (Ord. 840, 9-22-2003)
11-7C-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Custom or limited manufacturing, compounding, assembly, or treatment of
articles or merchandise, devices and pharmaceuticals of a medical nature.
Detoxification or psychiatric facilities.
Governmental and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the
health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
Heliport.
Multiple dwellings when integrated into medically related multiuse structures.
Public or semipublic recreational buildings, parks or uses; and governmental
and public buildings and structures.
Research laboratories.
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses designated
in this article and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the
general public's health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019)
11-7C-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations: The maximum height of any building shall be forty
five feet (45').
   B.   Front Yard Regulations: There shall be a front yard setback having a
depth of not less than ten feet (10').
   C.   Side Yard Regulations: There shall be no minimum side yard requirements
except that no building shall be located within ten feet (10') of any lot line
abutting a lot in any Residential District not buffered by a street or
alleyway.
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations: There shall be no minimum rear yard requirements
except that no building shall be located within ten feet (10') of any lot line
abutting a lot in any Residential District not buffered by a street or
alleyway.
   E.   Lot Area Restrictions: None.
   F.   Screening And Fencing: Screening or fencing must be considered during a
site plan review and may be required on side and rear yards which face
Residential Districts.
   G.   General Regulations: Requirements for signs, parking, and other
regulations are set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this title. (Ord. 840, 9-22-
2003)
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-8A-1: Purpose
11-8A-2: Permitted Uses
11-8A-3: Accessory Uses
11-8A-4: Conditional Uses
11-8A-5: Performance Standards
11-8A-1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide for light industrial and commercial uses
that may be suitably located in areas of relatively close proximity to
nonindustrial development. Industries that pose problems of air or noise
pollution, odor, vibration, smoke, liquid or solid wastes, heat, glare, dust or
other adverse influences will be restricted from this district. (1998 Code)
11-8A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Animal clinic.
Automobile repair and auto body shop.
Blacksmith, welding or other metal shop.
Bottling establishment.
Building material sales and storage.
Bus terminal and maintenance garage.
Child daycare facility.
Commercial communication tower.
Contractor shop.
Dry-cleaning establishment and laundry.
Electric light or power generating station, electrical service shop.
Engraving, printing and publishing.
Essential services.
Food trucks.
Governmental and public utility building and structure.
Greenhouse.
Laboratory.
Light manufacturing.
Machinery shop.
Medical, dental and optical laboratory.
Paint mixing.
Research laboratory.
Trade school.
Truck and freight terminal and maintenance garage.
Warehouse and mini-storage warehouse.
Wholesale business and office establishment. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord.
976, 3-6-2023)
11-8A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
All permitted accessory uses as allowed in the B-1 District.
Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction for the construction
period only. (1998 Code)
11-8A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Adult entertainment.
Automobile sales and service.
Car wash.
Commercial communication towers.
Farm implement sales and service.
Food processing manufacture.
Fuel tank and LP gas storage.
Manufactured home sales.
Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use.
Open or outdoor service, sales and rental as a principal or an accessory use
and including sales in or from motorized vehicles, trailers or wagons.
Outdoor animal clinic pens and animal kennels.
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses designated
in this article and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the
general public's health, safety or welfare. (1998 Code; amd. Ord. 953, 7-15-
2019)
11-8A-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations: The maximum height of all buildings shall not
exceed fifty feet (50').
   B.   Front Yard Setback:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum front yard of not less
than twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Adjoining Residential District: Any lot which abuts or adjoins a
Residential District shall require a front yard setback of not less than fifty
feet (50').
      3.   Double Frontage Lot: Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two (2) or more roads or highways there shall be a front yard setback on each
road or highway side of each corner lot. No building shall project beyond the
front yard line of either road.
      4.   Fence; Screen: Fencing and screening must be considered during a
site plan review and may be required along lot lines adjacent to Residential
Districts.
   C.   Side Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum side yard of not less
than ten feet (10').
      2.   Adjoining Residential District: Any lot which abuts or adjoins a
Residential District not bordered by a street or alleyway shall require a side
yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum rear yard of not less
than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Adjoining Residential District: Any lot which abuts or adjoins a
Residential District not bordered by a street or alleyway shall require a rear
yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
   E.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet.
   F.   General Regulations: Standards and regulations related to signs,
parking, etc., are set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this title.
   G.   Lot Width And Depth Regulations: There shall be a minimum lot width of
not less than one hundred feet (100') and a minimum lot depth of not less than
two hundred feet (200'). (1998 Code)
ARTICLE B. I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-8B-1: Purpose
11-8B-2: Permitted Uses
11-8B-3: Accessory Uses
11-8B-4: Conditional Uses
11-8B-5: Performance Standards
11-8B-1: PURPOSE:
This district is created to allow general industry to locate in designated
areas of the City. (1998 Code)
11-8B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District. (1998 Code)
11-8B-3: ACCESSORY USES:
All permitted accessory uses allowed in an I-1 Light Industrial District.
Open storage (secondary use) of any type. (1998 Code)
11-8B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Auto wrecking, junk yard, used auto parts (open storage) and similar uses.
Commercial communication towers.
Commercial stockyards and slaughtering of animals.
Concrete ready-mix plants and asphalt plants.
Extracting, processing and storage of sand, gravel, stone or other raw
materials.
Manufacturing and industrial uses not defined in I-1 District.
Outdoor storage of vehicles or materials or open sales lots.
Recycling centers and impound lots.
Refuse and garbage disposal.
Other uses determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to be
of the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses designated
in this article and found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the
general public's health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 953, 7-15-2019)
11-8B-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Height Regulations: No building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered to exceed fifty feet (50') in height.
   B.   Front Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum front yard of not less
than fifty feet (50').
      2.   Adjoining Residential District: Any lot which abuts or adjoins a
Residential District shall require a front yard of not less than fifty feet
(50').
      3.   Double Frontage Lot: Where a lot is located at the intersection of
two (2) or more roads or highways there shall be a front yard setback on each
road or highway side of each corner lot. No building shall project beyond the
front yard line of either road.
   C.   Side Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum side yard of not less
than fifty feet (50').
      2.   Adjoining Residential District: Any lot which abuts or adjoins a
Residential District shall require a side yard of not less than fifty feet
(50').
   D.   Rear Yard Regulations:
      1.   Minimum Required: There shall be a minimum rear yard of not less
than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Adjoining Residential District: Any lot which abuts or adjoins a
Residential District shall require a rear yard of not less than fifty feet
(50').
   E.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet.
   F.   Lot Width And Depth Regulations: There shall be a minimum lot width of
not less than one hundred feet (100') and a minimum lot depth of not less than
two hundred feet (200').
   G.   Screening And Fencing: The City will consider screening and fencing
during a site plan review and may require total screening or fencing of
industrial uses, to prevent visual blight, especially on side and rear yards
which face Residential or Agricultural Districts.
   H.   General Regulations: Other regulations related to signs, parking, etc.,
are set forth in chapters 13 and 14 of this title. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 9
CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-9-1: Purpose
11-9-2: Permitted Uses
11-9-3: Conditional Uses
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this District is to provide areas within the City for the
preservation of sensitive natural areas and the protection of wetlands and
wildlife habitat. The Conservancy District may be applied to either public or
private land where appropriate. Areas included in the Conservancy District are
unsuitable for residential, business, industrial, and most institutional
development due to flooding, high water table, wetland conditions, restrictive
soil conditions, steep slopes, significant and valuable vegetation and/or
wildlife habitat. (1998 Code)
11-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permanent open space
Public and private natural conservation and wildlife management areas. (1998
Code)
11-9-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Camping and picnic areas.
Nature centers and administrative buildings.
Other public uses.
Recreation and interpretive trail systems.
Utility uses such as dams, power plants, transmission lines, pipe lines,
drainage aids, bridges and culverts. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 10
MINNESOTA-CHIPPEWA RIVER OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-10-1: Policy
11-10-2: District Application
11-10-3: Interpretation
11-10-4: Uses
11-10-5: District Provisions
11-10-6: Notification And Certification Requirements
11-10-1: POLICY:
The City hereby establishes a district to provide for the preservation and
protection of the Minnesota River and the Chippewa River within the City, as
required by Minnesota Statutes sections 104.31 to 104.40 (as amended) and
Minnesota Statutes section 105.485 and Minnesota Regulations NR 78-84. (Ord.
610, 12-19-1983)
11-10-2: DISTRICT APPLICATION:
This District shall apply to the shoreland area of the designated Minnesota
scenic river land use district as identified in the Minnesota Regulations 6
MCAR 1.2600 and to the shoreland area of the Chippewa River. The shoreland area
is three hundred feet (300') landward of the ordinary high water on the
Chippewa River or the landward extent of the flood plain whichever is greater,
for the Minnesota River. The District shall be shown on the Zoning Map 1 .
(Ord. 610, 12-19-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 12 of this Title.
11-10-3: INTERPRETATION:
The Minnesota and Chippewa River Overlay Districts shall be applied to and
superimposed upon any underlying zoning district. Where provisions of any
statute or regulation impose greater restrictions than those required in these
Districts, such statute or regulation shall be controlling. Where definition of
any of the terms of these Districts are in dispute, the definitions of
Minnesota Regulations NR 82(d) and 78(d) shall be controlling. (Ord. 610, 12-
19-1983)
11-10-4: USES:
All permitted uses, conditional uses and prohibited uses of the underlying
district shall apply within the Minnesota and Chippewa River Overlay Districts.
(Ord. 610, 12-19-1983)
11-10-5: DISTRICT PROVISIONS:
The following provisions shall apply within the Minnesota and Chippewa River
Overlay Districts where they are more restrictive than those of the underlying
district.
   A.   Dimensional Requirements: The following chart sets forth the minimum
dimensional requirements and uses of the River Districts:
 Unsewered Areas Sewered Areas Riparian Lots Sewered Areas Nonriparian Lots
                        Unsewered Areas Sewered Areas Riparian Sewered Areas
                                        Lots                   Nonriparian Lots
1. Building setback
from ordinary high
water mark
a. Minnesota River      100'            75'                    N/A
b. Chippewa River       75'             50'                    N/A
2. On-site sewage
treatment system
setback from ordinary
high water mark
a. Minnesota River      75'             N/A                    N/A
b. Chippewa River       50'             N/A                    N/A
3. Maximum total area
of all impervious
surfaces on each lot
(includes all           30%             30%                    30%
structures, surfaced
roads, parking lots and
other surfaced area)
4. Impervious surface
setback from ordinary
high water mark         50'             50'                    50'
(applies to all
surfaced roads or
parking lots)
5. Vegetative cutting
a. Minnesota River
(follow rules NR 79[g])
(i) No clearcutting     100'            75'                    75'
from ordinary high
(ii) Selective cutting
permitted pursuant to
NR 79[g][1][bb]
b. Chippewa River
(follow rules NR 83[c]
[3])
(i) Clearcutting
prohibited except as
necessary for roads,
utility structures and
parking areas
(ii) Selective cutting
permitted pursuant to
NR 83[c][aa][iii]
6. Grading and filling
a. Minnesota River
(follow rules NR 79[h])
(i) Allowed only if
accessory to a
permitted or
conditional use
(ii) Activity must meet
performance criteria of
NR 79[h][3]
b. Chippewa River
(i) Permitted pursuant
to Rule NR 83[c][3][bb]
 
   B.   Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems: Individual sewage treatment
systems which do not meet the design or performance standards (does not apply
to those that are substandard in setback) of this Chapter shall be brought into
conformity or discontinued within five (5) years of the effective date hereof.
   C.   Alteration Of Beds Of Protected Waters:
      1.   Excavation of material from, or filling in the Minnesota or Chippewa
River or construction of any permanent structures or navigational obstructions
therein is prohibited, unless authorized by a permit from the Commissioner
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 105.42.
      2.   No State or local authority shall authorize the drainage or filling
in of wetlands within the Minnesota River Overlay District.
   D.   Utility Crossings: All utility transmission crossing of lands under the
jurisdiction of the local authority within the Minnesota River Land Use
District shall require a conditional use permit from the local authority. Such
crossings shall conform to the standards and criteria of NR 79(i)(2).
   E.   Road Crossings: In addition to such permits as may be required by
Minnesota Statutes section 105.42 for the crossing of public waters, a
conditional use permit from the City shall be required for any construction or
reconstruction of new public roads or existing roads within the Minnesota River
Land Use District, and shall conform to the standards and criteria of NR 79(j)
(2).
   F.   Land Suitability: No land within these Districts shall be subdivided
which is determined by the City (for the Chippewa River), or the Commissioner
of Natural Resources (for the Minnesota River), to be unsuitable by reason of
flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations
for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate
water supply or sewage treatment capabilities or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the
proposed subdivision or the community. Soil percolation rate tests and soil
borings shall be required on each proposed lot in any proposed subdivision
within the District, to establish the suitability of the land for development.
Such testing is required before any final plat may be approved, but may be
waived by the Zoning Administrator when adequate data is already available or
if the subdivided land is to be served by public sewer. (Ord. 610, 12-19-1983)
11-10-6: NOTIFICATION AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The Zoning Administrator shall send copies of all notices of hearings or
meetings and final decisions relating to plats, variances, ordinance amendments
and conditional use permits affecting any land within the Minnesota River and
Chippewa River Overlay Districts to the appropriate DNR office at least ten
(10) days prior to such hearings and within ten (10) days of the final action.
For the Minnesota River final decisions on variances, inconsistent plats and
ordinance amendments shall not become effective until certified by the DNR, in
accordance with Minnesota Regulations NR 81. (Ord. 610, 12-19-1983)
CHAPTER 11
MONTEVIDEO/CHIPPEWA COUNTY AIRPORT
SECTION:
11-11-1: Short Title
11-11-2: Purpose And Authority
11-11-3: Definitions
11-11-4: Airspace Obstruction Zoning
11-11-5: Land Use Safety Zoning
11-11-6: Airport Zoning Map
11-11-7: Nonconforming Uses; Regulations Not Retroactive
11-11-8: Permits
11-11-9: Variances
11-11-10: Hazard Marking And Lighting
11-11-11: Airport Zoning Administrator
11-11-12: Appeals
11-11-13: Judicial Review
11-11-14: Conflicts
11-11-15: Severability
11-11-16: Effective Date; Copies Filed With State And County
11-11-17: Penalty
11-11-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as MONTEVIDEO/CHIPPEWA COUNTY AIRPORT ZONING
ORDINANCE. Those sections of land affected by this Chapter are indicated in
Exhibit A on file in the office of the City Clerk. (1998 Code)
11-11-2: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The Montevideo/Chippewa County Joint Airport Zoning Board, created and
established by joint action of the Common Council of the City, the Board of
County Commissioners of Chippewa County and the Town Boards of Sparta and
Rosewood Townships pursuant to the provisions and authority of Minnesota
Statutes section 360.063, hereby finds and declares that;
   A.   Effect Of Hazards: An airport hazard endangers the lives and property
of users of the Montevideo/Chippewa County Airport, and property or occupants
of land in its vicinity, and also, if of the obstructive type, in effect
reduces the size of the area available for the landing, takeoff, and
maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the
Montevideo/Chippewa County Airport and the public investment therein.
   B.   Creation Of Hazards A Nuisance: The creation or establishment of an
airport hazard is a public nuisance and an injury to the region served by the
Montevideo/Chippewa County Airport.
   C.   Necessary Prohibition: For the protection of the public health, safety,
order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, and for the promotion of
the most appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or
establishment of airport hazards.
   D.   Prevention: The prevention of these airport hazards should be
accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police
power without compensation.
   E.   Public Funds To Abate: The prevention of the creation or establishment
of airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation,
marking or lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which
political subdivisions may raise and expend public funds. (1998 Code)
11-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT: The Montevideo/Chippewa County Airport located in section 5, township
117 north, range 40 west.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The established elevation of the highest point on the usable
landing area which elevation is established to be one thousand thirty four and
five-tenths feet (1034.5') above mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land which is hazardous to
persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence or
sleeping place of one or more persons.
ESTABLISHED RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD IN A BUILT-UP URBAN AREA (ERN-BUUA): An
area, which, if it existed on or before January 1, 1978 (for low density
structures and lots) and an area which, if it existed on or before July 2, 1979
(all other land uses), shall be considered a conforming use that shall not be
prohibited except as provided in subsection
11-11-5B5, Exemptions - Established Residential Neighborhoods. The following
criteria shall be applied and considered in determining what constitutes an
ERN-BUUA:
   A.   Location of the airport;
   B.   Nature of the terrain within Safety Zones A and B;
   C.   Existing land uses and character of the neighborhood around the
airport;
   D.   Population of the community;
   E.   That the average population density in all areas within one mile of any
point on a runway be equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per acre;
   F.   Population density near the airport compared with population density to
other areas of the community;
   G.   The age and the economic, political and social stability of the
neighborhood and the community as a whole;
   H.   The proximity of supporting school, commercial, religious,
transportation and other facilities and their degree of integration with
residential land uses;
   I.   Presence or absence of public utilities including, but not limited to
public sanitary sewer system, electric service and gas mains;
   J.   Whether or not the factors listed in subsections H and I above tend to
make the community surrounding the airport a self- sufficient unit;
   K.   Whether the areas within one mile of the perimeter of the airport
property would be considered primarily residential in character; and
   L.   Other material factors deemed relevant by the governmental unit in
distinguishing the area in question as established, residential, urban and
built-up.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth
in this Chapter and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean sea level
elevation unless otherwise specified.
LANDING AREA: The area of the airport used for the landing, taking off or
taxiing of aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, tree, natural growth, or use of
land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter or an amendment
hereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing or planned
straight-in instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities
with only horizontal guidance, and for which no precision approach facilities
are planned or indicated on an approved planning document.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock associations, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver,
assignee, administrator, executory, guardian, or other representative.
PLANNED: Refers only to those proposed future airport developments that are so
indicated on a planning document having the approval of the Federal Aviation
Administration, the Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics and
the City of Montevideo and County of Chippewa.
RUNWAY: Any existing or planned paved surface or turf covered area of the
airport which is specifically designated and use or planned to be used for the
landing and/or taking off of aircraft.
SLOPE: An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetical ratio of
horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.
STRUCTURE: An object constructed or installed by man, including, but without
limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines.
TRAVERSE WAYS: For the purpose of determining height limits as set forth in
this Chapter shall be increased in height by seventeen feet (17') for
interstate highways; fifteen feet (15') for all other public roadways; ten feet
(10') or the height of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse
the road, whichever is greater, for private roads; twenty three feet (23') for
railroads; and for waterways and all other traverse ways not previously
mentioned, an amount equal to the height of the highest mobile object that
would normally traverse it.
TREE: Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller-driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds
maximum gross weight and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on an approved planning document.
WATER SURFACES: Shall have the same meaning as land for the establishment of
protected zones. (1998 Code)
11-11-4: AIRSPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONING:
   A.   Airspace Zones: In order to carry out the purpose of this Chapter, as
set forth above, the following airspace zones are hereby established: Primary
Zone, Horizontal Zone, Conical Zone, Approach Zone, and Transitional Zone and
whose locations and dimensions are as follows:
      1.   Primary Zone:
         a.    All that land which lies directly under an imaginary primary
surface longitudinally centered on a runway and:
            (1)   Extending 200 feet beyond each end of Runways 14-32 and 06-
24.
            (2)   Coinciding with each end of Runway 03-21.
         b.   The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as
the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line. The width of the
primary surface is:
            (1)   500 feet for Runways 14-32 and 6-24.
            (2)   250 feet for Runway 03-21.
      2.   Horizontal Zone: All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary horizontal surface 150 feet above the established airport elevation,
or a height of 1184.5 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of which is
constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of
the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc is 6,000 feet for Runways 14-32,
06-24 and 03-21.
      3.   Conical Zone: All that land which lies directly under an imaginary
conical surface extending upward and outward from the periphery of the
horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000
feet as measured radially outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface.
      4.   Approach Zone:
         a.   All that land which lies directly under an imaginary approach
surface longitudinally centered on the extended center line at each end of a
runway. The inner edge of the approach surface is at the same width and
elevation as, and coincides with, the end of the primary surface. The approach
surface inclines upward and outward at a slope of:
            (1)   40:1 for Runways 14-32 and 06-24.
            (2)   20:1 for Runway 03-21.
         b.   The approach surface expands uniformly to a width of:
            (1)   3,500 feet for Runway 14-32 at a distance of 10,000 feet to
the periphery of the conical surface.
            (2)   3,500 feet for Runway 06-24 at a distance of 10,000 feet to
the periphery of the conical surface.
            (3)   2,250 feet for Runway 03-21 at a distance of 10,000 feet to
the periphery of the conical surface.
      5.   Transitional Zone: All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary surface extending upward and outward at right angles to the runway
center line and center line extended at a slope of 7 to 1 from the sides of the
primary surfaces and from the sides of the approach surfaces until they
intersect the horizontal surface or the conical surface.
   B.   Height Restrictions: Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, and
except as necessary and incidental to airport operations, no structure or tree
shall be constructed, altered, maintained or allowed to grow in an airspace
zone created in subsection A of this Section so as to project above any of the
imaginary airspace surfaces described in said subsection A hereof. Where an
area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive
limitations shall prevail.
   C.   Boundary Limitations: The airspace obstruction height zoning
restrictions set forth in this Section shall apply for a distance not to exceed
one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the perimeter of the airport boundary and
in that portion of an airport hazard area under the approach zone for a
distance not exceeding two (2) miles from the airport boundary. (1998 Code)
11-11-5: LAND USE SAFETY ZONING:
   A.   Safety Zone Boundaries: In order to carry out the purpose of this
Chapter, as set forth above and also, in order to restrict those uses which may
be hazardous to the operational safety of aircraft operating to and from the
Montevideo/Chippewa County Airport, and furthermore to limit population and
building density in the runway approach areas, thereby creating sufficient open
space so as to protect life and property in case of an accident, there are
hereby created and established the following land use safety zones:
      1.   Safety Zone A: All land in that portion of the approach zones of a
"runway", as defined in subsection
11-11-4A of this Chapter, which extends outward from the end of primary surface
a distance equal to two-thirds (2/3) of the planned length of the runway, which
distance shall be:
         a.   2,670 feet for Runway 14-32.
         b.   2,400 feet for Runway 06-24
         c.   1,667 feet for Runway 03-21.
      2.   Safety Zone B: All land in that portion of the approach zones of a
"runway" as defined in subsection
11-11-4A of this Chapter, which extends outward from Safety Zone A a distance
equal to one- third (1/3) of the planned length of the runway, which distance
shall be:
         a.   1,330 feet for Runway 14-32.
         b.   1,200 feet for Runway 06-24.
         c.   833 feet for Runway 3-21.
      3.   Safety Zone C: All that land which is enclosed within the perimeter
of the "horizontal zone", as defined in subsection
11-11-4A of this Chapter, and which is not included in Zone A or Zone B.
      4.   Exceptions - Established Residential Neighborhoods: The following
described lands are designated as established residential neighborhoods in
build-up areas, based upon the state of development of the areas on July 2,
1979. Land uses which were in existence in these areas on July 2, 1979 are
exempt from the use restrictions of subsection B2 and B3 below, and are subject
to the provisions of subsection B5 below.
         a.   Runway 03-21, 03 Approach.
Wolfe's First Subdivision
Sublot 9
Sublot 10
Sublot 11
Sublot 12
Sublot 13
Sublot 14
Sublot 15
Sublot 16
Sublot 17
Wolfe's Second Subdivision
Lot 8, Block 2
Lot 9, Block 2
Lot 10, Block 2
Lot 11, Block 2
Lot 8, Block 3
Lot 9, Block 3
Lot 10, Block 3
Lot 11, Block 3
Anderson's Northside Addition
Lot 6, Block 1
Lot 7, Block 1
Lot 8, Block 1
Lot 9, Block 1
Lot 10, Block 1
Lot 11, Block 1
Lot 12, Block 1
Water's First Addition
Lot 1, Block 1
Lot 2, Block 1
Lot 4, Block 1
Lot 5, Block 1
Lot 6, Block 1
Albrecht's First Addition
Lot 1, block 1
Lot 2, Block 1
Lot 3, Block 1
Lot 4, Block 1
Lot 5, Block 1
Odd Fellows Second Addition
Lot 18, Block 108
Odd Fellows Sublots
Sublot 6
Tome's Subdivision
Lot 1, Block 1
Lot 2, Block 1
Unplatted
N'ly 398' of E'ly 400'
of SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of
Section 6, T 117 N,
Range 40 W.
   B.   Use Restrictions:
      1.   General: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth
in subsection
11-11-4B of this Chapter, no use shall be made of any land in any of the
"safety zones" defined in subsection A of this Section which creates or causes
interference with the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the
airport or with radio or electronic communications between airport and
aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport,
impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the
landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
      2.   Zone A: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in
subsection
11-11-4B of this Chapter and to the general restrictions contained in
subsection B1 of this Section, areas designated as Zone A shall contain no
buildings, temporary structures, exposed transmission lines, or other similar
aboveground land use structural hazards, and shall be restricted to those uses
which will not create, attract, or bring together an assembly of persons
thereon. Permitted uses may include, but are not limited to, such uses as
agriculture (seasonal crops), horticulture, animal husbandry, raising of
livestock, wildlife habitat, light outdoor recreation (nonspectator),
cemeteries, and auto parking.
      3.   Zone B: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in
subsection
11-11-4B of this Chapter, and to the general restrictions contained in
subsection B1 of this Section, areas designated as Zone B shall be restricted
in use as follows:
         a.   Each use shall be on a site whose area shall not be less than
three (3) acres.
         b.   Each use shall not create, attract, or bring together a site
population that would exceed fifteen (15) times that of the site acreage.
         c.   Each site shall have no more than one building plot upon which
any number of structures may be erected.
         d.   A building plot shall be a single, uniform and noncontrived area,
whose shape is uncomplicated and whose area shall not exceed the following
minimum ratios with respect to the total site area:
Site Area At  But Less Than  Ratio Of Site Building Plot Area Max. Site
Least (Acres) (Acres)        Area To Bldg. (Sq. Ft.)          Population
                             Plot Area                        (15 persons/A)
Site Area At  But Less Than  Ratio Of Site Building Plot Area Max. Site
Least (Acres) (Acres)        Area To Bldg. (Sq. Ft.)          Population
                             Plot Area                        (15 persons/A)
3                            12:1          10,900             45
              4              12:1
4                            10:1          17,400             60
              6              10:1
6                            8:1           32,700             90
              10             8:1
10                           6:1           72,600             150
              20             6:1
20 and up                    4:1           218,000            300
 
         e.   The following uses are specifically prohibited in Zone B:
churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums, hotels and motels, trailer
courts, campgrounds, and other places of frequent public or semi-public
assembly.
      4.   Zone C: Zone C is subject only to height restrictions set forth in
subsection
11-11-4B of this Chapter, and to the general restrictions contained in
subsection B1 of this Section.
      5.   Exemptions - Established Residential Neighborhoods:
         a.   Land uses which existed as of July 2, 1979 in the established
residential neighborhoods set forth in subsection A4 above, and as shown on the
Zoning Map are subject to the height restrictions of subsection
11-11-4B of this Chapter and the general restrictions of subsection B1 of this
Section. Land uses which come into existence after July 2, 1979 are treated as
though they were not in a designated established residential neighborhood and
are subject to the Zone A or Zone B restrictions as the case may be.
         b.   Land uses in established residential neighborhoods which violate
any of the following restrictions are prohibited as safety hazards and must be
acquired, altered or removed at public expense. Those conditions are as
follows:
            (1)   The following land uses if they exist in Safety Zones A or B
and in an established residential neighborhood in a built-up urban area are
considered by the State Commissioner to constitute airport safety hazards so
severe, either to persons on the ground or to the air-traveling public, or
both, that they are hereby prohibited:
               (A)    Any structure which a person or persons customarily use
as a principal residence and which is located entirely inside Safety Zone A
within one thousand feet (1,000') of the end of the primary zone;
               (B)    Any structure which a person or persons customarily use
as a principal residence and which is located entirely within Safety Zones A or
B and which penetrates an imaginary approach surface as defined by subsection
11-11-4A of this Chapter;
               (C)    Any land use in Safety Zone A or B which violates any of
the following standards:
                  (i)    The land use must not create or cause interference
with the operation of radio or electronic facilities on the airport or with
radio or electronic communications between the airport and aircraft;
                  (ii)    The land use must not make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and other lights;
                  (iii)    The land use must not result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport or impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport;
               (D)    Any isolated residential building lot zoned for single-
family or two-family residences on which any structure, if built, would be
prohibited by subsection B5b(1)(A), above. An "isolated" residential building
lot is one located in an area in which the predominant land use is single-
family or two-family residential structures; and
               (E)    Any other land use which presents, in the opinion of the
State Commissioner, a material danger to the landing, taking off or maneuvering
of aircraft or to the safety of persons on the ground. In making such a
determination, the State Commissioner shall consider the following factors:
                  (i)    Possibility that the land use may contribute to or
cause a collision of two (2) or more aircraft or an aircraft and some other
object;
                  (ii)    Possibility that the land use may, in case of an
aircraft accident, cause an explosion, fire or the release of harmful or
noxious fumes, gases or substances;
                  (iii)    Tendency of the land use to increase the number of
persons that would be injured in case of an aircraft accident;
                  (iv)    Effect of the land use on availability of clear areas
for emergency landings; and
                  (v)    Flight patterns around the airport, the extent of use
of the runway in question, the type of aircraft using the airport, whether the
runways are lighted, whether the airport is controlled, and other similar
factors.
   C.   Boundary Limitations: The land use zoning restrictions set forth in
this Section shall apply for a distance not to exceed one mile beyond the
perimeter of the airport boundary and in that portion of an airport hazard area
under the approach zone for a distance not exceeding two (2) miles from the
airport boundary. (1998 Code)
11-11-6: AIRPORT ZONING MAP:
The several zones herein established are shown on the Montevideo/Chippewa
County Airport Zoning Map consisting of four (4) sheets, prepared by Thomas N.
Rodeberg, and dated April 15, 1983, on file in the office of the City Clerk and
made a part hereof, which Map, together with such amendments thereto as may
from time to time be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data,
zone boundaries, and other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby
adopted as part of this Chapter. (1998 Code)
11-11-7: NONCONFORMING USES; REGULATIONS NOT RETROACTIVE:
The regulations prescribed by this Chapter shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree
not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the Ordinance
codified in this Chapter, and Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code, or otherwise
interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended
use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior
to the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter and Title 2,
Chapter 3 of this Code, and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two
(2) years thereof. (1998 Code)
11-11-8: PERMITS:
   A.   Future Uses:
      1.   Except as specifically provided in subsection A2 and A3 hereunder,
no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure shall be
erected, altered or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a
permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted by the Airport Zoning
Administrator, hereinafter provided for. Each application for a permit shall
indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
particularity to permit it to conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If
such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.
      2.   However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than seventy five
feet (75') of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the
horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a
horizontal distance of four thousand two hundred feet (4,200') from each end of
the runway, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land
contour, or topographic features, would extend the height or land use limit
prescribed for the respective zone.
      3.   Nothing contained in this foregoing exception shall be construed as
permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration, or growth or
any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limitations established by
this Chapter as set forth in Section
11-11-4 of this Chapter and the land use limitations set forth in Section
11-11-5 of this Chapter.
   B.   Existing Uses: Before any existing use or structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or repaired, or rebuilt within any zone established
herein, a permit must be secured authorizing such replacement, change or
repair. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or
creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree
to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date
of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter or any amendments thereto, or than it
is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all
applications for such a permit shall be granted.
   C.   Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the Airport Zoning
Administrator determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been
abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn down, deteriorated, or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to
exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning
regulations. Whether application is made for a permit under this subsection or
not, the Airport Zoning Administrator may order the owner of the abandoned or
partially destroyed nonconforming structure, at such owner's own expense, to
lower, remove, reconstruct, or equip the same in the manner necessary to
conform to the provisions of this Chapter. In the event the owner of the
nonconforming structure shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order for
ten (10) days after receipt of written notice of such order, the Airport Zoning
Administrator may, by appropriate legal action, proceed to have the
nonconforming structure lowered, removed, reconstructed, or equipped and assess
the cost and expense thereof against the land on which the structure is or was
located. Unless such an assessment is paid within ninety (90) days from the
service of notice thereof on the owner of the land, the sum shall bear interest
at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date the cost and expense
is incurred until paid and shall be collected in the same manner as are general
taxes. (1998 Code)
11-11-9: VARIANCES:
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit
the growth of any tree, or use such person's property not in accordance with
the regulations prescribed in this Chapter, may apply to the Airport Board of
Adjustment, as provided for in Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code, for a variance
from such regulations. If a person submits an application for a variance by
certified mail to the members of the Board and the Board fails to grant or deny
the variance within four (4) months after the last member receives the
application, the variance shall be deemed to be granted by the Board. When the
variance is granted by reason of the failure of the Board to act on the
variance, the person receiving the variance shall notify the Board and the
State Commissioner of Transportation by certified mail that the variance has
been granted. The applicant shall include a copy of the original application
for the variance with this notice to the State Commissioner. The variance shall
be effective sixty (60) days after this notice is received by the Commissioner
subject to any action taken by the Commissioner pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
section 360.063, subdivision 6a. Such variances shall be allowed where it is
duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and relief granted would
not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in
accordance with the spirit of this Chapter, provided any variance so allowed
may be subject to any reasonable conditions that the Board of Adjustment or
State Commissioner may deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of this
Chapter. (1998 Code)
11-11-10: HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING:
   A.   Nonconforming Uses: The owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon
of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Airport Zoning
Administrator to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City and County.
   B.   Permits And Variances: Any permit or variance granted by the Airport
Zoning Administrator or Airport Board of Adjustment as the case may be, may, if
such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter and
be reasonable in the circumstances, so condition such permit or variance as to
require the owner of the structure or tree in question at such person's own
expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as
may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard. (1998
Code)
11-11-11: AIRPORT ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Montevideo City Manager to administer and
enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and
variances shall be made to the Airport Zoning Administrator upon a form
furnished by the Zoning Administrator. Permit applications shall be promptly
considered and granted or denied by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with
the regulations prescribed herein. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly
notify the applicant whether the permit application has been granted or denied.
   B.   Variance applications shall be forthwith transmitted by the Zoning
Administrator for action by the Airport Board of Adjustment provided for in
Title 2, Chapter 2 of this Code. (1998 Code)
11-11-12: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the
Airport Zoning Administrator made in the administration of this Chapter may
appeal to the Airport Board of Adjustment. Such appeals may also be made by any
governing body of a municipality, county, or airport zoning board, which is of
the opinion that a decision of the Zoning Administrator is an improper
application of this Chapter as it concerns such governing body or board.
   B.   All appeals hereunder must be commenced within thirty (30) days of the
Airport Zoning Administrator's decision, by filing with the Zoning
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Airport Board of Adjustment all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken. In addition, any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any
decisions of the Zoning Administrator made in the administration of this
Chapter who desires to appeal such decision shall submit an application for a
variance by certified mail to the members of the Board of Adjustment in the
manner set forth in Minnesota Statute section 360.068, subdivision 2.
   C.   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Airport Zoning Administrator certifies to the Airport
Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the Zoning
Administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of
Adjustment on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown.
   D.   The Airport Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear
in person or by agent or by attorney. The Board of Adjustment shall promptly
notify the appellant of its decision on any appeal.
   E.   The Airport Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions
of this Chapter and Title 2, Chapter 3, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part,
or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and
may make such order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be
appropriate under the circumstances, and to that end shall have all the powers
of the Airport Zoning Administrator. (1998 Code)
11-11-13: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Airport
Board of Adjustment, or any governing body of a municipality, county, or
airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that a decision of the Board of
Adjustment is illegal may present to the District Court of Chippewa County a
verified petition setting forth that the decision or action is illegal, in
whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the Court within thirty (30) days after the decision is
filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment. The petitioner must exhaust the
remedies provided in this Chapter before availing himself of the right to
petition the Court as provided by this Section. (1998 Code)
11-11-14: CONFLICTS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this Chapter and Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code and any other
regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect
to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the
more stringent limitation or regulation shall govern and prevail. (1998 Code)
11-11-15: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   In any case in which the provisions of this Chapter and Title 2,
Chapter 3 of this Code, although generally reasonable, are held by a court to
interfere with the use or enjoyment of a particular structure or parcel of land
to such an extent, or to be so onerous in their application to such a structure
or parcel of land, as to constitute a taking or deprivation of that property in
violation of the Constitution of this State or the Constitution of the United
States, such holding shall not affect the application of this Chapter and Title
2 Chapter 3 of this Code as to other structures and parcels of land, and to
this end the provisions of this Chapter and Title 2 Chapter 3 of this Code are
declared to be severable.
   B.   Should any section or provision of this Chapter and Title 2 Chapter 3
of this Code be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of this Chapter and Title 2, Chapter 3
of this Code as a whole or any part thereof other than the parts so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid. (1998 Code)
11-11-16: EFFECTIVE DATE; COPIES FILED WITH STATE AND COUNTY:
This Chapter and Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code shall take effect on April 2,
1984. Copies thereof shall be filed with the Commissioner of Transportation,
Division of Aeronautics, State of Minnesota and the County Recorder, Chippewa
County, Minnesota. (1998 Code)
11-11-17: PENALTY:
Every person who shall construct, establish, substantially change, alter or
repair any existing structure or use, or permit the growth of any tree without
having complied with the provision of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter
and Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code, or who, having been granted a permit or
variance under the provisions of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter and
Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code, shall construct, establish, substantially
change or substantially alter or repair any existing growth or structure, or
permit the growth of any tree, except as permitted by such permit or variance,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. The Airport Zoning Administrator may enforce all provisions
of this Chapter through such proceedings for injunctive relief and other relief
as may be proper under the laws of Minnesota Statute section 360.073 and other
applicable law. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 12
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-12-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact And Purpose
11-12-2: General Provisions; Definitions
11-12-3: Establishment Of Zoning Districts
11-12-4: Floodway District (FW)
11-12-5: Flood Fringe District (FF)
11-12-6: Subdivisions
11-12-7: Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads And Bridges
11-12-8: Manufactured Homes And Manufactured Home Parks And Placement Of
Trailers And Travel Vehicles
11-12-9: Administration
11-12-10: Nonconforming Uses
11-12-11: Penalties For Violation
11-12-12: Amendments
11-12-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the State of Minnesota has,
in Minnesota Statutes chapter 103F and section 462.357 delegated the
responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council does ordain as follows.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   Periodic Inundation: The flood hazard areas of Montevideo, are
subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   Methods Used To Analyze Flood Hazards: This Chapter is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize those losses
described in subsection B1 of this Section by provisions contained herein.
(Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which Chapter Applies: This Chapter shall apply to all lands
within the jurisdiction of Montevideo shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or
the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway
or Flood Fringe Districts. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
   B.   Adoption Of Official Zoning Map And Attached Materials: The City of
Montevideo Zoning Map, together with all materials attached thereto is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. The attached
material shall include the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Montevideo
prepared by the U.S. Geological Survey of the United States Department of the
Interior dated November 1971; and the Flooded Area Map of Montevideo, Minnesota
prepared by the U.S. Geological Survey dated 1971; and the City of Montevideo,
Minnesota Flood Hazard Boundary Map and Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by
the Department of Housing and Urban Development as issued under a revised date
of July 19, 1979; and the Flood Frequency Profiles of the Chippewa River and
the Minnesota River at Montevideo, Minnesota, prepared by George H. Carlson of
the U.S. Geological Survey and dated 1971. The Official Zoning Map shall be on
file in the City Hall. (Ord. 664, 3-26-1990)
   C.   Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot (1') above the elevation
of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
   D.   Interpretation:
      1.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
      2.   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by
scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal
appeal of the decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Zoning
Adjustment shall make the necessary interpretation, subject to the approval and
confirmation of the Council. All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional 100-year flood profile and other available technical data. Persons
contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their case to the Board and to submit technical
evidence.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this Chapter
to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this Chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: This Chapter does not imply that
areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   G.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
   H.   Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used
in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as
they have in common usage and so as to give this Chapter its most reasonable
application.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASEMENT: Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four (4) sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation, below ground level.
   CONDITIONAL USE: A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that: 1) certain
conditions as detailed in the Zoning Ordinance exist, and 2) the structure and/
or land use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT: A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FLOOD: A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY: The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equalled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Montevideo.
   FLOOD PLAIN: The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOODPROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY: The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood plain which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE: All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge
crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
   REGIONAL FLOOD: A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood"
used in the Flood Insurance Study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot (1') above the elevation
of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel
trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in subsection
11-12-8C1 of this Chapter and other similar items.
   VARIANCE: A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this Chapter to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only
as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship,
practical difficulty or unique circumstances as defined and elaborated upon in
the City's respective planning and zoning ordinances. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Districts:
      1.   Floodway District: The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Study Map and the Flooded Area
Map adopted in subsection
11-12-2B of this Chapter.
      2.   Flood Fringe District: The Flood Fringe District shall include those
areas designated as being within the flood plain but located outside of the
floodway as designated on the Flood Insurance Study Map, the Flooded Area Map
and the Flood Hazard Boundary Map adopted in subsection
11-12-2B of this Chapter. (Ord. 664, 3-26-1990)
   B.   Compliance: No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Chapter. Within the
Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or
conditional uses in Sections
11-12-4,
11-12-5 and
11-12-6 of this Chapter that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In
addition, a caution is provided here that:
      1.   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this Chapter and specifically Section
11-12-8 of this Chapter;
      2.   Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after
damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of
structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this Chapter and
specifically Section
11-12-10; and
      3.   As-built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be
certified by ground surveys and floodproofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in
the general provisions of this Chapter and specifically as stated in Section
11-12-9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-4: FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW):
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
      2.   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and airport
landing strips.
      3.   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails.
      4.   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
   B.   Standards For Floodway Permitted Uses:
      1.   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
      2.   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
      3.   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      1.   Structures accessory to the uses listed in subsection
11-12-4A above and the uses listed in subsection C2 through C8 of this
subsection below.
      2.   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel and other materials.
      3.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control
structures.
      4.   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines.
      5.   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials.
      6.   Placement of fill.
      7.   Travel trailers and travel vehicles either on individual lots of
record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of subsection
11-12-8C of this Chapter.
      8.   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency
flood event.
   D.   Standards For Floodway Conditional Uses:
      1.   All Uses: No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including
fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause
any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
      2.   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and
standards contained in subsection
11-12-9D of this Chapter.
      3.   The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district if one exists.
      4.   Fill:
         a.   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         b.   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         c.   As an alternative, and consistent with subsection D4b immediately
above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow
temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused
an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the
governing body has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of
the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.
The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the
office of the County Recorder.
      5.   Accessory Structures:
         a.   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
         b.   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of flood waters.
            (1)   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow, and,
            (2)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
         c.   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification
in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a
minimal investment, does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size, and
for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of
vehicles and limited storage. All floodproofed accessory structures must meet
the following additional standards, as appropriate:
            (1)   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and
            (2)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
floodproofed.
      6.   Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
         a.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         b.   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the governing body. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
      7.   Structural works for flood control that will change the course,
current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be
subject to the provisions of State law. Community-wide structural works for
flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory flood plain shall
not be allowed in the floodway. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989; amd. 1998 Code)
      8.   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not
cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis
must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. (Ord.
660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-5: FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF):
   A.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
If no preexisting, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential
or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted
use in the flood fringe, provided such use does not constitute a public
nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for flood fringe
permitted uses listed in subsection B of this Section and the standards for all
flood fringe permitted and conditional uses listed in subsection E of this
Section.
   B.   Standards For Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
      1.   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one foot (1') below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least
fifteen feet (15') beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
      2.   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed five hundred (500)
square feet for the outside dimension at ground level may be internally
floodproofed in accordance with subsection
11-12-4D5c of this Chapter.
      3.   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of
one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowed only as conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended to
elevate a structure in accordance with subsection B1 of this Section.
      4.   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      5.   The provisions of subsection E of this Section shall apply.
   C.   Conditional Uses: Any structure that is not elevated on fill or
floodproofed in accordance with subsection B1 and B2 of this Section or any use
of land that does not comply with the standards in subsection B3 and B4 of this
Section shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application for a
conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation
procedures specified in subsections D and E of this Section and subsection
11-12-9D of this Chapter.
   D.   Standards For Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
      1.   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts,
pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl
spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: a)
the enclosed area is above grade on at least one side of the structure; b) is
designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials;
and c) is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The
above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following
additional standards:
         a.   Design And Certification: The structure's design and as-built
condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building
Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
         b.   Specific Standards For Above-Grade, Enclosed Areas: Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be
designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
            (1)   The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. When openings are placed
in a structure's walls to provide for entry of flood waters to equalize
pressures, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of flood waters.
            (2)   That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building
Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or
storage.
      2.   "Basements" as defined by subsection
11-12-2H of this Chapter, shall be subject to the following:
         a.   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
         b.   Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with subsection D3 below of this Section.
      3.   All areas of nonresidential structures including basements to be
placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing classifications in the State
Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-
2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall
require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not
be permitted.
      4.   When at any one time more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of
fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as
on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads,
dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/
sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing
a State-approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a State-
approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used
to stabilize the fill on-site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or
regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the governing
body. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the
material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
      5.   Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
         a.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         b.   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      6.   The provisions of subsection
11-12-5E of this Chapter shall also apply. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
   E.   Standards For All Flood Fringe Uses:
      1.   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above
an elevation not more than two feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of Zoning
Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist. (Ord. 660, 9-
18-1989; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Commercial Uses: Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks
and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth greater than two feet (2') or be subject to flood
velocities greater than four feet (4') per second upon occurrence of the
regional flood.
      3.   Manufacturing and Industrial Uses: Measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
subsection E2 above. In considering permit applications, due consideration
shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be
located in flood plain areas.
      4.   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      5.   Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been
specified on the Official Zoning Map.
      6.   Standards for travel trailers and travel vehicles are contained in
subsection
11-12-8C of this Chapter.
      7.   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable State or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-6: SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Review Criteria: No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for
the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. All lots within the flood plain districts shall contain a building
site at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions
shall have water and sewer treatment facilities that comply with the provisions
of this Chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the
individual building sites no lower than two feet (2') below the regulatory
flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the
floodway and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation
and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
   B.   Removal Of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation: The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special
flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill
above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific
fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or
multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-7: PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES:
   A.   Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas,
electrical, sewer and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain
shall be floodproofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to
above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   B.   Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads and bridges to
be located within the flood plain shall comply with Sections
11-12-4 and
11-12-5 of this Chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
   C.   On-Site Sewage Treatment And Water Supply Systems: Where public
utilities are not provided: 1) on-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2) new
or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the State's current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this subsection.
(Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-8: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND PLACEMENT OF TRAVEL
TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES:
   A.   Compliance: New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing
mobile manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by Section
11-12-6 of this Chapter.
   B.   New Or Replacement Homes: The placement of new or replacement
manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of
record that are located in flood plain districts will be treated as a new
structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance with Section
11-12-5 of this Chapter. If vehicular road access for preexisting manufactured
home parks is not provided in accordance with subsection
11-12-5E1 of this Chapter, then replacement manufactured homes will not be
allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the governing body.
      1.   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable State or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
   C.   Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption
criteria specified in subsection C1 below shall be subject to the provisions of
this Chapter and as specifically spelled out in subsections C3 and C4 below.
      1.   Exemption: Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this Chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in
subsection C2 below and further they meet the following criteria:
         a.   Have current licenses required for highway use.
         b.   Are "highway ready", meaning on wheels or the internal jacking
system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel trailer/travel
vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
         c.   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be
permissible in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district.
      2.   Areas Exempted For Placement Of Travel/Recreational Vehicles:
         a.   Individual lots or parcels of record.
         b.   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
         c.   Existing condominium-type associations. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
      3.   Travel trailers and travel vehicles exempted in subsection C1 above
lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a structural addition to the travel trailer/
travel vehicle or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building.
The travel trailer/travel vehicle and all additions and accessory structures
will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/
floodproofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in
Sections
11-12-4 and
11-12-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 664, 3-26-1990)
      4.   New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds
and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling
sites shall be subject to the following:
         a.   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be
allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said trailer or
vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood
protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in
accordance with subsection
11-12-5E1 of this Chapter. Any fill placed in a floodway for the purpose of
elevating a travel trailer shall be subject to the requirements of Section
11-12-4 of this Chapter.
         b.   All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not
meeting the criteria of subsection C4a above may, as an alternative, be allowed
as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and the
provisions of subsection
11-12-9D of this Chapter. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the
safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan
shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual and
shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
travel trailers or other recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed
so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance
with subsection
11-12-7C of this Chapter. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-9: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Zoning Administrator: A Zoning Administrator designated by the
governing body shall administer and enforce this Chapter. If the Zoning
Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such violation in
accordance with the procedures stated in Section
11-12-11 of this Chapter.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof;
prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land; prior to
the change or extension of nonconforming use; and prior to the placement of
fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within
the flood plain.
      2.   Application For Permit: Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
      3.   State And Federal Permits: Prior to granting a permit or processing
an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary
State and Federal permits.
      4.   Certificate Of Zoning Compliance For A New, Altered Or Nonconforming
Use: It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure in a floodway or flood
fringe district until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued
by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land
conforms to the requirements of this Chapter.
      5.   Construction And Use To Be As Provided On Applications, Plans,
Permits, Variances And Certificates Of Zoning Compliance: Permits, conditional
use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and
punishable as provided by Section
11-12-11 of this Chapter.
      6.   Certification: The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Floodproofing
measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered
architect.
      7.   Record Of First Flood Elevation: The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
flood plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures and alterations or additions to structures are
floodproofed.
   C.   Board Of Zoning Adjustment: The Board of Zoning Adjustment for the City
shall perform the duties prescribed in this Chapter.
      1.   Rules; Powers: The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall adopt rules for
the conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such
boards by State law.
      2.   Administrative Review: The Board shall, subject to the approval and
confirmation of the Council, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter.
      3.   Variances: The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases,
subject to the approval and confirmation of the Council, such relief or
variances from the terms of this Chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical
difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as
provided for in the City's zoning ordinances. In the recommending of such
variance, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the
specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in the
City's zoning ordinances which justified the granting of the variance. No
variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in
that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory
flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower
than those required by State law.
      4.   Hearings: Upon filing with the Board of Zoning Adjustment of an
appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a
variance, the Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board shall submit
by mail to the State Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the
application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing.
      5.   Decisions: The Board shall arrive at a decision on such appeal or
variance within a reasonable period of time. In passing upon an appeal, the
Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the
findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In recommending a variance
the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those
specified in subsection D6 of this Section which are in conformity with the
purposes of this Chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this Chapter punishable under Section
11-12-11. If the appeal is denied, no further action shall be taken upon it; if
the appeal is granted, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall report its
recommendations to the Council within fifteen (15) days. A copy of all
decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the State
Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
      6.   Appeals: Appeals from any decision of the Board may be made, and as
specified in Minnesota statutes.
      7.   Flood Insurance Notice And Record Keeping: The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) the issuance of a variance
to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and 2) such
construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life
and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in
its annual or biannual report submitted to the Administrator of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
   D.   Conditional Uses: The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall, subject to the
approval and confirmation of the Council, hear and decide applications for
conditional uses permissible under this Chapter. Applications shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall forward the application to the
Board for consideration.
      1.   Hearings: Upon filing with the Board an application for a
conditional use permit, the Board shall submit by mail to the State
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
      2.   Decisions: The Board shall arrive at a decision on a conditional use
within a reasonable period of time. In recommending a conditional use permit,
the Board shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those specified in subsection D6 of this Section which are in conformity with
the purposes of this Chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards,
when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, punishable under Section
11-12-11. If the application is denied, no further action shall be taken upon
it; if the application is granted, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall report
its recommendations to the Council within fifteen (15) days. A copy of all
decisions granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the
State Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
      3.   Procedure: Procedures to be followed by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment in passing on conditional use permit applications within all flood
plain districts.
         a.   Require the applicant to furnish such of the following
information and additional information as deemed necessary by the Board for
determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use:
            (1)   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the
above to the location of the stream channel.
            (2)   Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
         b.   Transmit one copy of the information described in subsection D1a
above to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance, where necessary in evaluating the proposed project in relation to
flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the
adequacy of the plans for protection and other technical matters.
         c.   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the Board shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site and
evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.
      4.   Basis For Decision By Board: In passing upon conditional use
applications, the Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this Chapter, and:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
         b.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other
hydraulic structures.
         c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
         d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community.
         f.   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
         g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
         h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
         i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and flood plain management program for the area.
         j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
         l.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
Chapter.
      5.   Time For Acting On Application: The Board shall act on an
application in the manner described above within thirty (30) days from
receiving the application, except that where additional information is required
pursuant to D4 of this Section the Board shall render a written decision within
fifteen (15) days from the receipt of such additional information.
      6.   Conditions Attached To Conditional Use Permits: Upon consideration
of the factors listed above and the purpose of this Chapter, the Board shall
attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Chapter. Such conditions may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
         a.   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
         b.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation.
         c.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed
restrictions.
         d.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees and other protective measures.
         e.   Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code and this Chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area.
      7.   Approval And Confirmation By Council: No permit or variance shall be
issued under the provisions of this Chapter unless and until a decision of the
Board of Zoning Adjustment, as aforesaid, approving the same, is approved and
confirmed by the Council. In reporting its decision to the Council, the Board
of Zoning Adjustment shall report its findings with respect thereto and all
facts in connection therewith, and shall specifically and fully set forth any
adjustment or variance granted and the conditions designated. Upon receipt of
such report, the Council either shall approve and confirm the decision, with or
without changes, whereupon the permit or variance as applied for may issue; or
shall refuse to approve and confirm the decision.
      8.   Fees: All applications for a conditional use permit or a variance
shall be accompanied by a fee. The fee shall be the fee determined by the City
Council from time to time for a special use permit or a variance from the this
Title. (Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
11-12-10: NONCONFORMING USES:
A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this Chapter but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity.
   B.   Any alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection
elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing
techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in
the State Building Code, except as further restricted in subsection C below.
(Ord. 660, 9-18-1989)
   C.   The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the current estimated market value of the structure unless the
conditions of this Section are satisfied. The cost of all structural
alterations and additions constructed since the adoption of the community's
initial flood plain controls must be calculated into today's current cost which
will include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost
placed on all manpower or labor. If the current cost of all previous and
proposed alterations and additions exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current
market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of
Section
11-12-4 or
11-12-5 of this Chapter for new structures depending upon whether the structure
is in the floodway or flood fringe, respectively.
   D.   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this Chapter.
The Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period of twelve (12)
months.
   E.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including floods, to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its current
estimated market value at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. The
applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in Sections
11-12-4 or
11-12-5 of this Chapter will apply depending upon whether the use or structure
is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. (Ord. 660, 9-18-
1989; amd. 1998 Code)
11-12-11: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
   B.   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions
may include but are not limited to:
      1.   In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The City shall act in good faith to enforce
these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent
possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
      2.   When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to
the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with
the community's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this Chapter and all other official controls and the nature and
extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or
use is under construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order
the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either:
         a.   Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be
made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into
compliance with the official controls; or
         b.   Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
      4.   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this Chapter and shall
be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse
of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 660,
9-18-1989)
11-12-12: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be
removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is
in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the
regional flood and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the State Commissioner of Natural
Resources if said Commissioner determines that, through other measures, lands
are adequately protected for the intended use.
   B.   All amendments to this Chapter, including amendments to the Official
Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by the State Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption.
   C.   Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) technical conditions and criteria and must receive
prior FEMA approval before adoption. The State Commissioner of Natural
Resources must be given ten (10) days' written notice of all hearings to
consider an amendment to this Chapter and said notice shall include a draft of
the Chapter amendment or technical study under consideration. (Ord. 660, 9-18-
1989)
CHAPTER 13
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-13-1: Purpose
11-13-2: Solar Energy And Solar Structures
11-13-3: Property Standards
11-13-4: Exterior Storage
11-13-5: Exterior Lighting
11-13-6: Business And Industrial Design, Screening And Landscaping
11-13-7: Fencing And Screening; Residential, Business And Industrial
11-13-8: Yard Encroachments
11-13-9: Yard Requirements
11-13-10: Accessory Building And Structures
11-13-11: Dwelling Units Prohibited
11-13-12: Relocating Structures
11-13-13: Traffic Control
11-13-14: Access Drives And Accesses
11-13-15: Private Water Supply And Sewer Treatment Systems
11-13-16: Manufactured Homes
11-13-17: Manufactured Home Park
11-13-18: Site Plan Review
11-13-19: Apartments, Townhouses And Other Multi-Family Use
11-13-20: Parking
11-13-21: Off-Street Loading And Unloading Areas
11-13-22: Agricultural Operations
11-13-23: Private Stables
11-13-24: Home Occupations
11-13-25: Motor Vehicle Repair, Bodywork And Auto Service Standards
11-13-26: Mining And Gravel Extraction
11-13-27: Land Reclamation
11-13-28: Bed And Breakfast Establishments
11-13-29: Telephone And Radio Communication Towers
11-13-30: Storage Pods
11-13-31: Dumpsters
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The performance standards established in this Chapter are designed to
encourage a high standard of development by providing assurance that
neighboring land uses will be compatible. The performance standards are
designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause blight or are
detrimental to the environment. All future development in all districts shall
be required to meet these standards and the standards shall also apply to
existing development where so stated.
   B.   These standards apply to all districts, unless otherwise noted. Before
any zoning permit is approved, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether
the proposed use will conform to the performance standards. The developer or
landowners shall supply data necessary to demonstrate such conformance. Such
data may include a description of equipment to be used, hours of operation,
method of refuse disposal, and type and location of exterior storage. (1998
Code)
11-13-2: SOLAR ENERGY AND SOLAR STRUCTURES:
   A.   Permitted: Solar energy systems and solar structures shall be a
permitted use in all districts provided the system is in compliance with
minimum lot requirements and setbacks.
   B.   Exemptions: Solar energy systems and solar structures may be exempted
from setback, height, and lot coverage restrictions in any district by
variance. (1998 Code)
11-13-3: PROPERTY STANDARDS:
The owner of any premises shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Sanitation: All exterior property areas shall be maintained free from
any accumulation of garbage, animal feces or refuse.
   B.   Grading And Drainage: All premises shall be graded and maintained so as
to minimize the accumulation of water on said premises, except when required by
the City for water retention.
   C.   Ground Cover: All sites shall be maintained in a condition to control
erosions, dust and mud by suitable landscaping with grass, trees, shrubs, or
other planted ground cover or by paving with asphalt, or concrete or by other
suitable means as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   D.   Insect And Rodent Infestation: It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to exterminate any infestation of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests
in all exterior areas and accessory structures on the premises.
   E.   Condition Of Structures: All structures including, but not limited to,
primary structures, detached garages, sheds, and fences shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay-resistant woods shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint
or by other protective covering or treatment.
   F.   Nuisance Characteristics: No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air
pollution, liquid or solid wastes, heat, glare, dust or other such adverse
influences shall be permitted in any district that will in any way have an
objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property. All wastes in all
districts shall be disposed of in a manner that is not dangerous to public
health and safety nor will damage public waste transmission or disposal
facilities. (1998 Code)
11-13-4: EXTERIOR STORAGE:
   A.   Waste, Refuse And Garbage: All waste, refuse and garbage must be kept
in a building or properly contained in a closed container.
   B.   Nonoperating Vehicles, Equipment: All nonoperating vehicles or
equipment must be kept within a fully enclosed building.
   C.   Front Yard: No exterior storage is allowed in the front yard, except
parking of licensed and operable vehicles on a driveway.
   D.   Accumulation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to accumulate and store
building materials, lumber, boxes, cartons, or other containers, machinery,
scrap metal, junk, raw material, fabricated goods and other items in such
manner as to constitute a nuisance or rodent harborage.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles, Equipment: All recreation vehicles, equipment,
and motor vehicles parked or stored outside must be in a safe, operable
condition and exhibit current license or registration plates or tags if the
vehicle is one for which a license or registration plate is required by law for
its operation. (1998 Code)
11-13-5: EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
   A.   Off-Street Parking; Signs: In all districts, any lighting used to
illuminate an off-street parking area or sign shall be arranged so as to
deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public
streets. Direct glare from floodlights or similar sources, shall not be
directed into any adjoining property or public streets.
   B.   On-Site Lighting: On-site lighting shall be provided as is necessary
for security, safety and traffic circulation. (1998 Code)
11-13-6: BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DESIGN, SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of this Section to promote high standards of
design and construction for the business and industrial uses in the City. These
standards are set forth in order to enhance the visual appearance of the
business and industrial areas within the City, to increase the taxable value of
the City, and to promote the community public health, safety, and welfare. The
provisions of subsections B through H of this Section shall apply to all
business and industrial zones.
   B.   Exterior Building Materials: The exterior surface of all buildings in
the business and industrial zones shall be one of, or a combination of, the
following materials:
      1.   Permitted Materials:
         a.   Face brick, stone, glass, concrete block or similar material;
         b.   Architecturally treated concrete;
         c.   Stucco or other cement coating.
         d.   Textured or architecturally treated concrete masonry units, or
panels, if either sealed or painted in a manner guaranteed by the manufacturer
against blistering, peeling, cracking, flaking, checking or chipping for a
minimum of five (5) years.
         e.   Metal panels with interlocking, concealed, or tongue-and- groove
seams and approved fasteners, if the exterior surface finish is warranted by
the manufacturer for twenty (20) years against blistering, peeling, cracking,
flaking, checking or chipping.
         f.   Exterior plastic veneer constructed of approved plastic
materials.
         g.   Wood products if sealed or treated in a manner guaranteed for a
minimum of five (5) years.
   C.   Accessory Structures: Garages and accessory structures shall be of a
similar material, quality and appearance as the principal structure. The height
of the accessory structure shall not exceed that of the principal structure.
Screen walls and exposed areas of retaining walls shall be constructed of a
permanent material and finish and shall be of a compatible color and material
as the principal structure.
   D.   Rooftop Utilities: The ground level view of all rooftop equipment,
including rooftop structures related to elevators and other mechanical
utilities shall be completely screened from contiguous properties and adjacent
streets with materials of similar type, quality, and appearance as that of the
principal structure. If it is either physically impossible or impracticable to
completely screen these utilities, the Planning Commission may, during site
plan review, recommend alternative solutions that render them aesthetically
compatible with the principal structure.
   E.   Loading And Service Areas/Outdoor Storage: The perimeter views of all
external loading and service areas and any areas of outdoor storage must be
screened from residential uses and adjacent public streets and the public front
and office sides of all business and industrial uses, except at access points.
Such screening can be accomplished through the placement of the building on the
lot or the placement of a building on an adjacent lot. Screening can also be
accomplished through the use of berming, landscaping (80 percent opaque at the
time of maturity) or existing vegetation. If screen walls are proposed, then
the materials used shall be of similar type, quality, and appearance as those
of the principal structure. If it is either physically impossible or
impracticable to completely screen these areas, the Planning Commission may,
during site plan review, recommend alternative solutions that render them
aesthetically compatible with the principal structure.
   F.   Trash Handling: All trash and trash handling equipment shall be stored
within the principal structure or within an attached structure accessible from
within the principal structure or within an accessory structure totally
screened from eye level view from public streets and adjacent residential
properties. Such structures shall be constructed of the same building material
as the principal structure. If it is either physically impossible or
impracticable to completely screen these structures, the Planning Commission
may, during site plan review, recommend alternative solutions that render them
aesthetically compatible with the principal structure.
   G.   Landscaping:
      1.   General Provisions: All areas of land other than that occupied by
building and/or parking areas and driveways shall be landscaped with grass and/
or mulch and/or rock material and/or ground covers in planting beds. In
addition, the following will be permitted:
         a.   Undisturbed areas containing existing viable natural vegetation
that can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant material.
         b.   Areas designated as open space or future expansion areas properly
planted and maintained with approved cover crop.
      2.   Slopes And Berms: Final slope grades steeper than the ratio of three
to one (3:1) will not be permitted without special landscaping treatments such
as terracing, retaining walls, or ground cover. Berming used to provide
screening of parking lots shall be three feet (3') in height and shall have a
maximum slope ratio of three to one (3:1).
      3.   Parking Area Requirements:
         a.   Design: Design of parking areas of thirty (30) or more spaces
requires landscaping five percent (5%) of the parking lot surface area which
may be in the form of landscape islands. The landscaped area must adhere to the
following plant size requirements:
            (1)   Deciduous trees shall be a least two and one-half inches (21/
2") in diameter.
            (2)   Ornamental trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half
inches (11/2") in diameter.
            (3)   Evergreen trees must have a minimum height of three feet
(3').
            (4)   Potted shrubs shall be in a five (5) gallon pot or larger.
            (5)   Evergreen shrubs used for screening purposes shall be at
least one foot (1') in height at planting. Evergreen shrubs will have a minimum
spread of twenty four inches (24").
         b.   Landscape screening plantings shall be completed within one year
from the date of building permit. The planning commission may, during site plan
review, recommend alternative solutions that meet the intent of this title.
         c.   If it is either physically impossible or impracticable to
completely adhere to these landscape requirements, the planning commission may,
during site plan review, recommend alternative solutions that meet the intent
of this title.
   H.   Site Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be designed and arranged to
direct illumination away from contiguous residential district property. No
exterior lighting shall be arranged and designed to create direct viewing
angles of the illumination source by pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the
public right of way. Lenses, deflectors, shields, louvers and prismatic control
devices shall be used to eliminate nuisance and hazardous lighting. Such
lighting shall be no greater than twenty five feet (25') in height. (1998 Code)
11-13-7: FENCING AND SCREENING; RESIDENTIAL, BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL:
   A.   Permits: Building permits are not required to construct fences if under
seven feet (7') in height. Zoning permits are required for all fences erected.
   B.   Locations:
      1.   Fences shall be located entirely upon the private property of the
persons constructing the fence unless the owner of the adjacent property
agrees, in writing, that such fence may be erected on the division line of the
respective properties. If adjacent neighbors cannot agree that such fence be
placed on the property line, such fence must be placed a minimum of one foot
(1') from property line. The city may require the owner of the property
erecting a fence to establish the boundary line of his property by a survey.
      2.   Where any business or industrial use (structure, parking or storage)
is adjacent to property zoned for residential use, that business or industry
shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property.
Screening shall also be provided where a business, parking lot or industry is
across the street from a residential zone, but not on the side of a business or
industry considered to be the front. The screening required in this section may
consist of earth mounds, berms or ground forms; fences and walls; landscaping
(plant materials) or landscaped fixtures (such as timbers) used in combination
or singularly so as to block direct visual access to an object.
   C.   Construction And Maintenance:
      1.   Construction: Fences shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner
and of substantial material reasonably suited for its intended purpose:
materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: chain link, wood,
wrought iron, vinyl, plastic, decorative masonry, or other acceptable similar
material, constructed from commercially available materials.
Fences shall not be constructed from the following: chicken wire, welded wire,
plastic deer fence netting or similar product, snow fence, unless being used
for its intended purpose, branches, corrugated metal, sheet metal, or material
originally intended for other purposes, unless upon showing of a high degree of
architectural quality through the use of such, prior approval is granted by the
Zoning Administrator.
      2.   Maintenance: Every fence shall be maintained on both sides in a
condition of good repair and shall not be allowed to become or remain in a
condition of disrepair or danger, or constitute a public or private nuisance.
Any such fence which is, or has become dangerous to the city health and welfare
is a public nuisance, and the city may commence proper proceedings for the
abatement thereof.
      3.   Electric Fences: Electrical fences shall not be permitted except for
agricultural purposes.
      4.   Barbed Wire Fences: Barbed wire fences shall only be permitted on
farms or for special security requirements by conditional use permit.
   D.   Residential Fencing And Screening:
      1.   Side And Rear Yards: Fences extending across side and rear yards
shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height. Fences in excess of six feet (6')
shall require a conditional use permit. This provision shall not apply to
plantings.
      2.   Front Yards: Fences extending across front yards shall not exceed
three and one-half feet (31/2') in height. The front yard on a corner lot shall
be the location of the primary entrance.
   E.   Business And Industrial Fencing And Screening:
      1.   Height: Business and industrial fences may be erected up to eight
feet (8') in height. Fences in excess of six feet (6') shall require a
conditional use permit.
      2.   Barbed Wire Security Arms: Business and industrial fences with
barbed wire security arms a minimum of six feet (6') in height (measured
without the security arm) may be allowed by conditional use permit. The
security arm shall be angled in such a manner that it extends only over the
property of the permit holder and does not endanger the public.
   F.   Swimming Pools/Hot Tubs:
      1.   Safeguards Required: All swimming pools and outdoor hot tubs shall
be provided with safeguards to prevent children from gaining uncontrolled
access. This can be accomplished with fencing, screening or other enclosure, or
any combination thereof, of sufficient density as to be impenetrable and
affording no external hand holds or foot holds.
      2.   Hot Tubs: In the case of hot tubs, a locking hard cover may be used
as an alternative to the required fencing and screening. The cover shall be
constructed of a material which cannot be penetrated by toddlers.
      3.   Fences: The following provisions shall apply to fences:
         a.   Height: If fences are employed, they shall be at least five feet
(5') in height and shall completely enclose the swimming pool or hot tub.
         b.   Bottom: The bottoms of the fences shall not be more than four
inches (4") from the ground.
         c.   Materials: Fences shall be of a noncorrosive material.
         d.   Fence Openings: All fence openings or points of entry into the
doors to swimming pools and hot tubs shall be equipped with self-closing and
self-latching devices placed within twelve inches (12") of the top of the fence
so as to be inaccessible to small children.
         e.   The wall of any pool construction above ground level, regardless
of the height thereof, shall not qualify as a safety fence.
      4.   Definitions:
 
                              Any enclosure, designed or intended or used for
                              the containment of water whether constructed
                              below ground level or above ground level, which
SWIMMING POOL:                is designed, intended, or used for swimming,
                              wading or other recreational use. A swimming pool
                              shall be considered an accessory use for zoning
                              purposes.
                              A temporary above ground pool means a pool which
                              is inflated or assembled above ground or on the
                              ground and is intended by design to be seasonal
TEMPORARY ABOVE GROUND POOLS: in nature, is removed from the property from the
                              month of October through April and is available
                              only to the occupants of a residence and their
                              guests.
                              A wading pool is any pool with maximum depth of
WADING POOL:                  twenty-four inches (24") used or designed to be
                              used by infants, toddlers or small children.
 
      5.   Exceptions: The requirements of this section shall not apply to
temporary above ground pools and wading pools. However, the temporary above
ground pools shall only be excepted if, during the period of time it is up,
safeguards are provided by means of a latchable cover or the removal of any
means of access to the pool during such time as the pool is not actively in
use.
      6.   Application for exception: Owners of swimming pools may make a
written request for an exception to the fencing requirements set forth in this
section, if the owner of the swimming pool can provide a safe and reasonable
alternative to these requirements.
      7.   Violations: In addition to other penalty provisions in the
Montevideo City Code, violation of any part of this chapter is deemed a public
nuisance. (1998 Code; amd. Ord. 920, 8-5-2013; Ord. 959, 11-16-2020; Ord. 962,
7-6-2021; Ord. 967, 4-18-2022)
11-13-8: YARD ENCROACHMENTS:
The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on setback and
height requirements except as provided in this title:
   A.   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters, and the like provided they do
not project more than two feet (2') into a yard.
   B.   Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, stoops, decks or similar features
provided they do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the
principal structure or to a distance less than two feet (2') from any side or
rear lot line.
   C.   In rear yard, recreational and laundry drying equipment, arbors and
trellises, balconies, breezeways, open porches, decks, gazebos, satellite
dishes and antennas, detached outdoor living rooms, detached garages, and air
conditioning or heating equipment.
   D.   Unenclosed architectural projections including steps, landings,
uncovered porches, stoops, and/or decks may extend not more than six feet (6')
into the front yard as measured from the principal structure provided they do
not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal
structure. Temporary handicap ramps are exempt from this provision.
   E.   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed,
except for accessory buildings and the ordinary projections of sills, cornices
and ornamental features projecting no more than forty inches (40"); except that
in business areas a permanent awning and its accessory columns or struts may
project no more than five feet (5') into a required front or side yard.
   F.   Open or enclosed fire escapes may project into a required yard not more
than five feet (5') and into a required court not more than three and one-half
feet (31/2'), provided they be so located as not to obstruct light or
ventilation.
   G.   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments,
silos, stacks, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires,
communication towers, and necessary mechanical appurtenances shall not exceed
the height limitation in the district they are located in by more than fifty
percent (50%) without a conditional use permit. (1998 Code)
11-13-9: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Reduction: No lot, yard, or other open space shall be reduced in area
or dimension creating a lot, yard or open space less than the minimum required
by this title, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less
than the minimum required it shall not be further reduced. No required open
space provided about any building or structure shall be included as a part of
any open space required for another structure.
   B.   Double Frontage Lots: On double frontage lots, the required front yard
shall be provided on both streets. (1998 Code)
11-13-10: ACCESSORY BUILDING AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Residential Districts:
      1.   Height: No accessory structure shall exceed the lesser of the height
of the principal building or twenty feet (20').
      2.   Yards: Detached accessory structures located to the rear of the
principal structure shall be required to maintain a side yard of three feet
(3') and a rear yard of three feet (3').
      3.   Attached To Principal Structure: An accessory structure or
structures that are attached to the principal structure shall meet the district
front, side and rear setback requirements.
      4.   Number: A residential lot may have no more than two (2) accessory
structures. If there are two (2), the smaller one may be no more than four
hundred (400) square feet.
      5.   Size: No accessory building shall exceed one thousand (1,000) square
feet total floor area of a building, excluding unenclosed areas, measured from
the exterior of the walls in any residence district without first obtaining a
conditional use permit therefor.
      6.   Sheds Up To Two Hundred Square Feet: In addition to accessory
structures permitted in subsection A4 of this section, a residential lot may
have up to two (2) additional accessory structures, neither of which may exceed
two hundred (200) square feet.
      7.   Appearance: Garages, sheds, and accessory structures shall be of a
similar material, quality and appearance as the principal structure. Screen
walls and exposed areas of retaining walls shall be constructed of a permanent
material and finish and shall be of a compatible color and material as the
principal structure. (Ord. 945, 6-5-2017)
   B.   Business And Industrial Districts:
      1.   Height: No accessory building shall exceed the height of the
principal building except by conditional use permit.
      2.   Location: Accessory buildings may be located any place to the rear
of the principal building, subject to Fire Code regulations and performance
standards. (1998 Code)
11-13-11: DWELLING UNITS PROHIBITED:
No basement, garage, tent, trailer, or accessory building shall be used as a
permanent dwelling. The basement portion of a finished home or apartment may be
used for normal eating and sleeping purposes provided it is properly damp-
proofed, has suitable fire protection and exits, and is otherwise approved by
the building inspector. (1998 Code)
11-13-12: RELOCATING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Permit Required: Every licensed house mover shall obtain a certificate
of zoning from the Zoning Administrator before moving any building into or
within the City.
   B.   Application: An application for such permit shall designate the lot on
which the house is to be located, the dimensions of the lot and the proposed
location of the structure on the lot along with setback distance.
   C.   Conditions For Approval: No permit to move a building shall be issued
unless and until the following conditions are fully complied with and approved
by the Zoning Administrator:
      1.   The building to be moved must comply in all respects with this
title.
      2.   The lot on which the building is to be located must meet all the
minimum dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
      3.   The building must be placed on the lot so as to meet all the front,
side, and rear yard requirements as set forth in this title. (1998 Code)
11-13-13: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner
that will avoid: a) congestion on the public streets; b) traffic hazards; and
c) excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic.
Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to ensure its safe and orderly flow.
Traffic into and out of business areas shall, to the extent possible, be
forward moving with no backing into streets. On corner lots (including rural
areas), nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow which may cause danger to
traffic on a street or public road by obscuring the view. (1998 Code)
11-13-14: ACCESS DRIVES AND ACCESSES:
   A.   Curb Cut/Accesses: The location and number of curb cut/accesses onto
any public street or right of way shall be approved by the city engineer.
   B.   Access Drives: Access drives may be placed adjacent to property lines
except that drives consisting of crushed rock or other nonfinished surfacing
shall be no closer than three feet (3') to any side or rear lot line. The
number and types of access drives onto major streets may be controlled and
limited in the interests of public safety and efficient traffic flow.
   C.   County Roads: Access drives onto county roads shall require a review by
the county engineer. The county engineer shall determine the appropriate
location, size and design of such access drives and may limit the number of
access drives in the interest of public safety and efficient traffic flow.
   D.   Wooded, Steep, Open Field Areas: Access drives to principal structures
which traverse wooded, steep, or open field areas shall be constructed and
maintained to a width and base material depth sufficient to support access by
emergency vehicles. The zoning administrator shall review all access drives
(driveways) for compliance with accepted community access drive standards. All
driveways shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10') with a road strength
capable of supporting emergency and fire vehicles.
   E.   Emergency Vehicles: All lots or parcels shall have direct access for
emergency vehicles along the frontage of the lot or parcel from either an
existing dedicated public roadway, or an existing private roadway approved by
the city council. (1998 Code)
   F.   State Highways: Access drives on to state highways shall require a
review by the city engineer and be subject to both city and state requirements.
The city engineer shall determine the appropriate location, size, design and
number of such access drives, taking into account the interest of public
safety, long range planning and efficient traffic flow. (Ord. 834, 2-18-2003)
11-13-15: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY AND SEWER TREATMENT SYSTEMS:
   A.   Water Supply: Any public or private supply of water for domestic
purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota
department of health and the Minnesota pollution control agency. Private wells
must be located, constructed, maintained and sealed in accordance with or in a
more thorough manner than the water well construction code of the Minnesota
department of health. Publicly owned water systems must be used if available.
   B.   Sewage Treatment: Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:
      1.   Publicly owned sewer systems must be used if available.
      2.   All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed the
Minnesota pollution control agency's standards for individual sewage treatment
systems contained in the document titled, "Individual Sewage Treatment Systems
Standards", chapter 7080, a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this title.
      3.   On site sewage treatment systems must be set back from the ordinary
high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in the Chippewa
County shoreland management district.
      4.   All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems shall be
evaluated in accordance with the criteria in subsections B5a through B5d of
this section. If the determination of a site's suitability cannot be made with
publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the responsibility
of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings and percolation tests from
on site field investigations.
      5.   Evaluation Criteria:
         a.   Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table or
bedrock;
         b.   Soil conditions, properties, and permeability;
         c.   Slope;
         d.   The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock
outcrops.
      6.   Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems: A sewage treatment system
not meeting the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements must be
upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is
required for any improvement on, or use of, the property. (1998 Code)
11-13-16: MANUFACTURED HOMES:
   A.   Standards: Manufactured homes that do not meet the requirements of a
"single-family detached dwelling unit" as defined in Section
11-2-2 of this Title shall be located in an approved manufactured home park.
   B.   Federal, State And Local Standards: All manufactured homes permitted
under this Title shall meet all the appropriate Federal laws dealing with
health and safety for manufactured homes, as well as the appropriate State and
local building and health codes for manufactured homes including the State
Building Code, and local use and occupancy of pre-code manufactured home
standards. (1998 Code)
11-13-17: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK:
   A.   Intent: The intent and purpose of this Section is to assure quality
development equal to that found in other types of residential areas throughout
the City.
   B.   Application: The applicant for a building permit or conditional use
permit, in addition to other requirements, shall include the name and address
of the developer and a general description of the construction schedule and
construction cost. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by plans
which indicate the following:
      1.   Location and size of the manufactured home park.
      2.   Location, size and character of all manufactured home lots,
manufactured home stands, storage areas, recreation areas, laundry washers,
dryers and drying areas, central refuse disposal, roadways, parking spaces and
sites, and all setback dimensions.
      3.   Detailed landscaping plans and specifications.
      4.   Location and width of any sidewalks.
      5.   Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, water systems,
electrical service, telephone service, cable TV service and gas service.
      6.   Plans for an overhead street lighting system shall be submitted for
approval by the City Engineer.
      7.   The method of disposing of garbage and refuse.
      8.   Location and size of all streets abutting the manufactured home park
and all driveways from such streets to the park.
      9.   Plans and specifications for all road construction either within the
park or directly related to park operation.
      10.   Floor plans of all service buildings to be constructed within the
manufactured home park.
      11.   Name and address of developer or developers.
      12.   Detailed description of maintenance procedures and grounds
supervision.
      13.   Detailed plan indicating final grading and drainage of the site.
      14.   Details as to whether all of area will be developed at once or
whether it will be developed a portion at a time.
      15.   Other information as may be required or requested by the City.
   C.   Performance Standards For Manufactured Home Parks:
      1.   Water Supply; Sanitary Sewer System: All manufactured homes shall be
properly connected to a central water supply and a central sanitary sewer
system in conformance to standards adopted by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency. All water and sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. Where a public water
supply is available to the manufactured home park or at the boundary of the
park, a connection to said public water supply shall be provided for each
manufactured home.
      2.   Off Street Overload Parking Lot: Each manufactured home park shall
maintain a paved off street overload parking lot for guests of occupants in the
amount of one space for each three (3) sites.
      3.   Utility Lead-Ins: All utilities, such as sewer, water, fuel,
electric, telephone and cable television antenna lead-ins, shall be buried to a
depth specified by the city engineer, and there shall be no overhead wire or
support poles except those essential for street or other lighting purposes.
Plans for the disposal of surface stormwater shall be approved by the city
engineer.
      4.   Utility Connections: All utility connections shall be as approved by
the city. Owner shall pay any required connection fees to the city.
      5.   Garbage, Waste, Trash Disposal: The method of garbage, waste, and
trash disposal must be approved by the city engineer.
      6.   Landscaping: A properly landscaped area, sod or seeded grass with a
minimum of one overstory deciduous or conifer tree shall be adequately
maintained around each manufactured home park lot. All manufactured home parks
adjacent to industrial, business or residential land uses shall provide for a
minimum setback of thirty feet (30') with screening, such as fences or natural
growth, along the property boundary lines separating the park from such
adjacent uses.
      7.   Development; Maintenance: Every structure in the manufactured home
park shall be developed and maintained in a safe, approved, and substantial
manner. The exterior of every structure shall be kept in good repair. All of
said structures must be constructed to meet existing state codes. Portable fire
extinguishers rated for electrical and liquid fires shall be kept in all
service buildings and other locations conveniently and readily accessible for
use by all occupants.
      8.   Skirting: The area beneath all manufactured homes shall be enclosed
(skirted) with a suitable material through the entire manufactured home park,
except that such an enclosure must be so constructed that it is subject to
reasonable inspection. No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the
inspection of plumbing, electrical facilities, and related manufactured home
equipment. All manufactured homes moved into said park must be enclosed
(skirted) within thirty (30) days.
      9.   Storage Areas: All manufactured home parks shall have an area or
areas set aside for storage, boats, boat trailers, hauling trailers, and all
other equipment not generally stored within the manufactured home or within the
utility enclosure that may be provided, shall be stored in a separate place
provided by the park owner. This storage place shall be screened. Such
equipment shall not be stored upon a lot which is occupied by a manufactured
home or upon the streets within the manufactured home park. (1998 Code)
      10.   Community Buildings: A manufactured home park may have one or more
community buildings for public safety during storms which must be maintained in
a safe, clean, and sanitary condition. Said buildings shall be adequately
lighted during all hours of darkness and may contain laundry washers, dryers
and drying areas, public telephones and public mailboxes, in addition to public
toilets and lavatory. At a minimum, the following shall be provided:
         a.   In the case of a manufactured home park with less than ten (10)
manufactured homes, a plan for the sheltering or the safe evacuation to a safe
place of shelter for the residents of the park in times of severe weather
conditions. The shelter or evacuation plan shall be developed with the
assistance and approval of the city and shall be posted at conspicuous
locations throughout the park. The park owner shall provide each resident with
a copy of the approved shelter or evacuation plan.
         b.   A manufactured home park with ten (10) or more manufactured
homes, licensed prior to March 1, 1988, shall provide a safe place of shelter
for park residents or a plan for the evacuation of park residents to a safe
place of shelter within a reasonable distance of the park for use by park
residents in times of severe weather. The shelter or evacuation plan must be
approved by the city. The city may require the park owner to construct a
shelter if it determines that a safe place of shelter is not available within a
reasonable distance from the park. The park owner shall provide each resident
with a copy of the approved shelter or evacuation plan.
         c.   A manufactured home park with ten (10) or more manufactured
homes, receiving an initial license after March 1, 1988, must provide the type
of shelter required by Minnesota statutes section 327.205. (Ord. 900, 8-2-2010)
      11.   Building/Zoning Permit: All structures being placed in the park
shall require a building/zoning permit.
      12.   Recreation Area: A recreation area consisting of one hundred (100)
square feet per manufactured home site shall be provided, but in no instance
shall less than five thousand (5,000) square feet be provided for such purpose.
The planning commission may recommend waiving of this requirement.
      13.   Streets: All streets shall be hard surfaced to city specification
and should be constructed to a minimum width of twenty four feet (24').
   D.   Manufactured Home Park Lots:
      1.   Size: Each manufactured home site shall contain at least five
thousand (5,000) square feet of land area for the exclusive use of the occupant
and shall be at least fifty feet (50') wide.
      2.   Setbacks: Manufactured homes and auxiliary structures shall be
placed upon manufactured home lots so that there shall be at least five feet
(5') from the side lot line, twenty feet (20') between the front of the
manufactured home and the front lot line, and twenty feet (20') between the
rear of the manufactured home and the rear lot lines.
      3.   Occupied Area: The area occupied by a manufactured home shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total area of a manufactured home site. No
other building or structure shall be attached to the manufactured home other
than one open carport, dimensions not to exceed two hundred forty (240) square
feet and one enclosed or covered entryway. The entryway covered or enclosed may
not exceed one hundred seventy (170) square feet. In addition to the above, one
utility shed with dimensions not to exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet
is permissible at a designated location on the lot; provided, that said utility
shed shall not be attached to the manufactured home.
      4.   Yards: The yards shall be landscaped except for necessary driveway
and sidewalk needs which shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the width of the site.
      5.   Off-Street Parking: Each manufactured home shall have off-street
parking space for at least two (2) automobiles. Each space shall be nine feet
by twenty feet (9' x 20') minimum.
      6.   Corners: The corners of each manufactured home lot shall be clearly
marked and each site shall be numbered.
   E.   Manufactured Home Stands: The area of the manufactured home stand shall
provide adequate support for the placement and tie- down of the manufactured
home, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation,
and overturning.
      1.   The manufactured home stands shall not heave, shift, or settle
unevenly under the weight of the manufactured home, due to the frost action,
inadequate drainage, vibration, or other forces acting upon the structure.
      2.   The manufactured home stand shall be provided with anchors and tie-
downs, such as cast-in-place concrete foundations or runways, screw augers,
arrowhead anchors or other devices providing for stability of the manufactured
home.
      3.   Anchors and tie-downs shall meet current Minnesota State Uniform
Manufactured Home Standards Code.
   F.   Park Management:
      1.   Compliance Required; Supervision: The person to whom a permit for a
manufactured home park is issued shall operate the park in compliance with this
Title and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
      2.   Notification Of Occupants: The park management shall notify park
occupants of all applicable provisions of this Title and inform them of their
duties and responsibilities under this Title.
      3.   Registry; Home Number: The operator of every manufactured home park
shall maintain a registry indicating the name and address of each head of
household. A home number shall be placed on the manufactured home and be at
least three inches (3") in height and visible from the street.
      4.   Lot Limits: The limits of each manufactured home lot shall be
clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes, markers, or other
suitable means, said lot limits shall be approximately the same as shown on the
accepted plans.
      5.   Map: A map of the manufactured home park shall be located at the
manufactured home park office. (1998 Code)
11-13-18: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Required Information: Except for single-family and twin home
residential structures, all requests for a building permit for new
construction, additions and building renovations altering the use or occupancy
of a building shall be accompanied by a site plan indicating:
      1.   Building locations, dimensions and elevations, sign structures,
entry areas, storage sites and other structural site improvements.
      2.   Circulation plans for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      3.   Fences and screening devices.
      4.   Trash and waste disposal facilities.
      5.   Storm drainage plans.
      6.   Fire fighting and other public safety facilities and provisions such
as hydrant locations and fire lanes.
      7.   Elevation drawings or illustrations indicating exterior wall
materials and design information.
      8.   A two foot (2') contour topographical map of the existing site.
      9.   A grading plan illustrating the proposed grade changes, from the
original topographical map. All site area, when fully developed, shall be
completely graded so as to adequately drain and dispose of all surface water,
storm water and ground water in such a manner as to preclude large scale
erosion, unwanted ponding and surface chemical runoff.
      10.   Landscape Plan: The site, when fully developed, shall be landscaped
according to a plan approved by the Planning Commission. The landscaping plan
shall specify the size, type and location of all trees and shrubbery and the
location of all seeded and sodded areas.
      11.   A soil erosion control plan for the construction period.
      12.   General floor plan of each structure.
      13.   Location and size of all parking spaces.
      14.   Location, size and system of loading/unloading areas.
      15.   A survey shall be required if the premises are unplatted and the
site plan indicates the use of minimum setbacks or in such other situations as
the Zoning Administrator may request. The survey requirement may be waived at
the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
      16.   Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept.
Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with
building design.
      17.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission may reasonably request.
   B.   Submission: The site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for presentation to the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall review the plan and make its recommendations on approval or
disapproval of the plan to the City Council, which shall approve or disapprove
the same. (1998 Code)
11-13-19: APARTMENTS, TOWNHOUSES AND OTHER MULTI-FAMILY USE:
   A.   Location: Multi-family units including apartments, townhouses shall be
a permitted use in the R-2 and R-3 Districts. The Planning Commission has the
right to waive standards for a single duplex.
   B.   Performance Standards: Same as those listed in the R-2 and R-3 District
and this Chapter.
   C.   Parking Requirements:
      1.   Number Required; Size: Two (2) parking spaces per unit for multiple
dwellings and one per unit for congregate dwellings shall be provided on the
same lot as the dwelling unit. Each space shall not be less than nine feet wide
and twenty feet in length (9' x 20') and each space shall be served adequately
with access drives.
      2.   Location: Parking spaces shall not be within ten feet (10') of a
front property line; five feet (5') of the side lot line, or within five feet
(5') of the rear lot line. Setbacks are doubled if site is adjacent to or
across from an R District.
      3.   Driveways: Bituminous hot mix or concrete driveways are required for
parking areas.
   D.   Landscape Provisions: The design shall make use of all land contained
in the site. All of the site shall be related to the circulation, recreation,
screening, building, storage, landscaping, etc. so that no portion of the site
remains undeveloped. The site when fully developed shall be landscaped
according to a plan approved by the Planning Commission during the site plan
review.
   E.   Screening:
      1.   Screening to a height of at least six feet (6') and not exceeding
eight feet (8') in height shall be required where any off-street parking area
contains more than six (6) parking spaces and is located adjacent to a
residential zone, and where the driveway to a parking area of more than six (6)
parking spaces is within fifteen feet (15') of an adjoining residential zone.
      2.   All exterior storage shall be located in the rear yard. Front and
side yard storage may be approved by the City Council upon recommendation of
the Planning Commission. (1998 Code)
11-13-20: PARKING:
   A.   Surfacing And Drainage: Off-street parking areas, except for single-
family residences, shall be improved with concrete or hot mixed bituminous
surfacing in accordance with standard design specifications. Such areas shall
be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water accumulation, subject to
approval by the city engineer. If due to factors unique to the property or the
project, it is physically impracticable to surface the parking area, the
planning commission may recommend alternative solutions subject to the approval
of the city engineer. (1998 Code)
   B.   Location:
      1.   Spaces accessory to one- and two-family dwellings shall be located
on the same lot as the principal use served. Parking spaces shall not violate
front, side and rear yard regulations. Parking in front yards shall be in
parking spaces only.
      2.   Spaces accessory to multiple-family dwellings shall be located on
the same lot as the principal use served or within four hundred feet (400') of
the main entrance to the principal building served.
      3.   Parking and driving aisle setbacks in business, industrial or multi-
family residential districts:
 
Minimum front yard                              10
Minimum side yard                               5
Minimum side yard if adjacent to any R district 10
Minimum rear yard                               5
Minimum rear yard if adjacent to any R district 10
 
      4.   There shall be no off-street parking lot within any street right of
way. (Ord. 818, 10-15-2001)
   C.   General Provisions:
      1.   Each parking space shall not be less than nine feet (9') wide and
twenty feet (20') in length.
      2.   When off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on
the lot in which the principal use served is located, they shall be in the same
ownership or control, either by deed or long-term lease, as the principal use.
The deed or lease document shall require the owner to maintain the required
number of off- street spaces during the existence of said principal use. A copy
of the property deed or lease document shall be filed with the city.
      3.   Required off-street parking space in any district shall not be
utilized for open storage of goods and commercial vehicles or for the storage
of vehicles which are inoperable.
      4.   Property in a B-1 district which has been assessed for the provision
of off-street city parking lots shall be exempt from the provisions of this
subsection which refers to off-street parking.
      5.   Parking for handicapped persons shall be provided in accordance with
state and federal regulations.
   D.   Design And Maintenance Of Off-Street Parking Areas:
      1.   Access: Parking areas shall be designed to provide adequate means of
access to a public alley or street. Such driveway access shall not exceed
thirty feet (30') in width, four percent (4%) in grade and shall be located to
cause the least interference with traffic movement.
      2.   Curbing And Landscaping: All open off-street parking areas designed
to have head-in parking along the property line shall provide a bumper curb not
less than five feet (5') from the side property line or a guard of normal
bumper height not less than three feet (3') from the side property line.
      3.   Parking Space For Six Or More Cars: When a required off-street
parking space for six (6) cars or more is located adjacent to any residence
district, a screening fence constructed of wood, brick, masonry or slatted
vinyl chainlink fence shall be erected not to exceed eight feet (8') in height
or be less than six feet (6') in height.
      4.   Maintenance Of Off-Street Parking Space: It shall be the joint and
overall responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use, uses
and/or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner the parking space
accessways, landscaping, required fences and striping.
      5.   Determination Of Areas: A parking space shall not be less than three
hundred (300) square feet per vehicle of standing and maneuvering area. A land
area credit of three hundred (300) square feet toward the satisfaction of
parking area requirements is allowed for each garage stall in any residential
district.
      6.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area
shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property,
abutting residential uses and public rights of way. Lighting shall be provided
where necessary for security, safety and traffic circulation.
      7.   Parking Area Requirements: Design of parking areas of thirty (30) or
more spaces requires landscaping of five percent (5%) of the parking lot
surface area which may be in the form of landscape islands. The landscaped area
must adhere to the following plant size requirements:
         a.   Deciduous trees shall be at least two and one-half inches (21/2")
in diameter.
         b.   Ornamental trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches
(11/2") in diameter.
         c.   Evergreen trees must have a minimum height of three feet (3').
         d.   Potted shrubs shall be in a five (5) gallon pot or larger.
         e.   Evergreen shrubs used for screening purposes shall be at least
one foot (1') in height at planting. Evergreen shrubs will have a minimum
spread of twenty four inches (24").
Landscape screening plantings shall be completed within one year from the date
of building permit. The Planning Commission may, during site plan review,
recommend alternative solutions that meet the intent of this Title.
If it is either physically impossible or impracticable to completely adhere to
these landscape requirements, the Planning Commission may, during site plan
review, recommend alternative solutions that meet the intent of this Title.
   E.   Other Parking In Residential Areas: Parking in residential areas (off-
street and on-street) shall be limited to the use of the residents of those
homes, except for short-term parking for their guests.
   F.   Shared Parking In Nonresidential Districts:
      1.   Shared parking facilities serving two (2) or more uses may be
located on the same lot or in the same structure; provided, that the total
number of parking spaces furnished shall not be less than the sum of the
separate requirements for each use.
      2.   A shared parking plan for two (2) or more uses involving fewer than
the total number of parking spaces required in subsection F1 above may be
approved by conditional use permit, if at least the following conditions are
met:
         a.   No more than fifty percent (50%) of the required parking spaces
for a given use may be shared with another use.
         b.   The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict
between the principal operating hours of the uses which will share parking
spaces.
         c.   A properly drawn legal instrument covering access easements,
cross parking arrangements, maintenance, or other pertinent issues, executed by
the parties involved, and reviewed by the City Attorney, shall be filed with
the City.
   G.   Off-Street Spaces Required (Except for B-1 District unless otherwise
required):
Auto and truck repair, auto and truck
sales and service (new/used), implement  10 customer parking spaces, plus 2
sales and service, boat and marine sales additional spaces for 1,000 square
and service, motor cycle and snowmobile  feet of gross floor area.
sales and service, nursery, or building
material sales
                                         At least 4 off-street parking spaces
Automobile service station               plus 2 off-street parking spaces for
                                         each service stall.
                                         5 spaces for each lane/green, plus
Bowling alley, golf course               additional spaces as may be required
                                         herein for related uses such as a
                                         restaurant.
Business and professional offices,       1 space for each 200 square feet of
banks, savings and loans                 gross floor space.
Car wash:                                 
 Self-service                           A minimum of 2 spaces.
 Convenience store or service station   Zero in addition to that required for
  car wash                               the store or station.
                                         At least 1 space for every 2 employees
Colleges                                 plus 1 space for every car permitted
                                         to students by the college.
Community centers, libraries, private    At least 1 off-street parking space
clubs, lodges, museums, art galleries,   for each 400 square feet of gross
post office                              floor area.
Congregate housing for the elderly       1 space per unit.
                                         1 space for each 100 square feet of
Drive-in food establishment              gross floor space, but not less than
                                         20 spaces.
Hospital                                 At least 2 parking spaces for each
                                         hospital bed.
Hotel or motel, bed and breakfast        1 space per unit plus 1 space per
                                         full-time employee.
                                         At least 1 space for each employee on
Industrial storage and warehousing       maximum shift or 1 space for each
                                         2,000 square feet of gross floor area,
                                         whichever is larger.
                                         1 space per 500 square feet of gross
Manufacturing, light industrial          floor area or 1 space for each
processing and fabrication               employee on maximum shift, whichever
                                         is greater.
Medical, veterinary, chiropractic and    1 space per 150 square feet of gross
dental clinics; animal hospital          floor space.
Multiple dwellings                       2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Nursing home/care center                 1 space per 4 beds.
One- and two-family residences           2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Restaurants, cafes, bars, taverns night  At least 1 space for each 3 seats
clubs                                    based on design capacity.
                                         At least 1 off-street parking space
Retail stores, service establishments    for each 250 square feet of gross
                                         floor area.
Schools:                                  
 Nursery school                         1 space per teacher/employee.
 Elementary and junior high schools     3 spaces for each classroom.
                                         At least 1 parking space for each 4
                                         students based on design capacity,
 High school                            plus 1 additional space for each
                                         classroom. Additional spaces may be
                                         required for related uses such as a
                                         theater, gymnasium or stadium.
                                         At least 1 off-street parking space
Shopping centers                         for each 200 square feet of gross
                                         floor area.
Theaters, auditoriums, cinemas, churches
and religious facilities mortuaries,     Spaces equal in number to 1/3 of the
stadiums, arenas, dance halls and other  capacity in persons.
places of assembly
                                         As determined by the City Council
                                         following review of the Planning
                                         Commission. Factors to be considered
                                         shall include size of building, type
Uses not specifically noted              of use, number of employees, expected
                                         volume and turnover of customer
                                         traffic and expected frequency and
                                         number of delivery or service
                                         vehicles.
 
(1998 Code)
11-13-21: OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS:
   A.   Location, Number, Size And Screening: The location, number, size and
screening of required loading/unloading areas shall be determined by the city
council following review and recommendation by the planning commission during
the site plan review process.
   B.   Access: Each required loading berth shall be located with appropriate
means of vehicle access to a street or public alley in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic.
   C.   Surfacing: All loading berths and accessways shall be improved with
concrete or hot mix bituminous surfacing in accordance with standard design
specification. If it is physically impracticable to surface the loading/
unloading area, the planning commission may recommend alternative solutions
subject to the approval of the city engineer.
   D.   Use: Any space allocated as a loading berth or maneuvering area so as
to comply with the terms of this title shall not be used for the storage of
goods, inoperable vehicles or be included as a part of the space requirements
necessary to meet the off- street parking area. (1998 Code)
11-13-22: AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS:
   A.   Applicability Of Standards: All regulations contained in these
performance standards shall apply to all changes of the farming operation which
will cause all or part of the area to become more intensively used or more
urban in character.
   B.   Building Permit Required: All agricultural use structures exceeding
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in value to be erected on a farm shall
require a building permit and conform to all requirements of the building code.
   C.   Conditional Use Permit Required: The city council may require any farm
operator to secure a conditional use permit to expand or intensify said
operations in the event of the following:
      1.   The farm is adjacent to or within four hundred feet (400') of any
dwelling unit and may be detrimental to living conditions creating safety
hazards or by emitting noise, odor, vibrations or similar nuisances.
      2.   The farming operations are so intensive as to constitute an
industrial type use consisting of the compounding, processing and packaging of
products for wholesale or retail trade. (1998 Code)
11-13-23: PRIVATE STABLES:
Private stables and paddock areas shall be located on the rear half of the lot
and not closer than twenty feet (20') to any property line, nor closer than
forty feet (40') from any dwelling on the same or adjoining property. The
minimum lot area required for a private stable or paddock is one acre, on which
two (2) horses may be kept. One additional horse may be kept for each twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet by which the parcel of land exceeds one acre.
(1998 Code)
11-13-24: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Conditions For Allowance: Home occupations may be allowed in any
residential district under the following conditions: no hobby, vocation, or
profession shall adversely affect the character of the uses permitted in the
zoning district in which the property is located or violate any state statute
or city ordinance or policy.
   B.   Permitted Home Occupations: Permitted home occupations are where no
customers visit the premises. The following criteria must be met for a
permitted home occupation:
      1.   Percent Of Structure Used: Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the
square footage of the structure shall be used for a home occupation.
      2.   Employees: No person is employed other than a member of the
household residing on the premises and two (2) other persons.
      3.   Equipment: No mechanical or electrical equipment is to be used if
the operation of such equipment interferes unreasonably with the desired quiet
residential environment of the neighborhood or if the health and safety of the
residents is endangered.
      4.   Proof Of Compliance: A person having a home occupation shall provide
proof of meeting the aforementioned requirements of this section if complaints
are received by the city council.
   C.   Special Conditional Use Home Occupations:
      1.   Criteria: Special conditional use home occupations are that of a
business profession that would generate traffic or customers visiting the
premises. Special conditional use home occupation daycare facilities are
subject to State regulations and are exempt from this provision. The following
criteria must be met for a special conditional use home occupation:
         a.   Percent Of Structure Used: Not more than fifty percent (50%) of
the square footage of the structure shall be used for a home occupation.
         b.   Employees: No person is employed other than a member of the
household residing on the premises and two (2) other persons.
         c.   Equipment: No mechanical or electrical equipment is to be used if
the operation of such equipment interferes unreasonably with the desired quiet
residential environment of the neighborhood or if the health and safety of the
residents is endangered.
         d.   Proof Of Compliance: A person having a home occupation shall
provide proof of meeting the aforementioned requirements of this section if
complaints are received by the City Council.
         e.   Sign: A sign on the premises shall consist of not more than one
single-faced, unlighted wall sign installed flush to the structure with a
maximum area of two (2) square feet.
      2.   Conditional Use Permit:
         a.   Considerations: In acting upon an application for a conditional
use permit for a home occupation the City shall consider:
            (1)   The effect of the proposed use upon the health, safety and
general welfare of the City and on surrounding properties including but not
limited to the factors of noise, glare, odor, electrical interference,
vibration, dust and other nuisances; fire and safety hazards; existing and
anticipated traffic conditions; and parking facilities on adjacent streets and
land.
            (2)   The impact on governmental facilities and services, including
roads, sanitary sewer, water and police and fire.
         b.   Term: The conditional use permit is valid for one year from date
of issuance unless otherwise specified in the resolution for approval and
thereafter shall be automatically renewed each year unless objections or
complaints are received from neighboring property owners, the City Council or
City staff and a request for review is made.
   D.   Prohibited Home Occupations: All home occupations not permitted or
conditionally permitted, are prohibited. Examples of prohibited home
occupations are motorized vehicle repair, salvage yards, animal kennels, animal
hospitals, and small engine repair.
   E.   Procedures And Permits:
      1.   A conditional use permit will become void if the home occupation is
discontinued or abandoned for a period of one year.
      2.   Home occupation permits shall not run with the land and shall not be
transferable or handed down from generation to generation. (1998 Code)
11-13-25: MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, BODYWORK AND AUTO SERVICE STANDARDS:
   A.   Fuel Pumps: Fuel pumps may be permitted to encroach into a required
yard provided they are not less than fifteen feet (15') from any street right-
of-way lines.
   B.   Fencing And Screening: When adjacent to residential property, there
shall be a screening fence.
   C.   Vehicles: No vehicle shall be parked or be waiting service longer than
fifteen (15) days.
   D.   Exterior Storage: Exterior storage besides vehicles shall be limited to
service equipment and items offered for sale. Exterior storage of items offered
for sale shall comply with yard setback requirements and shall be placed in
containers such as the racks, metal trays, and similar structures designed to
display merchandise.
   E.   Screening: All areas utilized for the storage or disposal of trash,
debris, discarded parts, and similar items shall be screened. All structures
and grounds shall be maintained in an orderly, clean and safe manner. Junk
cars, empty cans, and other unsightly materials are not permitted in an area
subject to public view. (1998 Code)
11-13-26: MINING AND GRAVEL EXTRACTION:
   A.   Purpose: To minimize land use conflicts and potential nuisance caused
by mining operations.
   B.   Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit shall be required for
all commercial mining and gravel extraction operations. Said permit shall be
valid for a one-year period; after which a permit renewal shall be required.
   C.   Information Required: The following information shall be provided by
the person requesting the permit:
      1.   Name And Address: Name and address of person requesting the mining
permit.
      2.   Legal Description: The legal property description of area to be
mined.
      3.   Plat; Topographical Map: If requested by the City Engineer or
Council, a plat and topographical map of the proposed area to be graded.
      4.   Agreements: Copies of any agreements contemplated or entered into
between the owner of said property and any other person charged with
performance of such grading;
      5.   Bond; Cash Deposit: A bond or certified check in the amount of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) payable to the City conditioned upon compliance
with the terms and provisions of this Chapter.
      6.   Permit Fee: A permit fee is required in accordance with City fee
schedule. In the event said application for permit is denied, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
      7.   City Engineer:
         a.   Approval Required: In all cases, each application for permits for
the above must be approved by the City Engineer before the permit is granted.
         b.   Procedures; Processes: Also, in all cases of the above, the City
Engineer has the right to review procedures, processes and results in view of
the operations to determine whether they are in accordance with general public
welfare and safety through regular on-site inspections.
         c.   Order To Cease Operation: The City Engineer, upon determining the
permittee's operation creates a serious and immediate safety hazard, may order
the operation ceased for a period of seventy two (72) hours.
         d.   Notice To Cease; Special Meeting: Upon so ordering the City
Engineer shall immediately notify the Mayor and the permittee in writing of the
hazard and the Mayor shall call a special meeting of the Council. The permittee
shall be requested to attend this meeting.
         e.   Withdrawal Of Permit: If the Council determines that an immediate
safety hazard exists, the permit shall be withdrawn until the permittee
complies with Council directives to eliminate the hazard.
      8.   Other Information: Any other information requested by the Planning
Commission or City Council.
   D.   Land Rehabilitation: All mining sites shall be rehabilitated
immediately after mining operations cease. Rehabilitation shall be completed
within one calendar year after operation ceases. The following standards shall
apply:
      1.   Removal Of Buildings, Structure And Plants: Within a period of one
year after the termination of a mining operation, all buildings, structures and
plants incidental to such operation shall be dismantled and removed by, and at
the expense of, the mining operator last operating such buildings, structures
and plants.
      2.   Grading; Backfill: The peaks and depressions of the area shall be
graded and backfilled to a surface which will result in a gently rolling
topography in substantial conformity to the land area immediately surrounding,
and which will minimize erosion due to rainfall. No finished slope shall exceed
eighteen percent (18%) in grade.
      3.   Sodded; Surfaced With Soil: Reclaimed areas shall be sodded or
surfaced with soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas
immediately surrounding, and to a depth of at least three inches (3").
      4.   Planted: Such required topsoil shall be planted with legumes and
grasses. Trees and shrubs may also be planted but not as a substitute for
legumes and grasses. Such planting shall adequately retard soil erosion. (1998
Code)
11-13-27: LAND RECLAMATION:
   A.   Purpose: To minimize land use conflicts and potential nuisance caused
by the reclaiming of land.
   B.   Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit shall be required for
all land reclamation. Said permit shall be valid for a one-year period; after
which a permit renewal shall be required. The City Council may also require a
performance bond from the landowner.
   C.   Information Required: The following information shall be provided by
the person requesting the permit:
      1.   Name and address of person requesting the permit.
      2.   The exact legal property description and acreage of area to be
reclaimed.
      3.   The following maps of the entire site and to include all areas
within five hundred feet (500') of the site. All maps shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') unless otherwise stated below:
         a.   Map A, existing conditions, to include:
            (1)   Contour lines at five foot (5') intervals.
            (2)   Existing vegetation.
            (3)   Existing drainage and permanent water areas.
            (4)   Existing structures.
         b.   Map B, finished grade plan, to include:
            (1)   Contour lines at five foot (5') intervals.
            (2)   Type and amount of fill to be used.
      4.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan.
      5.   A plan for dust, noise and rodent control.
      6.   A full and adequate description of all phases of the proposed
operation to include an estimate of duration of the reclamation operation.
      7.   Any other information requested by the Planning Commission or City
Council, including a land rehabilitation plan.
   D.   Land Rehabilitation: All mining sites shall be rehabilitated
immediately after mining operations cease. Rehabilitation shall be complete
within one calendar year after operation ceases. The following standards shall
apply:
      1.   Grading: The peaks and depressions of the area shall be graded and
backfilled to a surface which will result in a gently rolling topography in
substantial conformity to the land area immediately surrounding, and which will
minimize erosion due to rainfall. No finished slope shall exceed eighteen
percent (18%) in grade.
      2.   Sodded; Surfaced With Soil: Reclaimed areas shall be sodded or
surfaced with soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas
immediately surrounding, and to a depth of at least three inches (3").
Such required topsoil shall be planted with legumes and grasses. Trees and
shrubs may also be planted but not as a substitute for legumes and grasses.
Such planting shall adequately retard soil erosion.
      3.   Performance Bond: A performance bond may be required for land
rehabilitation. (1998 Code)
11-13-28: BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Conditional Use: Bed and breakfast establishments shall be allowed as a
conditional use in all residential and business districts.
   B.   Applicable City Standards:
      1.   Number Of Rooms: The number of lodging rooms in any building shall
not exceed ten (10) unless in the opinion of the Planning Commission and City
Council, conditions warrant additional rooms.
      2.   Other Standards: All other standards related to conditional uses and
applicable standards in this Title including those for signs, parking, etc.,
shall be applicable to these types of establishments. (1998 Code)
11-13-29: TELEPHONE AND RADIO COMMUNICATION TOWERS:
Communication towers may be allowed as a conditional use in business and
industrial districts.
   A.   Review: The City may review all requests in regard to height, means of
support, lighting, security, and any other relevant issue.
   B.   Other Standards: All other standards related to conditional uses and
applicable standards in this Title including those for signs, fencing, parking,
etc., shall be applicable to these type of establishments. (1998 Code)
11-13-30: STORAGE PODS:
   A.   Residential Districts.
      1.   Permit: Upon application, an applicant is permitted to have on the
applicant's property one storage pod, or any similar temporary structure used
by persons residing on or moving into the property, for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days. The zoning administrator shall have discretion to permit one
extension to this time period.
      2.   Location: The Storage Pod must be placed on the driveway of the
premises or in such location on the property that is not in the street right of
way. Each applicant is limited to one (1) Storage Pod at a time per property.
   B.   Business and Industrial Districts.
      1.   . Any use of and duration of use of Storage Pods must be approved by
the zoning administrator on a case-by-case basis.
      2.   The Storage Pod must not become a permanent fixture on the property.
      3.   The Storage Pod must be located on the same property as a permanent
structure and must not be located on a vacant lot. (Ord. 969, 4-18-2022)
11-13-31: DUMPSTERS:
Time Limits:
   A.   When a building permit is not required there will be a thirty (30)-day
limit for dumpsters.
   B.   When a building permit is required there will be a one hundred and
eighty (180)-day limit for dumpsters.
   C.   The zoning administrator will have authority to extend the time limits
for dumpsters if appropriate. (Ord. 969, 4-18-2022)
CHAPTER 14
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-14-1: Applicability
11-14-2: Purpose
11-14-3: Definitions
11-14-4: Administration
11-14-5: General Requirements
11-14-6: Signs Prohibited
11-14-7: Signs Permitted Without A Permit
11-14-8: Sign Regulations By Zoning Districts
11-14-9: Maintenance
11-14-10: Abandoned Signs
11-14-11: Nonconforming Signs
11-14-12: Sign Permits And Fees
11-14-13: Enforcement
11-14-14: Penalties
11-14-15: Appeals
11-14-16: Directional Signs Permitted On Public Right Of Way
11-14-1: APPLICABILITY:
Any signs hereafter erected or maintained shall conform with the provisions of
this chapter and any other provisions of this code. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the use and display of
signs. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person,
advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity conducted
or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed.
ADMINISTRATOR: The zoning administrator or a duly authorized deputy is hereby
authorized by the city council to administer and enforce this chapter.
APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT SIGN: Sign which identifies a group of apartment
buildings of eight (8) or more units.
AREA OF A SIGN: The "area of a sign" is the area of the panel(s) or module(s)
on which sign copy is painted or attached, exclusive of any structural support.
The area of a billboard is the area of the painted bulletin or poster panel and
frame, exclusive of the base and structural support. The area of a sign
consisting only of individual alphabetic, numeric and symbolic characters
without background or affixed directly to a wall is the area within a single
continuous perimeter of straight lines at right angles enclosing the
characters.
AWNING: A nonrigid hood or cover projecting over public property or right of
way not more than seven feet (7') from the face of a supporting building, which
may be folded, collapsed or retracted against the building. No portion of the
awning shall extend nearer than two feet (2') to the face of the nearest curb
line measured horizontally. In no case shall an awning extend over public
property or right of way greater than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from the
property line to the nearest curb in front of the building site. In any
configuration, awnings shall not obstruct the use of a required means of
egress.
BANNER SIGN: A temporary sign composed of lightweight material either enclosed
or not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted so as to allow movement of
the sign caused by movement of the atmosphere.
BILLBOARD: A sign, including the supporting structures, which directs the
attention of the general public on a public street or walk to a business,
service or activity not offered or sold upon the premises where such sign is
located.
BUSINESS SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted upon the premises at which the sign is located, and which may refer
to goods or services produced, offered for sale or obtained at such premises.
CANOPY OR MARQUEE: A permanent rooflike shelter either freestanding or
extending from part or all of a building fascia over a public right of way or a
portion of the premises and constructed of some durable material such as metal,
glass or plastic. Every marquee shall be so located as not to interfere with
the operation of any exterior standpipe or obstruct the clear passage of a
means of egress from the building or the installation or maintenance of
electrifiers.
   A.   Projection And Clearance: The horizontal clearance between a marquee
and the curb line shall not be less than two feet (2'). A marquee projecting
more than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from the property line to the curb
line shall not be less than twelve feet (12') above the ground or pavement
below and shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in length along the direction
of the street. A marquee projecting less than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance
from the property line to the curb line shall not be less than eight feet (8')
above the ground or pavement below.
   B.   Thickness: The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured
vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall not exceed three feet
(3') when the marquee projects more than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from
the property line to the curb line and shall not exceed nine feet (9') when the
marquee is less than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from the property line to
the curb line.
CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to or constructed on the fascia or
hung from a canopy or marquee.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (PHYSICAL): A sign such as public service information
signs, message centers or reader boards physically controlled with different
changeable messages (i.e., removable lettering) of an informative or commercial
nature.
CHANGING SIGN (AUTOMATIC): A sign such as electronically or electrically
controlled public service information signs, message centers or reader boards
where different automatic changing messages of an informative or commercial
nature of interest to the traveling public are shown.
   A.   Message Center: A sign which contains a changing message within the
copy area which remains on for a specified minimum period of time and blacks
out for a specified minimum period of time between messages.
   B.   Electronic Reader Board: A sign which contains a traveling message, or
a message which appears to be traveling and usually in a horizontal manner. The
characters incorporated into any message remain constant, and do not change in
hue or intensity, as they travel or appear to travel across or through the
automatic changing copy of the sign.
   C.   Public Service Information Sign: Any sign intended primarily to promote
messages of general interest to the community such as time, temperature, date,
atmospheric conditions, news or traffic control.
CONSTRUCTION SIGNS: A sign placed at a construction site identifying the
project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or other
involved parties.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any sign which is designed and erected solely for the purpose
of traffic or pedestrian direction and which is placed on the property to which
or on which the public is directed. Such sign contains no advertising copy.
DOUBLE FACED SIGN: A sign with faces on both sides showing in opposite
directions and shall constitute one advertising sign.
EVENT OR FESTIVAL TEMPORARY SIGNAGE: Temporary signs erected to advertise a
public event or festival, including county fairs, city sponsored events,
community events, school events, church or other nonprofit events. Event or
festival signs do not include signs to advertise a sale or event for one or
more commercial or for profit enterprises.
EXEMPT SIGNS: Signs exempted from normal permit requirements.
FACE OF A SIGN: The entire area of a sign on which copy could be placed.
FEATHER SIGNS: A pole anchored into the ground, to which one side of a flexible
fabric, generally in the shape of a feather or similar shape, is attached.
FLASHING SIGN: Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light
source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by
means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
GROUND SIGN: A sign which is firmly attached to the ground in a permanent
location not attached to or forming part of a building.
HEIGHT, SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade or
upper surface of the nearest street curb to the highest point of a sign.
HOLIDAY SIGN: A sign designed to promote the spirit of a holiday which does not
mention a product, service or business name.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN: A sign identifying a residential professional office or
home occupation.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which emanates light either by means of exposed
tubing or lamps on its surface, or by means of illumination transmitted through
the sign faces.
INFORMATIONAL SIGN: Any sign giving information to employees, visitors or
delivery vehicles but containing no advertising or identification.
INSTITUTIONAL SIGN: A sign or bulletin board which identifies the name or other
characteristics of a public, semipublic or private institution on the site
where the sign is located. Institutions shall include churches, schools, city
buildings and other nonprofit, governmental, or charitable organizations.
INTEGRAL SIGN: A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of erection,
monumental citations, commemorative tablets, addresses and the like when carved
into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other
permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure.
MULTI-TENANT BUILDING: A building that provides leased space or ownership to
more than one tenant or owner, particularly a building that includes multiple
ground level storefronts.
NONCONFORMING SIGN (LEGAL): Any advertising structure or sign which was
lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the
purview of this chapter, and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform
to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter.
OWNER/OCCUPANT SIGN: A sign which identifies the name of the owner or occupant
of a residential, commercial or industrial building.
PAINTED WALL SIGN: An advertisement painted directly on the wall of a building.
PEDESTAL SIGN: A sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in
or upon the ground, not attached to or forming part of a building.
POLITICAL SIGN: A sign on behalf of a candidate for office or measures on
election ballots.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building,
allowing it to be moved to various locations not to exceed thirty two (32)
square feet and must advertise the use located on the premises.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign other than a wall sign, marquee or canopy which is
attached to and projects from a structure, building face or wall. The area of a
projecting sign is calculated on one face of the sign only.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The particular distance across a public street, alley,
sidewalk or boulevard measured from property line to property line. When
property lines on opposite sides of the public street are not parallel, the
public right of way width shall be determined by the city engineer.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign, including auction signs, pertaining to the sale,
lease or rental of the property upon which it is located not exceeding twenty-
four inches by thirty-six inches (24"x36").
REVOLVING/FLASHING SIGN: Illuminated sign on which such illumination is not
kept stationary or constant in intensity and/or color at all times when such
sign is in use.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon the roof or parapet of a building, the entire
face of which is situated above the roof level of the building to which it is
attached and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN: A freestanding sign that advertises the items or specials
that are available from a business and which have no more than twenty percent
(20%) of the total area of the sign utilized for business identification.
Limited to "A" frame style signs with two faces or sides that are separated by
no more than two feet and no less than six inches at the base of the sign and
which are no more than three feet in height and two feet in width.
SEARCHLIGHTS: Illumination which comes from lamps, lenses or devices designed
to focus or concentrate the light rays of the source.
SHOPPING CENTER: Any group of four (4) or more retail/service businesses with a
single architectural plan.
SHOPPING CENTER SIGN: A sign advertising a shopping center or businesses within
the shopping center.
SIGN: Any identification, description, illustration or device illuminated or
nonilluminated which is visible from any public place or is located on private
property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation,
including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem,
painting, banner, pennant, placard or temporary sign designed to advertise,
identify or convey information. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also
include all sign structures. However, a "sign" shall not include any display of
official court, public office notices or traffic signs, nor shall it include
the flag, separate emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit or school or
religious group, or incombustible tablet or lettering built into the wall of a
building or other structure. A "sign" inside a building is not included unless
its face is visible only from the exterior of a building.
SIGN POSTERS/HANDBILLS: Flier/brochure type sign advertising event or activity
affixed to poles, trees, buildings, walls or other public or private property.
SUBDIVISION PLAT SIGN: A temporary sign which advertises a new subdivision
plat.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A nonpermanent sign affixed, erected or displayed, including
"lighter than air devices", on a premises for a limited period of time not to
exceed thirty two (32) square feet and must advertise the use located on the
premises.
TRAFFIC SIGN: A sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purpose of
directing or guiding traffic.
UNLAWFUL SIGN: A sign which violates this chapter or which the administrator
may declare as unlawful if it becomes dangerous to public safety by reason of
dilapidation or abandonment.
WALL SIGN: Any sign affixed in such a way to a building or structure that its
exposed face is parallel to or approximately parallel to the plane of the
building or structure on which it is affixed. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000; amd. Ord.
940, 6-6-2016; Ord. 971, 4-18-2022)
11-14-4: ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be administered by the zoning administrator appointed by the
council. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided, signs shall comply with the following: (Ord. 803,
11-20-2000)
   A.   Yard Requirements: No signs shall violate the front, side or rear yard
requirements of the district in which they are placed, except in a B-1 and B-
2 district the base of a pedestal or ground sign may be placed within ten feet
(10') of the front lot line, and the sign face may be within five feet (5') of
the front lot line. In the case of existing or built up commercial areas, the
sign may be set to meet the average setback of other signs on the block, but in
no case may new pedestal or ground signs or sign faces be closer than five feet
(5') to the front lot line. (Ord. 889, 2-17-2009)
   B.   Illumination: The light from any illuminated sign or from any light
source, including the interior of a building, shall be so shaded or directed
that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect a surrounding
or facing residential district, or adversely affect safe vision of operators of
vehicles moving on public or private roads, highways or parking areas. Light
shall not shine or reflect on or into residential structures.
   C.   Obstruction Prohibited: Signs or sign structures that obstruct any
window, door, fire escape, stairway or opening intended to provide ingress or
egress for any building structure are prohibited. With reference to commercial
and industrial districts, signs painted on the inside glass portion of windows
or doors are permitted.
   D.   Traffic Hazard: No sign shall be erected near or at any intersection of
any streets in such manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or at any
location where by reason of position, shape or color, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal
or device.
   E.   Projection Over Right Of Way: No signs may be placed on or over a
public right of way except that a wall sign may project up to twelve inches
(12") over a public right of way and except as permitted on a canopy or
marquee.
   F.   Measurement: The zoning administrator shall interpret the measurement
of sign area in a liberal, consistent interpretation, taking into consideration
the surface area to which the sign is to be applied. In no case shall temporary
paper, watercolor, chalk or similar signs that are displayed in windows be
counted as sign surface area. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-6: SIGNS PROHIBITED:
The following signs are hereby prohibited:
   A.   Searchlights or similar devices (without a temporary sign permit);
   B.   Revolving and flashing signs;
   C.   Sign posters/handbills on public property or on private property
without the permission of the owner;
   D.   Signs placed on top of marquees, canopies or buildings;
   E.   Roof signs;
   F.   Sign placed or painted on any tree or rock in its natural setting;
   G.   Inflatable devices (without a temporary sign permit);
   H.   Billboards along a state or federally designated scenic byway. (Ord.
887, 1-20-2009)
11-14-7: SIGNS PERMITTED WITHOUT A PERMIT:
The following signs are hereby permitted without a permit in all districts:
   A.   Construction signs;
   B.   Real estate signs;
   C.   Political signs;
   D.   Directional and private traffic control signs;
   E.   Subdivision plat signs;
   F.   Integral signs;
   G.   Holiday signs;
   H.   Informational signs;
   I.   Institutional signs;
   J.   Flags not exceeding sixty (60) square feet in total area;
   K.   Real estate signs; except that real estate signs exceeding twenty-four
inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36") require a temporary sign permit.
   L.   Rummage/garage sale signs;
   M.   Street signs erected by the city;
   N.   Handbills/sign posters erected on private property with permission of
the owner. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000; amd. Ord. 971, 4-18-2022)
11-14-8: SIGN REGULATIONS BY ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Residential districts:
      1.   Permitted uses:
         a.   Owner-Occupant Signs: One wall sign, not to exceed two (2) square
feet in area.
         b.   Home Occupation Sign: One wall sign, not to exceed two (2) square
feet in area, where used by permitted home occupation.
         c.   Apartment Development Sign: One per building, not to exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in area, and not to exceed a height of eight feet
(8').
         d.   Institutional Signs: One per site, not to exceed thirty two (32)
square feet in area, and not to exceed a height of eight feet (8').
         e.   Temporary Or Portable Sign: Three (3) temporary or portable ten
(10) day permits per calendar year. These may be taken "back to back".
      2.   Conditional uses:
         a.   Institutional signs exceeding the number or square footage
allowed as a permitted use.
   B.   Business districts:
      1.   Permitted Uses:
         a.   Residential Signs: Any sign permitted in residential districts.
         b.   Business Signs:
            (1)   Wall Signs: Twenty five percent (25%) of the square footage
of the front silhouettes and fifteen percent (15%) of side and rear silhouettes
may be taken up by wall signs.
            (2)   Canopy, Marquee, Awning Or Projecting Signs: Will be included
in the total square footage for wall signs.
            (3)   Pedestal Signs Or Ground Signs:
               (A)    One pedestal sign up to two hundred twenty five (225)
square feet in area and not exceeding thirty five feet (35') in height and no
less than ten feet (10') above grade; or
               (B)    One ground sign up to one hundred (100) square feet in
area is allowed for each one hundred feet (100') of front footage.
            (4)   Temporary Signs Or Portable Signs: One 30-day temporary or
portable sign permit per calendar year and two (2) 21-day temporary or portable
sign permits per calendar year, for a total of three (3) temporary or portable
sign permits per calendar year. These may be taken "back to back".
            (5)   Event Or Festival Signs: Event or festival signs not to
exceed six (6) signs, which may be in place for up to seven (7) days prior to
each event or festival and for the duration of the event or festival. Event or
festival signs may not exceed eighty (80) square feet each. No event or
festival signs are allowed on city property or rights of way without prior
approval by the city. Event or festival signs may not have flashing or strobe
lights, but may be lighted. Event or festival signs may include electronic
reader boards, but they must have a static message, and may not scroll.
            (6)   Sandwich Board Signs: Sandwich Board Signs are allowed in
Districts B-l and B-2 with a no-cost permit as determined by the zoning
administrator.
               (A)   Placement. Sandwich Board Signs shall only be placed
within the boundaries of the applicable business on street frontage. The sign
shall be placed on the edge of the sidewalk that is furthest from the street
and closest to the business. The sign cannot be placed on that portion of the
property that is adjacent to the street. The sign may not be lighted. The signs
may not be displayed from parked vehicles adjacent to the business. Signs must
not be placed on display until such time as the sidewalk area has been cleared
of snow to its full width. The sign must be removed from the sidewalk at the
end of each business day. The sign shall be positioned as not to:
                  i.   Reduce the sidewalk clearance below a width of thirty-
six (36") inches;
                  ii.   Impede any line of sight for motorists at vehicular
public right-of way intersections;
                  iii.   Interfere with persons entering or exiting parked
cars.
            (7)   Multi-Tenant Buildings: Each tenant in a multitenant building
is allowed one wall sign. The aggregate gross area of all wall signs shall not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the wall to which they are attached.
            (8)   Feather Signs: A no-cost permit must be obtained for every
feather sign. Feather signs may not be electrified. The sign shall have a
maximum height of eight feet (8') . No more than two (2) feather signs shall be
allowed for each property.
      2.   Conditional Uses:
         a.   Billboard Signs In B-2 Zones: One billboard sign may be
substituted for one pedestal or ground sign, not to exceed three hundred (300)
square feet. Billboards must be no more than thirty five feet (35') in height
nor less than ten feet (10') above grade. No billboard shall be erected closer
than five hundred feet (500') to any other billboard, either within or outside
the city's boundaries, nor closer than five hundred feet (500') to a
residential zone.
         b.   Other Off Premises Signs Or Messages: Off premises signs or
messages may be substituted for up to fifty (50) square feet of wall signs per
building.
         c.   Multi-Occupant Or Shopping Center Signs: Pedestal or ground signs
exceeding the square footage allowed under permitted uses.
   C.   Industrial districts:
      1.   Permitted Uses: All those signs listed as permitted uses in
residential and business zones.
      2.   Conditional Uses:
         a.   All those signs listed as conditional uses in residential and
business zones. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000; amd. Ord. 940, 6-6-2016; Ord. 971, 4-18-
2022)
11-14-9: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Required: All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys
and anchors, shall be kept in repair and in a proper state of preservation. All
signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition
at all times. Maintenance shall include painting, repainting, cleaning,
replacement or repair of defective parts, and other necessary acts. The display
surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times.
Every sign and the immediate surrounding premises shall be maintained by the
owner or person in charge thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive
condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
   B.   Dangerous, Defective Condition: Any sign which is found in a dangerous
or defective condition shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or
the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-10: ABANDONED SIGNS:
   A.   Removal Required: Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the
sign. Any such sign not removed shall be subject to removal by the city thirty
(30) days after the zoning administrator shall have served a notice of removal
on the owner thereof by mail, or if the owner cannot be found, publication in
the legal newspaper of the city. The notice of removal shall specify the nature
of the violation, the action required by the owner, the date by which the
action must be completed and an opportunity to appear before the council and be
heard as to any objections concerning the proposed action of the council. If
the owner of the sign is not the owner of the premises on which the sign is
located, the owner of the premises shall also be served.
   B.   Removal By City; Expense Responsibility Of Owner: If, after such notice
has been served, the party or parties served fails to remove the sign in
accordance with the terms of the notice, and after having heard the objections
thereto, if any, the council does not determine otherwise, the council may
cause the sign to be removed at the expense of the city and recovered in the
manner in which improvements are assessed. This shall not limit any other
rights which the city has to enforce collection of the cost against the owner
of the sign and the owner of the property.
   C.   Exception: Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily
suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall
not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of more
than six (6) months. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-11: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Permitted To Continue: Within the districts established by this title,
there exist signs and sign structures which were lawful before this chapter was
passed or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this
chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their
survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended or used as a basis for allowing
additional signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
   B.   Restrictions: Any sign or sign structure which does not conform to the
use regulations contained in this chapter at the time it becomes applicable may
be continued subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Damage: Any nonconforming sign or sign structure which has been
damaged such that its value has been reduced to less than fifty percent (50%)
of its fair-market value prior to such damage, shall be required to conform to
the use regulations of this chapter.
      2.   Repairs: Such repairs and maintenance work as required to keep a
nonconforming sign or sign structure in sound condition may be made; provided,
that no additions shall be made to a nonconforming sign. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-12: SIGN PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without
a permit issued by the administrator, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. In all events, a permit must be obtained before any visible work is
done in connection with the erection, alteration or relocation. Any permit or
license issued in conflict with this chapter shall be null and void and of no
effect whatever.
   B.   Application: Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing on
forms provided by the city. The permit application shall contain the names and
addresses of the sign owner, sign erector and property owner, a drawing showing
the location, size and design of the sign, and such other pertinent information
as the zoning administrator may require to ensure compliance with this chapter
and other ordinances of the city.
   C.   Exceptions: The following operations shall not require a sign permit:
      1.   Replacing Copy: The changing of advertising copy on a sign or the
message on a theater marquee or a similar approved sign which is specifically
designed for the use of changeable copy.
      2.   Maintenance: Painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal
maintenance and repair of a sign or sign structure, unless a structural change
is made.
      3.   Exempt Signs: Signs listed in subsection
11-14-7A of this chapter.
   D.   Term: Permits issued for the erection, alteration or relocation of a
sign shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
issuance. The zoning administrator may extend the time at the administrator's
discretion but not exceeding an additional six (6) months.
   E.   Permit Fee: Sign permit fee shall be paid on each sign in accordance
with the fee schedule fixed by resolution of the council and on file at the
city offices. A late application charge in accordance with the fee schedule
fixed by resolution of the council and on file at the city office shall be
imposed for failure to obtain a permit prior to erecting, altering or
relocating any sign. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-13: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Right Of Entry: This chapter shall be enforced by the zoning
administrator of the city. The zoning administrator shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable hour upon any premises, for the purpose of enforcement
of this chapter.
   B.   Violations: If the zoning administrator shall find that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, the zoning administrator shall
notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it or
shall take such action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or
to prevent continued violation of its provisions. The person responsible for
such violation shall be given thirty (30) days to correct the violation except
in the case of a violation involving portable signs where the person
responsible for such violation shall be given five (5) days to correct the
violation. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-14: PENALTIES:
   A.   Petty Misdemeanor: Any violation of this chapter of the code shall be a
petty misdemeanor punishable according to petty misdemeanor limits as
established from time to time by the state of Minnesota. Each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Removal Without Notice: If a sign is found to be an immediate and
serious danger to the public because of its unsafe condition, it may be removed
without notice, and notice of removal and reasons for such shall be served as
soon as possible under the terms of this chapter. The costs of removal may be
enforced and assessed as provided in section
11-14-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-15: APPEALS:
   A.   The board of zoning adjustment shall have the power and duty of hearing
appeals or requests on the following cases:
      1.   Appeals from any action of the zoning administrator in granting or
denying a sign permit.
      2.   Appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the
enforcement of this chapter.
      3.   Requests for variances as in other cases involving zoning ordinances
of the city, from the literal provisions of this chapter in instances where
their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances
unique to the individual property under consideration. In granting a variance,
the board may impose conditions to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent
properties. The board may not permit as a variance any sign which is not
permitted in the zoning district in question by this chapter.
   B.   All appeals are subject to procedures set forth in section
2-2-3 of this code. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
11-14-16: DIRECTIONAL SIGNS PERMITTED ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of this section, the owner or operator of an
airport, library, community center, church, hospital, institution of an
educational, philanthropic or charitable nature, cemetery, mausoleum, mortuary,
governmental institution or armory may place a directional sign on any city
street sign located adjacent to a state highway or county road or state aid
designated street within the city.
   B.   Any such sign shall be two hundred sixteen (216) square inches.
   C.   All such signs shall conform to the coloring and construction materials
used in state of Minnesota highway department information signs. The city may
mandate the design of the sign.
   D.   No sign shall be erected pursuant to this section until the person or
agency erecting the sign has obtained a sign permit and approval on the
specific location of the sign. The city zoning administrator will issue the
sign permit after consulting with the public works director as to the public
safety of the proposed sign. No sign permit will be issued for a sign that
would constitute a hazard to public safety.
   E.   The city shall install any such sign for which a permit is issued after
the person or agency requesting such sign has paid the costs thereof. The
person or agency erecting the sign shall be responsible for the maintenance and
upkeep of any sign placed on a city street sign. In the event the sign so
installed is not maintained and kept in the same condition as the city street
sign or becomes a hazard to public safety, the city, at its option, may request
such person or agency to remove the sign. If the sign is not removed, the city
may remove the sign and recover the costs thereof from the person or agency
erecting the same. (Ord. 803, 11-20-2000)
CHAPTER 15
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
11-15-1: Purpose
11-15-2: Permitted Uses
11-15-3: Density
11-15-4: General Requirements
11-15-5: Coordination With Subdivision Regulations
11-15-6: Pre-Application Meeting
11-15-7: Preliminary Development Plan
11-15-8: Final Development Plan
11-15-9: Development Agreement
11-15-10: Conveyance And Maintenance Of Common Open Space
11-15-11: Standards For Common Or Public Open Space
11-15-12: Review And Amendments
11-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this Chapter are:
   A.   To encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its
improvements than is possible under the more restrictive application of zoning
requirements such as lot sizes and building setbacks, while at the same time
meeting the standards and purposes of the Comprehensive Plan and preserving the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City.
   B.   To allow for a mixture of residential units in an integrated and well-
planned area.
   C.   To ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas, and the
preservation of the natural resources of the site including wetlands,
woodlands, steep slopes and scenic areas.
   D.   To allow more flexibility and imaginative design in redevelopment
projects. (1998 Code)
11-15-2: PERMITTED USES:
Residential dwelling units in a clustered, semi-detached, attached, or multi-
storied structures. (1998 Code)
11-15-3: DENSITY:
The maximum density of development of a PUD shall not exceed that of the zoning
district in which it is located. (1998 Code)
11-15-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A conditional use permit shall be required of all planned unit developments.
Unless a variance is otherwise approved, the City may approve the planned unit
development only if it finds that the development satisfies all the following
standards in addition to meeting the requirements of Section
11-3-7 of this Title, except for the time limit:
   A.   The planned unit development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan
of the City.
   B.   The planned unit development is an effective and unified treatment of
the development possibilities in the project site and the development plan
provides for the preservation of unique natural amenities such as streams,
stream banks, wooded cover, rough terrain, and similar areas.
   C.   The planned unit development can be planned and developed to harmonize
with any existing or proposed development in the areas surrounding the project
site.
   D.   Financing is available to the applicant on conditions and in an amount
which is sufficient to assure completion of the planned unit development.
   E.   A minimum of ten (10) or more dwelling units are proposed.
   F.   The tract under consideration is under single control.
   G.   The tract is at least five (5) acres in size for undeveloped areas and
two (2) acres for redevelopment of existing, developed areas of the City. (1998
Code)
11-15-5: COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
   A.   It is the intent of this Title that subdivision review under the
subdivision regulations be carried out simultaneously with the review of a
planned unit development under this Chapter of the Zoning Ordinance.
   B.   The plans required under this Chapter must be submitted in a form which
will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations for the
preliminary and final plans required under these regulations. (1998 Code)
11-15-6: PRE-APPLICATION MEETING:
Prior to the submission of any plan to the Planning Commission, the applicant
shall meet with the Zoning Administrator, and if necessary, with the Planning
Commission to discuss the contemplated project relative to community
development objectives for the area in question and to learn the procedural
steps for a conditional use permit and a preliminary plat. The applicant may
submit a simple sketch plan at this stage for informal review and discussion.
The applicant is urged to avail himself or herself of the advice and assistance
of the planning staff to facilitate the review of the outline plan and
preliminary draft. (1998 Code)
11-15-7: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Application For Conditional Use Permit: An applicant shall make an
application for a conditional use permit following the procedural steps as set
forth in this Title.
   B.   Criteria For Approval: In addition to the criteria and standards for
the granting of conditional use permits, the following additional findings
shall be made before approval of the preliminary development plan:
      1.   The proposed PUD is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
      2.   The uses proposed will not have an undue and adverse impact on the
reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property, and will not be detrimental to
potential surrounding uses.
      3.   Each phase of the proposed development, as it is proposed to be
completed, is of sufficient size, composition, and arrangement that its
construction, marketing, and operation are feasible as a complete unit, and
that provision and construction of dwelling units and common open space are
balanced and coordinated.
      4.   The PUD will not create an excessive burden on parks, schools,
streets, and other public facilities and utilities which are proposed to serve
the district.
      5.   The proposed total development is designed in such a manner as to
form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries.
   C.   Preliminary Development Plan Submission:
      1.   Submission; Number Of Copies: Following the pre-application meeting,
the developer shall submit six (6) copies of the preliminary development plan
to the Zoning Administrator at least ten (10) days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which such plan is to be considered.
      2.   Distribution Of Copies: The Zoning Administrator shall submit one
copy of the preliminary development plan to each Planning Commission member,
the City Attorney, City Engineer and any other appropriate City officials.
      3.   Review; Costs: The City Attorney, City Engineer and Zoning
Administrator and other appropriate City officials shall review the preliminary
development plan and shall transmit a report of their findings and
recommendations together with any supporting material to the Planning
Commission prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The developer
shall be required to pay the cost of such services and the City Council shall
establish a fee from time to time to cover such costs.
      4.   Technical And Staff Services: The Planning Commission may require
qualified technical and staff services such as economic and legal to review the
preliminary development plan and advise on its suitability regarding general
planning; conformity with plans of other private and public organizations and
agencies; adequacy of proposed water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and
flood control, special assessment procedures and other features. The subdivider
shall also be required to pay the cost of such services.
      5.   Public Hearing: Within forty five (45) days after the plan has been
filed and after reports and certifications have been received as requested, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plan after
notice of the time and place thereof has been published once in the official
newspaper at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Within thirty
(30) days of the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall make its report to the City Council.
      6.   Planning Commission Report: The Planning Commission may forward to
the City Council a favorable, conditional or unfavorable report which shall
contain a statement of findings and recommendations.
      7.   City Council Action: The City Council shall act to approve or
disapprove. The preliminary development plan application must be approved or
disapproved by the City Council within thirty (30) days following the delivery
of an application completed in compliance with these regulations by the
applicant, unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to by the
applicant. If the City fails to preliminarily approve or disapprove an
application within the review period, the application shall be deemed approved,
and upon demand, the City shall execute a certificate to that effect. If the
City Council disapproves the preliminary development plan, the grounds for any
such disapproval shall be set forth in the minutes of the City Council meeting
and reported to the owners and subdividers.
   D.   Preliminary Development Plan Documentation: The following exhibits
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator by the proposed developer as
part of the application for a conditional use permit:
      1.   Character And Need Of Development: An explanation of the character
and need for the planned development and the manner in which it has been
planned to take advantage of the planned development regulations.
      2.   Statement Of Financing: A statement of proposed financing of the
PUD.
      3.   Statement Of Ownership: A statement of the present ownership of all
the land included within the planned development and a list of property owners
within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the outer boundaries of the property.
      4.   Schedule Of Development: A general indication of the expected
schedule of development including sequential phasing and time schedules.
      5.   Map: A map giving the legal description of the property including
approximate total acreage and also indicating existing property lines and
dimensions, ownership of all parcels, platting, easement, street rights of way,
utilities, and buildings for the property, and for the area three hundred fifty
feet (350') beyond.
      6.   Natural Features Map: Natural features map or maps of the property
and area three hundred fifty feet (350') beyond the PUD showing contour lines
at no more than two foot (2') intervals, drainage patterns, wetlands,
vegetation, soil and subsoil condition.
      7.   Proposed Land Use Map: A map indicating proposed land uses including
housing units and types, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and open space
uses.
      8.   Governmental Services: A full description of how all necessary
governmental services will be provided to the development including sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, water system, streets and other public utilities. (1998
Code)
11-15-8: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Filing Of Plan: Within sixty (60) days of City Council approval of the
preliminary development plan and the preliminary plat, the applicant shall file
a final development plan and final plat for all or that portion to be platted
with the Zoning Administrator. The final development plan shall contain those
changes as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council during the preliminary review process.
   B.   Submission To Planning Commission: The Zoning Administrator shall
submit the final development plan to the Planning Commission for review.
   C.   Recommendation To City Council: The Planning Commission shall review
the final development plan and make its recommendation to the City Council
within sixty (60) days of receiving the final development plan.
   D.   City Council Review: The City Council shall review the final
development plan and act within thirty (30) days of receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   E.   Issuance Of Conditional Use Permit: If the final development plan is
approved by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a
conditional use permit to the applicant.
   F.   Issuance Of Building Permit: Once the final development plan has been
approved, the City may issue the building permit for the area complying with
the plan and other laws of the City without further hearings or review of the
plan by the City Council. (1998 Code)
11-15-9: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
Prior to the issuance of a special use permit, the developer and the City shall
enter into a development agreement that contains, as applicable, provisions
for: construction schedule, landscape plan, development plan, open space plan,
any Municipal improvements required, any developer's improvements required,
signs, on-site improvements, occupancy requirements, insurance, inspections,
any dedications to the public, ownership of improvements, site cleanup,
responsibility for costs, hold harmless provision for the benefit of the City,
any screening, and any other provision required by the City Council. (1998
Code)
11-15-10: CONVEYANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Method Of Conveyance: All land shown on the final development plan as
common open space must be conveyed under one of the following methods at the
option of the City:
      1.   Public Agency: It may be conveyed to a public agency which will
agree to maintain the common open space and any building, structures, or
improvements which have been placed on it.
      2.   Trustees: It may be conveyed to trustees provided in an indenture
establishing an association or similar organization for the maintenance of the
planned development. The common open space must be conveyed to the trustees
subject to the covenants to be approved by the City Council which restrict the
common open space to the uses specified on the final development plan, and
which provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which
assures its continuing use for its intended purpose.
   B.   Maintenance By Homeowners Association: If the common open space is
conveyed to a homeowners association, and the common open space is not
maintained properly to standards established by the City, the City shall have
the authority to maintain the property and assess the costs back to the
homeowners association. (1998 Code)
11-15-11: STANDARDS FOR COMMON OR PUBLIC OPEN SPACE:
No open space may be accepted as common open space under the provisions of this
Title unless it meets the following:
   A.   Suitability: The location, size and character of the common open space
must be suitable for the planned development.
   B.   Uses: Common open space must be used for amenity or recreational
purposes. The uses authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to
the character of the planned development, considering the size, density,
expected population, topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be
provided.
   C.   Improvements: Common open space must be suitably improved for its
intended use, but common open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures and improvements
which are permitted in the common open space must be appropriate to the uses
which are authorized for the common open space having regard to its topography
and unimproved condition. (1998 Code)
11-15-12: REVIEW AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Annual Review: The Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission shall
review all PUDs under construction within the City at least once each year and
shall make a report to the City Council on the status of the development. If
the City Council determines that the development has not occurred within a
reasonable time after the original approval of the conditional use for the PUD,
the City Planning Commission may recommend that the City revoke the conditional
use permit.
   B.   Revisions:
      1.   Minor Changes: Minor changes in the location, placement and heights
of buildings, structures or landscaping may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at
the time the final plan was approved.
      2.   Approval Required: Approval of the Planning Commission and City
Council shall be required for other changes such as rearrangement of lots,
blocks and building tracts. These changes shall be consistent with the purpose
and intent of the approved final development plan.
   C.   Amendments: Any amendment to the PUD shall require the same procedure
for the application of a conditional use permit. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 16
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
11-16-1: Scope
11-16-2: Alterations
11-16-3: Extension
11-16-4: Changes
11-16-5: Construction Approved Prior To Adoption
11-16-6: Restoration
11-16-7: Wear And Tear
11-16-8: Abandonment
11-16-9: Displacement
11-16-10: Unlawful Use Not Authorized
11-16-11: District Changes
11-16-12: Existing Lots
11-16-1: SCOPE:
Any buildings, or land and its use existing at the effective date hereof may be
continued although the use or structure does not conform with the provisions of
this Title, provided the following conditions of this Chapter are met. (1998
Code)
11-16-2: ALTERATIONS:
A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, improved or reconstructed
provided the work does not exceed in aggregate cost fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement cost of the building or structure at the time the alteration is
proposed to be made. (1998 Code)
11-16-3: EXTENSION:
A nonconforming use shall not be extended to any portion of a building or
structure that was not previously subject to the nonconforming use. (1998 Code)
11-16-4: CHANGES:
A conditional use permit shall be required to allow a nonconforming building,
structure or use to be changed to another nonconforming use. (1998 Code)
11-16-5: CONSTRUCTION APPROVED PRIOR TO ADOPTION:
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or
designated use of a building or structure for which a building permit has been
issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted and
which entire building shall be completed according to the plans as filed within
one year from the effective date hereof. (1998 Code)
11-16-6: RESTORATION:
Nothing in this Title shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding
and continued use of any nonconforming building or structure damaged by fire,
collapse, explosion or acts of God subsequent to the effective date hereof,
provided the expense of the work does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement cost of the building or structure at the time the damage occurred.
(1998 Code)
11-16-7: WEAR AND TEAR:
Nothing in this Title shall prevent the normal maintenance of a nonconforming
building, structure, or part thereof, including necessary nonstructural repairs
and incidental alterations that do not extend or intensify the nonconforming
uses provided that the cost of the work does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the replacement cost of the building or structure at the time the work is done.
Nothing in this Title shall prevent the placing of a structure in a safe
condition after it has been declared unsafe by the Building Inspector of the
City. (1998 Code)
11-16-8: ABANDONMENT:
A nonconforming use of a building or premises which has been abandoned shall
not thereafter be a lawful nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be
considered abandoned:
   A.   When the intent of the owner is to discontinue the use, if apparent, or
six (6) months after the use is discontinued.
   B.   When the characteristic equipment and the furnishings of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been
replaced by similar equipment within six (6) months.
   C.   When it has been replaced by a conforming use.
   D.   When it has been changed to another use under permit from the City
Council. (1998 Code)
11-16-9: DISPLACEMENT:
No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use. (1998
Code)
11-16-10: UNLAWFUL USE NOT AUTHORIZED:
Nothing in this Title shall be interpreted as authority for, or approval of,
the continuance of the use of a building or premises in violation of this
Title. (1998 Code)
11-16-11: DISTRICT CHANGES:
Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed to transfer an area from one
district to another district of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any use that becomes nonconforming thereby.
(1998 Code)
11-16-12: EXISTING LOTS:
A lot or parcel of land in a residential district which was of record as a
separate lot or parcel in the office of the County Recorder or Registrar of
Titles, on or before the date of adoption hereof, may be used for single-family
detached dwelling purposes provided the area and width thereof are within forty
percent (40%) of the minimum requirements of this Title but not less than four
thousand eight hundred (4,800) square feet. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 17
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND ADULT USES
SECTION:
11-17-1: Purpose And Intent
11-17-2: General Provisions
11-17-3: Adult Use-Principal
11-17-4: Adult Use-Accessory
11-17-5: Nonconforming Sexually Oriented Businesses And Adult Uses
11-17-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The regulations of this Section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. It is not the intent nor effect of this
Code to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is
the purpose of this Code to regulate sexually oriented businesses and adult
uses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens
of the City and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to:
   A.   Prevent additional criminal activity within the City;
   B.   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse
effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
   C.   Locate sexually oriented businesses away from schools, churches,
residential properties daycare centers, libraries, parks, commercial
recreational facilities for minors, and businesses selling alcoholic beverages;
   D.   Prevent concentration of sexually oriented businesses within certain
areas of the City;
   E.   Prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. (Ord. 752, 12-5-
1994; amd. 1998 Code)
11-17-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Sexually oriented businesses or "adult uses" as defined in Section
3-4-2 of this Code shall be subject to the following general provisions:
   A.   Activities defined as obscene by Minnesota Statutes section 617.241 are
not permitted and are prohibited.
   B.   Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses, either principal or
accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also
utilized for residential purposes.
   C.   Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses, either principal or
accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place which is also used to
dispense, consume or sell alcoholic beverages.
   D.   A sexually oriented business or adult use which does not qualify as an
accessory use shall be classified as an adult use- principal.
   E.   Sexually oriented businesses or adult use classified as an adult use-
principal may not locate or operate within the City without first obtaining a
sexually oriented businesses "adult use-principal" license as required by
Section
3-4-3 of this Code. (Ord. 752, 12-5-1994; amd. 1998 Code)
11-17-3: ADULT USE-PRINCIPAL:
   A.   Sexually oriented businesses classified as adult use-principal shall be
permitted uses in Highway Business Districts and I-1 Industrial Districts (with
a special use permit) only and located at least five hundred (500) radial feet,
as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of
the building upon which the adult use-principal is located to the property line
of:
      1.   Property zoned: R-1, Single-Family Residential (Low Density), R-2,
Multi-Family (Medium Density), R-3, Multi-Family (High Density), AO,
Agriculture-Open Space or any residence in a B-2, Highway Business District;
      2.   A licensed daycare center;
      3.   Public or private educational facilities including preschools,
elementary, junior high or senior high schools;
      4.   A public library;
      5.   A public park;
      6.   Another adult use, principal;
      7.   Churches;
      8.   Commercial recreational facilities if the majority of its customers
consists of minors;
      9.   Specialty schools if the majority of its students consists of
minors;
      10.   Businesses selling alcoholic beverages.
   B.   Adult use-principal activities, as defined by this Code shall be
classified as one use. Two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses or adult
uses-principal shall not be located in the same building or upon the same
property.
   C.   Sexually oriented businesses shall adhere to the following signing
regulations:
      1.   Shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the
district in which they are located.
   D.   Adult use-principal activities shall be prohibited at any public show,
movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical, or other performance or
exhibition presented to the general public where minors are permitted. (Ord.
752, 12-5-1994; amd. 1998 Code)
11-17-4: ADULT USE-ACCESSORY:
   A.   Adult use-accessory shall:
      1.   Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located.
      2.   Comprise no more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross receipts of
the entire business operation.
      3.   Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of
merchandise.
   B.   Adult use-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit access to
minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general public
access. Business owners shall make every reasonable precaution to limit access
to minors and shall comply with Minnesota Statutes section 617.293 and any
amendments thereto.
   C.   Adult use-accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and external
advertising and signing of adult materials and products. (Ord. 752, 12-5-1994;
amd. 1998 Code)
11-17-5: NONCONFORMING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND ADULT USES:
Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses which are classified as legal
nonconforming uses may continue in accordance with the provision of this Code
except that any such nonconforming use shall be terminated and become illegal
twelve (12) months after the effective date hereof. To the extent possible, the
City shall attempt to identify all such uses which become classified as
nonconforming under the provisions of this Section and shall notify the
property owners and operators of such uses in writing of the change in status
and the terms and conditions which apply. The owner of any property or business
on which an adult use is located may apply to the City Council for an extension
of the termination date. Any such application shall be in writing and be
received by the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the termination date.
Failure to submit a timely extension application shall constitute a waiver of
the right to request an extension. The extension may be granted if the
applicant demonstrates that the amortization period is an unreasonable burden
upon the business and does not allow adequate time to recover a reasonable
return upon the business investment. The applicant shall have the burden of
proof to demonstrate hardship with the established termination date and also
the time required for an extension. In making its decision, the City Council
may consider any factor relevant to the issue, including, but not limited to:
   A.   The degree or magnitude of threat to the public health, safety, and
general welfare posed by the secondary impacts of the operation.
   B.   The length of time that the adult use has been operating.
   C.   The ease by which the property could be converted to a conforming use.
   D.   The nature and character of the surrounding neighborhood.
   E.   The value and condition of the improvements on the property.
   F.   The amount of the applicant's investment in the business.
   G.   The amount of investment already realized.
   H.   The cost of relocating the adult use. (Ord. 752, 12-5-1994; amd. 1998
Code)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Short Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Jurisdiction
12-1-4: Application Of Title
12-1-5: Approvals Necessary For Acceptance Of Plats
12-1-6: Compliance
12-1-7: Building Permits
12-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title shall be known as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
MONTEVIDEO, and will be referred to as "this Title". (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
In order to safeguard the best interests of the City and to assist the
subdivider in harmonizing his or her interests with those of the City at large,
the following rules and regulations are adopted in order that adherence to same
will bring results beneficial to both parties. Because each new subdivision
becomes a permanent unit in the basic unit structure of the expanding
community, and to which the community will be forced to adhere, and because
piecemeal planning of subdivisions will bring an undesirable disconnected
patchwork of pattern and poor circulation of traffic unless its design and
arrangement is correlated to a Comprehensive Plan of the City aiming at a
unified scheme of community interests, all subdivision of land hereafter
submitted for approval to the Planning Commission shall, in all respects, fully
comply with the regulations hereinafter set forth in this Title. It is the
purpose of this Title to make certain regulations and requirements for the
platting of land within the City pursuant to the authority contained in
Minnesota Statutes chapters 429, 471, 505 and section 462.358, which
regulations the Council deems necessary for the health, safety and general
welfare of this community. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-1-3: JURISDICTION:
The regulations herein governing plats and subdivision of land shall apply
within the corporate limits of the City and the unincorporated area within two
(2) miles of its limits; provided, that the townships having jurisdiction over
the areas adjacent to the City have not adopted ordinances for the regulation
of subdivision of land or platting. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-1-4: APPLICATION OF TITLE:
Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof lying
within the jurisdiction of this Title, shall be prepared, presented for
approval, and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein
shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into three (3)
or more lots, tracts or other division of land for the purpose of sale or of
building development, whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision
or replatting of land or lots. Division of land in tracts larger than five (5)
acres in area and three hundred feet (300') in width shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Title. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-1-5: APPROVALS NECESSARY FOR ACCEPTANCE OF PLATS:
Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall have been
approved by the City Planning Commission and by the Council as having fulfilled
the requirements of this Title. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-1-6: COMPLIANCE:
No plat of any subdivision within the jurisdiction of this Title shall be
entitled to record in any Register of Deeds' office or have any validity until
the plat thereof has been prepared, approved and acknowledged in the manner
prescribed by this Title. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-1-7: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permits shall be issued by the City for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement to the land or to any lot in a subdivision,
as defined herein, until all requirements of this Title have been complied
with. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Rules
12-2-2: Definitions
12-2-1: RULES:
For the purpose of this Title, words used in the present tense shall include
the future; words in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. (Ord. 470,
2-18-1975)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, certain words and terms are hereby defined as
follows:
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake.
CITY: The City of Montevideo.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of the City.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Refers to the group of maps, charts and texts that make up
the Comprehensive Long-Range Plan of the City.
DESIGN STANDARDS: The specifications to landowners or subdividers for the
preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other
things, the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as right of
way, blocks, easements and lots.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the
purpose of construction and maintaining utilities, including, but not limited
to, sanitary sewer, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer
or storm drainageways and gas lines.
FINAL PLAT: A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all the requirements of
the City and Minnesota State Statutes and in such form as required by the
County for purposes of recording.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for building
development or for transfer of ownership.
OWNER: Includes the plural as well as the singular, and where appropriate shall
include a natural person, partnership, firm, association, public or quasi-
public corporation, private corporation, or a combination of any of them.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS: Public lands and open spaces in the City dedicated or
reserved for and usable for recreation purposes.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public or private right of way across a block or within a
block to provide access, to be used by pedestrians and which may be used for
the installation of utility lines.
PERCENTAGE OF GRADE: "Percentage of grade" on street center line means the
distance vertically (up or down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a
foot for each one hundred feet (100') of horizontal distance.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision meeting
requirements herein enumerated.
PROTECTIVE OR RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts made between private parties as
to the manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and
preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area.
STREET: A public right of way affording primary access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or
however otherwise designated.
STREET, COLLECTOR STREETS: Those that carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance
streets of residential neighborhoods.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS: Minor streets which are parallel and adjacent
to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from traffic.
STREET, MINOR STREETS: Those which are used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
STREET, THOROUGHFARES, ARTERIAL STREETS: Those used primarily for heavy
traffic, and serving as an arterial trafficway between the various districts of
the community, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the
street right of way.
SUBDIVISION: A described tract of land which is to be or has been divided into
three (3) or more lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is less than
five (5) acres in area, and three hundred feet (300') in width, for the purpose
of transfer of ownership of building development, or, if a new street or road
is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision
and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
TANGENT: A straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve where a
tangent meets a curve.
VERTICAL CURVE: The surface curvature on a street center line located between
lines of different percentage of grade. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-3-1: Blocks
12-3-2: Lots
12-3-3: Streets And Alleys
12-3-4: Easements
12-3-5: Public Sites And Open Spaces
12-3-1: BLOCKS:
   A.   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks, and lots within blocks, shall
be determined with due regard to:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the principal and all required accessory uses.
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions, and provisions
regulating off-street parking and loading spaces.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
      5.   Where no existing plat controls, the blocks in residential
subdivisions shall normally not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320') in length, except where topography justifies a departure from this
maximum.
   B.   Residential blocks shall normally be of sufficient width for two (2)
tiers of lots. Block lengths shall be determined by circulation and other
needs. Where residential blocks with lots deeper than two hundred feet (200')
are proposed, a reservation for a future street through the block,
longitudinally, may be required.
   C.   Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width
as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate
space for off-street parking and deliveries.
   D.   Pedestrianways of sufficient width shall be required where deemed
essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers, transportation and other community facilities. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-3-2: LOTS:
   A.   The minimum lot area, lot width and lot depth shall conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which the plat is situated as required
by the City Zoning Ordinance.
   B.   Corner lots for residential use shall have sufficient width to permit
appropriate building setback from both roads as required by the City Zoning
Ordinance.
   C.   Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to road or
street lines or radial to curved road or street lines.
   D.   Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where lots back on a
highway or other arterial street, or where topographic or other conditions
render subdividing otherwise unreasonable. Such double frontage lots shall have
additional depth sufficient to allow space for screen planting along the back
lot line.
   E.   Every lot must have the minimum required frontage on a public dedicated
road or street other than an alley, and have satisfactory access to such
existing public street for purposes of firefighting, utilities and other public
and quasi-public services. This requirement may be waived as to planned
developments.
   F.   Setback or building lines shall not be less than the setback required
by the City Zoning Ordinance. On those lots which are intended for business or
industrial use, the setback shall not be less than the setback required by the
City Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-3-3: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   The arrangement of streets shall conform as nearly as possible to the
City Comprehensive Plan. Except for cul-de-sacs, roads and streets normally
shall connect with roads and streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent
subdivisions, or provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided
tracts, or shall be a reasonable projection of roads In the nearest subdivided
tracts. The arrangement of streets shall be considered in their relation to the
reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff storm
water, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to
the proposed uses of the area to be served.
   B.   Minor streets and marginal streets should be so planned as to
discourage their use by nonlocal traffic. Dead-end streets and roads shall be
prohibited, but cul-de-sacs will be permitted where topography or other
conditions justify their use. Cul-de-sacs shall normally not be longer than
five hundred feet (500'), including a terminal turnaround which shall be
provided at the closed end, with an outside curb radius of at least fifty feet
(50') and a right-of-way radius of not less than sixty feet (60').
   C.   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or
intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed
future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and
submitted by the subdivider.
   D.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or
parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical
location and openings of future roads and appropriate resubdivision, with
provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision.
   E.   Under normal conditions, streets shall be designed so as to intersect
as nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other
conditions justify variations. Under normal conditions, the minimum angle of
intersection of streets shall be eighty degrees (80o). Street intersection jogs
with an offset of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be
avoided.
   F.   Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to the right
of way of a State or Federal highway, provision shall be made for a marginal
access street or road approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of
such right of way, or for a road or street at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of land between such road or street and right of way. Such
distance shall be determined with due consideration for the minimum distance
required for approach connections to future grade separations, or for lot
depths.
   G.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except
that this requirement may be waived where other definite and assured provision
is made for service access, such as on-site loading, unloading and parking
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Alleys, where provided,
shall not be less than twenty feet (20') wide. Dead-end alleys and any alleys
in residential areas shall be avoided wherever possible, but if unavoidable,
such dead-end alleys may be approved if adequate turnaround facilities are
provided at the closed end.
   H.   Dedication of half streets or roads will not be approved, except where
it is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and in
conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, where it is found
that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided, or where it becomes necessary to acquire the
remaining half by condemnation so that it may be improved in the public
interest.
   I.   For all public ways hereafter dedicated and accepted, the minimum
right-of-way widths for streets, and thoroughfares shall be as shown in the
Comprehensive Plan for Montevideo and where not shown therein, the minimum
right-of-way width for streets. thoroughfares, alleys or pedestrianways
included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for
each classification as follows:
 
Major thoroughfare     100 feet
Secondary thoroughfare 80 feet
Collector street       60 feet
Minor street           60 feet
Marginal access street 50 feet
Alley                  20 feet
Pedestrianway          10 feet
 
Where existing or anticipated traffic on major and secondary thoroughfares
warrants greater widths of right of way, these shall be required.
   J.   The grades in all streets, thoroughfares, collector streets, minor
streets and alleys in any subdivision shall be prescribed by the City Engineer
and wherever practical shall not exceed the following:
 
Major thoroughfare     5 percent
Secondary thoroughfare 5 percent
Collector street       5 percent
Minor street           8 percent
Alley                  8 percent
 
In addition, there shall be a minimum grade on all streets and thoroughfares of
not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%).
   K.   The horizontal and vertical alignment standards on all streets shall be
as follows:
      1.   Horizontal: Radii of center line:
 
                       Desirable Minimum Acceptable
Major thoroughfare     800 feet  500 feet
Secondary thoroughfare 800 feet  500 feet
Collector street       500 feet  300 feet
 
There shall be a tangent between all reversed curves of a minimum length as
follows:
 
                      Minimum Acceptable
Major thoroughfare     100 feet
Secondary thoroughfare 100 feet
Collector street       50 feet
 
      2.   Vertical: All changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical parabolic curves of such length as follows:
 
Major or secondary thoroughfares 300 feet minimum
Collector or minor street        100 feet minimum
 
   L.   All proposed streets shall be offered for dedication as public streets,
except that private streets may be permitted, following approval of the
variance application, within the boundaries of property under one ownership.
(Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-3-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   An easement for utilities at least six feet (6') wide shall be provided
along the side line of lots, front line and/or rear line of lots where
necessary to form a continuous right of way, at least twelve feet (12') in
width. If necessary for the extension of water main or sewer lines or similar
utilities, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across
lots.
   B.   Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining
properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed
without the approval of the City Council, by ordinance, upon the recommendation
of the Planning Commission.
   C.   Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the outside of
turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior angle
so that pole guys will fall along side lot lines.
   D.   Where a subdivision contains or is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel, lake or stream, a storm water easement, drainage right of
way or park dedication, whichever the Planning Commission may deem the most
adequate, conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourses, shall
be provided, together with such further width or construction, or both, as will
be adequate for the storm water drainage of the area. The width of such
easements shall be determined by the City Engineer. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-3-5: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
In subdividing land or resubdividing an existing plat, due consideration shall
be given by the subdivider and by the Planning Commission upon review, to the
dedication or reservation of suitable site for schools, parks, playgrounds,
conservation areas, or other public or semipublic recreational areas or open
spaces. Areas so dedicated or reserved shall conform as nearly as possible to
the Comprehensive Plan. Whenever the Comprehensive Plan shows the proposed park
or recreational area partially or completely within a proposed subdivision, the
preliminary and final plats of said subdivision shall show the proposed site as
reserved and the City shall have one year from date of approval of the
preliminary plat by the Planning Commission in which to purchase said land or
to initiate condemnation proceedings with respect thereto. (Ord. 470, 2-18-
1975)
CHAPTER 4
PLATS; SUBMISSION PROCEDURE AND DATA REQUIRED
SECTION:
12-4-1: Sketch Plan
12-4-2: Preliminary Plat
12-4-3: Final Plat
12-4-4: Plan Requirements
12-4-1: SKETCH PLAN:
   A.   Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit for review with the planning
staff, subdivision sketch plans which shall contain the following information:
tract boundaries, north point, description of nature and purpose of tract,
streets on and adjacent to the tract, significant topographical and physical
features, proposed general street layout and proposed general lot layout.
   B.   Such sketch plans will be considered as submitted for informal and
confidential discussion between the subdivider and the staff. Submission of a
subdivision sketch plan shall not constitute formal filing of a plat with the
City.
   C.   As far as may be practical on the basis of a sketch plan, the planning
staff will informally advise the subdivider as promptly as possible of the
extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms to the design standards of
this Title and will discuss possible plan modifications necessary to ensure
conformance. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Filing: Three (3) copies of a preliminary plat and one copy of a
vicinity sketch of any proposed subdivision shall be filed with the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Approval Of The Planning Commission: The preliminary plat shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission at least ten (10) days prior to a
Commission meeting at which consideration is requested. The Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing on said preliminary plat. Notice of public hearing
shall be published in a paper of general circulation at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing date. Public notice shall consist of a general description
of the proposal, the time, date and place of hearing. Approval or disapproval
of a preliminary plat will be conveyed to the subdivider in writing within ten
(10) days after the meeting of the Planning Commission at which such plat was
considered. In case the plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified
of the reason for such action and what requirements will be necessary to meet
the approval of the Commission.
   C.   Approval Of The Council: After the public hearing and review of the
preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, such preliminary plat, together
with the recommendations of the Planning Commission, shall be submitted to the
City Council for consideration. The Council shall act on each plat forwarded by
the Planning Commission within sixty (60) days after submission to the Council.
Approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat shall be conveyed to the
subdivider in writing within ten (10) days after the meeting of the Council at
which such plat was considered. In case the plat is disapproved, the subdivider
shall be notified of the reason for such action and what requirements will be
necessary to meet the approval of the Council.
The approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute an acceptance of the
subdivision, but is deemed to be an authorization to proceed with the final
plat. This approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of
six (6) months, unless an extension is granted by the Council. The subdivider
may file a final plat limited to such portion of the preliminary plat which he
proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, that such portion must
conform to all requirements of this Title. If some portion of the final plat
has not been submitted for approval within this period, a preliminary plat must
again be submitted to the Planning Commission and the Council for approval.
(Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-4-3: FINAL PLAT:
After the preliminary plat has been approved, the final plat may be submitted
for approval as follows:
   A.   Filing: Three (3) copies of a final plat shall be filed with the City
Planning Commission together with additional copies as required for approval by
County authorities. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
   B.   Filing Fee: The final plat shall be accompanied by a required fee in an
amount to be set by resolution of the City Council. The fee is to be used for
the expense of the City in connection with the review, inspection, approval or
disapproval of said plat which may thereafter be submitted. (Ord. 693, 11-4-
1991)
   C.   Approval Of The Planning Commission: Approval or disapproval of the
final plat will be conveyed to the subdivider in writing within ten (10) days
after the meeting of the Planning Commission at which such plat was considered.
In case the plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified of the reason
for such action and what requirements shall be necessary to meet the approval
of the Commission.
   D.   Approval Of The Council: After review and approval of the final plat by
the Planning Commission, such final plat, together with the recommendations of
the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the Council for approval. If
accepted, the final plat shall be approved by resolution, which resolution
shall provide for the acceptance of all streets, alleys, easements or other
public ways, and parks, or other open spaces dedicated to public purposes. If
disapproved, the grounds for any refusal to approve a plat shall be set forth
in the proceedings of the Council and reported to the person or persons
applying for such approval. If the Council does not act within sixty (60) days
after submission of the final plat to it, the failure to take action shall be
deemed to be an approval of the final plat. If the Council deems it advisable
to promote cooperation with a township, it may require that either the
preliminary plat or the final plat be submitted to a town board for its
comments and suggestions. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-4-4: PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Both the preliminary plat and the final plat shall in all respects comply with
the requirements for plats prescribed by the laws of the State. The Planning
Commission may require such additional information on either the preliminary
plat or the final plat as it deems necessary to make clear any portion of the
proposed plan for the area or to protect the owners of adjacent property or
future owners of the areas to be platted.
The form of approval by the Planning Commission is as follows:
Approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Montevideo this             
day of                              19      .
   Signed:
                                                                       
   Chairman
   ATTEST:
                                                                      
   Secretary
The form of approval by the Council is as follows:
Passed and adopted this                   day of                       ,
19        .
   Signed:
                                                                       
    President - City Council
   ATTEST:
                                                                      
   City Clerk
   Approved this                  day of                           19       .
   Signed:
                                                                      
   Mayor
(Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
CHAPTER 5
BASIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
12-5-1: General
12-5-2: Street Improvements
12-5-3: Public Utilities
12-5-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Before a final plat is approved by the City Council, the City Council
may require the subdivider of the land covered by the said plat to execute and
submit to the City Council an agreement, which shall be binding on his or their
heirs, personal representatives and assigns, that he or they will cause no
private construction to be made on said plat or file or cause to be filed any
application for building permits for such construction until all improvements
required under this Title have been made or arranged for in the manner
following as respects the highways, roads or streets to which the lots sought
to be constructed have access.
   B.   Prior to making of such required improvements, the City Council may
require the subdivider to deposit with the City Clerk an amount equal to one
and one-quarter (11/4) times the City Engineer's estimated cost of such
improvements, either in cash or an indemnity bond, with sureties satisfactory
to the City, conditioned upon the payment of all construction costs incurred in
making of such improvements and all expense incurred by the City for
engineering and legal fees and other expense in connection with the making of
such improvements.
   C.   No final plat shall be approved by the City Council without first
receiving a report from the City Engineer certifying that the improvements
described herein, together with the agreements and documents required herein
meet the minimum requirements of all applicable ordinances. Drawings showing
all improvements as built shall be filed with the City Engineer.
   D.   No final plat shall be approved by the City Council on land subject to
flooding or containing poor drainage facilities and on land which would make
adequate drainage of the streets or roads and lots impossible. However, if the
subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, make the area suitable for use without interfering with the flow of
water under flood conditions, the final plat of the subdivision may be
approved. In no event, however, shall a plat be approved unless the same
complies with the flood plain regulations of the City 1 .
   E.   All of the required improvements to be installed under the provisions
of this Title shall be inspected during the course of their construction by the
City Engineer or an inspector appointed by the Council. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11, Chapter 12 of this Code.
12-5-2: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   The City Council may require the full width of the right of way to be
graded, including the subgrade of the areas to be paved, in accordance with the
standards and specifications for street construction as approved by the
Council.
   B.   Storm sewers, culverts, storm water inlets and other drainage
facilities may be required where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, they are
necessary to ensure adequate storm water drainage for the subdivision. Where
required the drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance to the
standards and specifications for street construction as approved by the
Council. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-5-3: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   All utility lines for telephone and electric service shall be placed in
rear line easements when carried on overhead poles.
   B.   Where telephone, electric and/or gas service lines are to be placed
underground entirely, conduits or cables shall be placed within easements or
dedicated public ways, in such a manner so as not to conflict with other
underground services. All drainage and other underground utility installations
which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements. (Ord.
470, 2-18-1975)
CHAPTER 6
VARIANCES
SECTION:
12-6-1: General
12-6-1: GENERAL:
The Planning Commission may recommend a variance from any of the provisions of
this Title when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict
compliance. In granting any variance, the Commission shall prescribe any
conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the protection of the
public interest. In making its findings, as required hereinbelow, the Planning
Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and
the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who do or will
reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the
proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall
be granted unless the Planning Commission finds:
   A.   That the property owner has an undue hardship because of the unique
circumstances of the individual property.
   B.   That the property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use under
the language of the Zoning Ordinance.
   C.   That the situation of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the landowner.
   D.   That granting the variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality. (Ord. 724, 2-16-1993)
CHAPTER 7
LAND SURVEYS AND CONVEYANCES
SECTION:
12-7-1: Registered Land Surveys Or Plat Of Certified Survey
12-7-2: Conveyance By Metes And Bounds
12-7-1: REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS OR PLAT OF CERTIFIED SURVEY:
It is the intention of this Title that all registered land surveys in the area
over which the City has jurisdiction under this Title shall be presented to the
Planning Commission in the form of a preliminary plat in accordance with the
standards set forth in this Title for preliminary plats and that the Planning
Commission shall first approve the arrangement, sizes and relationship of
proposed tracts in such registered land surveys, and that tracts to be used as
easements or roads should be so dedicated. Unless such approvals have been
obtained from the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the
standards set forth in this Title, building permits will be withheld for
buildings on tracts which have been so subdivided by registered land surveys
and the City may refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads or to improve,
repair or maintain any such tracts unless so approved. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-7-2: CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS:
No conveyance of three (3) or more parcels in which the land conveyed is
described by metes and bounds shall be made or recorded if the parcels
described in the conveyance are less than five (5) acres in area and three
hundred feet (300') in width, unless such parcel was a separate parcel of
record at the effective date of this Title. Building permits will be withheld
for buildings on tracts which have been subdivided and conveyed by this method
and the City may refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads or to improve,
repair or maintain any such tracts. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
CHAPTER 8
COMPLIANCE, VIOLATION AND PENALTY
SECTION:
12-8-1: Conditions For Recording
12-8-2: Building Permits
12-8-3: Sale Of Lots From Unrecorded Plats
12-8-4: Receiving And Recording Unapproved Plats
12-8-5: Misrepresentations Regarding Improvements
12-8-6: Penalty
12-8-1: CONDITIONS FOR RECORDING:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the County Register
of Deeds' office or have any validity until the plat thereof has been prepared,
approved and acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this Title, and no
conveyance filed contrary to the provisions hereof shall be recorded. (Ord.
470, 2-18-1975)
12-8-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permits will be issued by the City for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement to the land or to any lot in a subdivision,
as defined herein until all requirements of this Title have been fully complied
with. This limitation on issuing permits shall not apply to planned
developments approved by the City Council pursuant to its Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-8-3: SALE OF LOTS FROM UNRECORDED PLATS:
It shall be unlawful to sell, trade or offer to sell, trade or otherwise convey
any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with any plan, plat or
replat of any subdivision or area located within the jurisdiction of this Title
unless said plan, plat or replat shall have first been recorded in the office
of the Register of Deeds of the appropriate county. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-8-4: RECEIVING AND RECORDING UNAPPROVED PLATS:
It shall be unlawful to receive or record in any public office any plans, plats
or replats of land laid out in building lots and highways, streets, roads,
alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or
private use, for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or
adjacent thereto, and located within the jurisdiction of this Title, unless the
same shall bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the
Planning Commission and the City Council. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-8-5: MISREPRESENTATIONS REGARDING IMPROVEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning an addition or subdivision of land
within the jurisdiction of this Title to represent that any improvement upon
any of the streets, alleys or avenues of said addition or subdivision or any
sewer in said addition or subdivision has been constructed according to the
plans and specifications approved by the Council, or has been supervised or
inspected by the City Engineer, when such improvements have not been so
constructed, supervised or inspected. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
12-8-6: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) and/or by a commitment to jail for a period of not to exceed ninety
(90) days. Each day during which compliance is delayed shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 470, 2-18-1975)
